
Noblesville Code of Ordinances


CITY OF NOBLESVILLE, INDIANA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-43 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through Ord. 38-09-19, passed 9-24-19; and
Res. RC-13-19, passed 9-24-19; and
State legislation current through Indiana Legislative Services,
2018 Acts, Pamphlet #5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION



      11.   COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION   



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



 



   10.99   General penalty; enforcement procedures



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Noblesville,
Indiana, shall be designated as the "Muncipal Code of the City of
Noblesville, Indiana" and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition, and appli-cation shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the Indiana Code.



   (B)   Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the
Indiana Code, such reference indicates that the section is analogous or
similar to the cited sections in the Indiana Code. Footnotes, cross
references, and other comments are by way of explanation only and should not
be deemed a part of the text of any section.



   (C)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although the same may not
be so limited specifically.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I, not incompatible with future legislation,
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  But technical words and phrases having
a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.  (ICl-l-4-l)



   (B)   For the purposes of this code, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.



      (1)   "CITY," "MUNICIPAL CORPORATION," or "MUNICIPALITY." The
City of Noblesville, Indiana.



      (2)   "THIS CODE" or "THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES."  The
Municipal code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.



      (3)   "COUNCIL."  The Common Council of Noblesville, Indiana.



      (4)   "MAY."  is permissive.



      (5)   "MONTH."  A calendar month.



      (6)   "OWNER."  Applied to a building or land, includes any
part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, or joint
tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with
others.



      (7)   "PERSON."  Extends to and includes person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms "PERSON" or
"WHOEVER" as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.



      (8)   "PERSONAL PROPERTY."  Every species of property except
real property.



      (9)   "POPULATION."  The population according to the most
recent federal special or decennial census.  This definition applies even if
the reference is to the most recent federal decennial census.



      (10)   "PROPERTY."  Real and personal property.



      (11)   "REAL PROPERTY."  Lands, tenements, and hereditaments
and all chattels real.



      (12)   "SHALL" is mandatory.



      (13)   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of a street between the curb
lines of the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines
intended for the use of pedestrians.



      (14)   "STATE."  State of Indiana.



      (15)   "STREET."  Except as provided in the traffic code, the
entire width between property lines of every way or place of whatever nature
when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right.



      (16)   "YEAR."  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance. 



   (A)   "AND" or  "OR."  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition is satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent
or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of an ordinance containing a
nonsevera-bility provision, each part and application of every ordinance is
severable.  If any provision or application of an ordinance is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the ordinance unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with, and so dependent upon, the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   The repeal of an ordinance stating that the provisions of an
act are severable as provided in division (B) does not affect the operation
of division (B) with respect to that act.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by appicable state and federal law,
shall be the official time within the city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by these
rules, by order of the court, or by any applicable statute, the day of the
act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run
shall not be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included unless it is:



      (1)   A Saturday;



      (2)   A Sunday;



      (3)   A legal holiday as defined by state statute; or



      (4)   A day the office in which the act is to be done is
closed during regular business hours.



   (B)   In any event, the period runs until the end of the next day
that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the
office is closed.  When the period of time allowed is less than seven days,
intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, legal holidays, and days on which the office
is closed shall be excluded from the computations.



(Trial Rule 6(A))



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES..



   (A)   General Penalty.  Whoever violates any provision of this code
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not
more than $2,500 for each offense.  (See IC 36-l-3-8)



   (B)   Enforcement Procedures.



      (1)   Any person who violates Title V, Title IX, Title XI or
Title XV of this code of ordinances, or any other ordinance of the city
containing a penalty for violation, other than Title VII shall be subject to
the enforcement provisions of this subsection.



      (2)   This subsection shall not amend the enforcement
provisions of the Traffic Code contained in Title VII.



      (3)   Any action to enforce an ordinance or code section
listed in division (B)(1) above, shall be initiated by filing a Complaint and
Summons (the Complaint) in the Noblesville City Court, on a form
substantially similar to Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 6-3-02 and
incorporated herein by reference.



      (4)   The Complaint shall be signed by any sworn police
officer, by any Director of the city, or such employee of the Director's
department as the Director shall authorize in writing (the Enforcement
Officers).  Said authorization shall be on a form substantially similar to
Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 6-3-02 and incorporated herein by reference,
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, and filed in the minutes of
the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (5)   The Enforcement Officers, in their sole discretion, may
issue warning tickets which allow the person, or landowner, who is cited to
remedy the alleged ordinance violation within such time as is approved by the
enforcement officer, which time shall not exceed 30 days without good cause.



      (6)   If an alleged violation is not remedied within the time
on a warning, the Enforcement Officers may issue a new complaint.



      (7)   In the event the ordinance violation concerns the
condition or improvement of a parcel of real estate, the Enforcement Officers
may, as opposed to citing the person in possession of the real estate, issue
the Complaint to the owner of the real estate.  The name and address of the
landowner shall be obtained from the property records maintained by the
Hamilton County Auditor.  The Enforcement Officers shall attach a copy of
the property record information to the Complaint.  Such Complaint, along
with a copy of the property record information shall constitute prima facie
proof of the ownership of the real estate where the violation occurred.



      (8)    A business whose goods or services are advertised on a
sign posted in violation of the sign ordinance of the city may be cited by
mailing a Complaint to the last known address as shown in the Indianapolis
Metropolitan Phone Book.



      (9)   A Complaint shall be served upon the alleged offender in
person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, pursuant to the
Indiana Rules of Trial Procedure.



      (10)    In the event any city ordinance does not specifically
provide that the violation thereof is an infraction, then the violation of
the ordinance shall be a Class C infraction.  Any subsequent violation
within one year of the judgment of a violation of a first offense shall be a
Class B infraction.  Each day of any violation shall be deemed a separate
offense.



      (11)    It is the intent of the enforcement procedures of this
code of ordinances that all persons comply with the ordinances of the city. 
To that end, the Common Council encourages the use of the Noblesville City
Court Deferral Program pursuant to IC 34-28-5-1(g).



(Ord. 6-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



CHAPTER 11:  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS



Section



   11.01  Districts of the city



   11.02  Redistricting



§ 11.01  DISTRICTS OF THE CITY.



   (A)  Councilmanic Districts.  The city is hereby divided into six
councilmanic districts conforming to the requirements of IC 36-4-6-3 as
follows.



   (B)  The Districts shall consist of the following precincts:



      (1)   Council District 1: Precincts 27, 17, 24, 25, 18, 23,
14, and Morse 35(NV) as defined by the precinct maps and boundaries located
in the Office of the Clerk of Hamilton County.



      (2)   Council District 2: Precincts 33, 36, 31, 11, 30 and 34
as defined by the precinct maps and boundaries located in the Office of the
Clerk of Hamilton County.



      (3)   Council District 3: Precincts 9, 20, 28, 37, 12 and 10
as defined by the precinct maps and boundaries located in the Office of the
Clerk of Hamilton County.



      (4)   Council District 4: Precincts 29, 16, 13, 5, 7 and 22 as
defined by the precinct maps and boundaries located in the Office of the
Clerk of Hamilton County.



      (5)   Council District 5: Precincts 6, 8, 26, 21, 38, 39, and
Delaware 2, as defined by the precinct maps and boundaries located in the
Office of the Clerk of Hamilton County.



      (6)   Council District 6: Precincts 32, Wayne 5, Wayne 4,
Wayne 3, Wayne 6 (NV) and Fall Creek 13, as defined by the precinct maps and
boundaries located in the Office of the Clerk of Hamilton County.



(Ord. 1471, passed 12-31-82; Am. Ord. 63-10-90, passed 10-22-90; Am. Ord.
16-04-91, passed 4-8-91; Am. Ord. 49-12-92, passed 12-14-92; Am. Ord.
50-12-94, passed 12-27-94; Am. Ord. 42-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
11-05-12, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 30-07-14, passed 7-29-14)



§ 11.02  REDISTRICTING.



   Redistricting of councilmanic districts was done in l982 and shall be 
done  at  least  every  ten  years thereafter in accordance with I.C.
36-4-6-4 and 36-4-6-5.



(Ord. 1471, passed 12-31-82)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   EXECUTIVE BRANCH



      32.   LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



      33.   JUDICIAL BRANCH



          33A.   FISCAL BRANCH



      34.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      35.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



      36.   EMPLOYMENT POLICIES



      37.   CITY POLICIES



      38.   FINANCE AND REVENUE



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Organization of city government



   30.02   Elective officers; appointed officials



   30.03   Eligibility for office



   30.04   Notice; oath; bond



   30.05   Filling vacancies in office



   30.06   Reserved



   30.07   Promotional fund



   30.08   Use of credit cards by employees



   30.09   Purchasing policies; purchasing agency and agents



   30.10   Ordinance Violation Deferral Program



   30.11   Reverse auction procedures



§ 30.01  ORGANIZATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT.



   The government of the city shall consist of four branches, those being
the following.



   (A)   Executive branch.



   (B)   Legislative branch.



   (C)   Judicial branch.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 30.02  ELECTIVE OFFICERS; APPOINTED OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The elective officers of the city, elected in accordance with
the provisions of the state election laws, shall be:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The Clerk;



      (3)   The members of the Common Council; and



      (4)   The City Judge.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint:



      (1)   A City Civil Engineer;



      (2)   Corporation Counsel;



      (3)   A Chief of the Fire Department;



      (4)   A Chief of the Police Department;



      (5)   A Controller; and



      (6)   Other officers, employees, boards, and commissions
required by statute.



   (C)   The members  of the  Board of  Public Works and Safety are
the Mayor and two persons appointed by the Mayor. I.C. 36-4-4-2
notwithstanding, a member may hold other appointive or elective positions in
city government during the member’s tenure. I.C. 36-4-11-2 applies to board
member appointments under this section. The City Clerk is the Clerk of the
Board.



(I.C. 36-4-9-6)  (‘61 Code, § 3.1) (Am. Ord. 35-04-16, passed 4-26-16;
Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 30.03  ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE.



   No person shall be eligible for any city office unless he shall have
been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding his
election, nor shall any person be eligible for the office of councilman to
represent any district unless for the last 6 months of his residence in the
city he shall have been a resident of such district.  Should any city
officer cease to be a resident of the city, or any councilman representing
any district cease to be a resident of such district, during his term of
office, such office shall at once become vacant.



(Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



                   



Statutory reference:



   Residency requirements for Mayor, see IC 36-4-5-2



   Residency requirements for Council, see IC 36-4-6-2



   Residency requirements for Clerk, see IC 36-4-10-3



§ 30.04  NOTICE; OATH; BOND.



   (A)   (1)   Every officer and every deputy, before entering on
the officer’s or deputy’s official duties, shall take an oath to support
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Indiana, and that the officer or deputy will faithfully discharge the duties
of such office.



      (2)   A prosecuting attorney and a deputy prosecuting attorney
shall take the oath required under division (B)(1) before taking office.



   (B)   The City Controller, City Judge, Clerk and all employees,
contractors of the City whose official duties include receiving, processing,
depositing, disbursing, or otherwise having access to funds that belong to
the City, the federal government, the State of Indiana, a political
subdivision thereof, or another government entity, shall execute a bond,
pursuant to I.C. § 5-4-1-18 et seq., in the required minimum statutory
amounts and on the forms prescribed by the State Board of Accounts. The
Common Council may also: (1) direct any employee to file an individual bond;
(2) may approve bond amounts greater than the statutory minimum; (3) allow
for blanket bonds in an aggregate coverage sufficient to cover all officers,
employees, and contractors required to be bonded by statute; and (4) allow
for crime insurance policies providing for additional acts or omissions
committed by officers, employees or contractors.



   (C)   Any person who shall not file his oath, or oath and bond, as
the case may be, with the proper officer within ten days after the beginning
of the term for which he shall have been elected or appointed shall be deemed
to have refused to serve, and the office shall be deemed to be vacant.



(‘61 Code, § 3.7) (Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 30.05  FILLING VACANCIES IN OFFICE.



   (A)   A vacancy in a city office (other than judge of a city court)
that was last held by a person elected or selected as a candidate of a major
political party of the state shall be filled by a caucus under I.C.
3-13-11.  (I.C. 3-13-8-1)



   (B)   A vacancy in the office of Mayor not covered by I.C. 3-13-8-1
shall be filled Clerk, and the Common Council pursuant to state statute. (See
I.C. 3-13-8-5; 3-13-8-6, 3-13-8-7)



   (C)   A person filling a vacancy under this section must give the
same bond and take the same oath and has the same rights and duties as the
official who vacated the office.  (IC 3-13-8-12)



   (D)   A person selected to fill a vacant office under this section
holds the office for the remainder of the term.  (IC 3-13-8-13)



(Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 30.06  RESERVED.



§ 30.07  PROMOTIONAL FUND.



   A city promotional fund is hereby established.  The Common Council is
hereby authorized to budget and appropriate funds from the general fund or
from other funds to pay the expenses incurred in promoting the betterment of
the municipality.



(Ord. 1480, passed 5-9-83)



§ 30.08  USE OF CREDIT CARDS BY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer will obtain a credit card to be used for
purchases by each Department in the City of Noblesville. There will be a
separate account number issued for each department. The credit card
application shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk-Treasurer. The amount
of the credit limit will be determined by the Mayor and the Clerk-Treasurer.
The amounts cannot be increased without approval of the Mayor and
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The credit cards for each department will be kept in each
department by the Director of that department. The Mayor will be provided
with a credit card that may be carried by him or her at all times. Upon
request by the employee, the credit card will be signed out to the employee
with approval by his or her supervisor/Director. A record showing the date of
issuance and the date of return and the purpose of use will be maintained by
the department with a copy going to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   (C)   The credit card and detailed receipts will be returned to the
department within 72 hours of the purchase. If the employee is attending a
school that extends over a billing cycle, the employee will make arrangements
to get the receipts to the department Director for payment.



   (D)   All credit card billing statements shall be sent by the issuer
to the department. The charges of the cards shall be paid by the
Clerk-Treasurer from the appropriate budget line item pursuant to the claims
procedures of the city.



   (E)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay the charge cards promptly so
that no interest carrying charges of penalties will be incurred due to late
payments. Any employee who causes interest or carrying charges to be added to
the credit card account by a failure to timely provide the required
information to the Clerk-Treasurer shall be personally liable for the
interest or carrying charge. Any employee who fails to provide a receipt for
the purchase shall be personally liable for the purchase.



   (F)   No credit card issued by the city for any department or
employee shall be used by any person for private/personal purchases.



   (G)   Any violations of the city issued credit will result in
disciplinary action, up to and including discharge pursuant to the city’s
personnel policy.



(Ord. 31-7-96, passed 7-22-96; Am. Ord. 54-11-09, passed 2-23-10)



§ 30.09  PURCHASING POLICIES; PURCHASING AGENCY AND AGENTS.




   (A)   Purchasing policies.





      (1)   Protection of offers; status of documents as public
records.





         (a)   Protection of offers prior to opening.  The
Clerk-Treasurer of Noblesville, or the purchasing agent who receives offers,
shall retain all offers received in a secure location prior to the date and
time at which offers will be opened in order to prevent disclosure of the
contents prior to the opening of the offers.





         (b)   Unobstructed evaluation of offers.  After offers
have been opened, the purchasing agent shall be responsible for maintaining
the offers in such a manner as to permit evaluation of the offers by the
persons responsible for evaluating the offers.





         (c)   Public records status of bids.  Bids submitted in
response to an invitation for bids must be made available for public
inspection and copying after the time of the bid opening, unless the bid
opening is delayed, as authorized in this section or any other statute or
ordinance.





         (d)   Register of proposals.  The purchasing agent
shall prepare a register of proposals for each request for proposals issued
which shall contain information concerning the proposals available for public
inspection and copying. Proposals may not be disclosed.





      (2)   Discussions with offerors responding to a request for
proposals.  The purchasing agent may conduct discussions with parties who
are submitting proposals. Final offers may be obtained from responsible
offerors who submit proposals and are determined to be reasonably susceptible
of being selected for a contract award.





      (3)   Delay of openings of offers.  When the Board of Public
Works and Safety make a written determination that is in the City's best
interest, offers may be opened after the time stated in the solicitation. The
date, time, and place of the rescheduled opening must be announced at the
time and place of the originally scheduled opening.





      (4)   Evidence of financial responsibility.





         (a)   Purchases less than $25,000.  The purchasing
agent may not require evidence of financial responsibility when the estimated
cost of a purchase is less than $25,000.





         (b)   Purchases between $25,000 and $100,000.  The
solicitation may include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of
financial responsibility.  If evidence of financial responsibility is
required, the solicitation must indicate the kind of evidence that will be
acceptable. If a bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10%
of the estimated cost of the purchase.





         (c)   Purchases over $100,000.  The solicitation shall
include a requirement that an offeror provide evidence of financial
responsibility and must indicate the kind of evidence that will be
acceptable. If a bond or certified check is required, it may not exceed 10%
of the estimated cost of the purchase.





      (5)   Use of RFP for purchase of designated types of
supplies.  If the Board of Public Works and Safety determines that it is
either not practicable or not advantageous to purchase certain types of
supplies by sealed competitive bidding, they shall authorize the appropriate
purchasing agent to receive proposals.





      (6)   Modification and termination of contracts.





         (a)   Price adjustments.  Any purchasing agent for the
city may include provisions to permit price adjustments in a purchase
contract. The following provisions for price adjustments may be included:





            1.   Price adjustments must be computed by
agreement on a fixed price adjustment before the beginning of the pertinent
performance or as soon after the beginning of performance as possible;





            2.   Price adjustments must be computed by unit
prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;





            3.   Price adjustments must be computed by costs
attributable to the events or situations under such clauses with adjustment
of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or subsequently agreed
upon;





            4.   Price adjustments must be computed in such
other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree upon; or





         (b)   Adjustments in time of performance.  The
purchasing agent may include provisions in a purchase contract concerning
adjustments for time of performance under the contract.





         (c)   Unilateral rights of the city.  The purchasing
agent may include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with the
unilateral right of the purchasing agent, or the Board of Public Works and
Safety, to order changes in the work within the scope of the contract or to
order temporary work stoppage or delays in time of performance.





         (d)   Quantity variations.  The purchasing agent may
include in a purchase contract provisions dealing with variations between the
estimated quantities of work in a contract and the actual quantity delivered.





      (7)   Small purchases.





         (a)   This section applies to all purchases which are
defined as small purchases under I.C. 5-22-8-2.





            1.   In the event the purchase is between $5,000
and $25,000, the purchasing agent making the purchase shall receive prices
either by phone, in writing, or in person from at least three suppliers.





            2.   The purchasing agent shall keep a file for
purchase agent shall keep a file for purchases made under this section with
the following information:





               a.   The name, address, and phone number of
each supplier who provided a price;





               b.   The price provided by each supplier;





               c.   The supplier chosen and the reason for
the choice if the supplier did not provide the lowest price;





               d.   The reasons why less than three
suppliers were not contacted.





      (8)   Required purchases.  All purchases made by any
purchasing agent or the purchasing agency shall be supplies manufactured in
the United States unless there is a specific finding, in writing, that the
exceptions set out in I.C. 5-22-15-21.




(Ord. 32-6-98, passed 7-13-98)




   (B)   Purchasing agency and agents.





      (1)   The Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of
Noblesville is designated as the purchasing agency for the City of
Noblesville, Indiana.





      (2)   The purchasing agency shall have all the powers and
duties authorized under I.C. 5-22, as may be amended from time to time by
law, or supplemented from time to time by ordinances adopted by the Common
Council of the City of Noblesville, and policies adopted by the purchasing
agency.





      (3)   The purchasing agency shall act as purchasing agency for
every agency, board, office, branch, bureau, commission, council, and
department. The Mayor, the Clerk-Treasurer and each elected official,
including the Judge of the City Court, pursuant to I.C. 5-22-4-3, and each
department head shall act as purchasing agents for that office or department.




(Ord. 33-6-98, passed 7-13-98)



§ 30.10  ORDINANCE VIOLATION DEFERRAL PROGRAM.



   (A)   The city Ordinance Violation Deferral Program is hereby
established.



   (B)   Eligible individuals who have violated qualifying city
ordinances may voluntarily enter the program by written agreement with the
City Attorney.  The Deferral Program shall provide the following:



      (1)   The defendant shall voluntarily agree to the terms and
conditions of the deferral agreement offered by the City Attorney;



      (2)   The terms and conditions of the deferral agreement shall
be in writing and signed by the City Attorney;



      (3)   The defendant shall agree to pay to the Clerk of Court
the deferral fees established by the City Attorney and approved by the Common
Council;



      (4)   The defendant shall agree to pay all other applicable
court fees and costs to the Clerk of Court;



      (5)   The executed deferral agreement shall be filed in the
City Court;



      (6)   Upon the defendant’s successful compliance with the
terms and conditions of the deferral agreement, the City Attorney shall file
a motion with the City Court to dismiss the pending deferred action; and



      (7)   The City Court shall dismiss the pending deferred action
against the defendant, with prejudice, upon receipt of a motion to dismiss
from the City Attorney.



   (C)   The City Attorney is hereby given full authority to administer
the Deferral Program, and to draft, prepare and execute all documents and
forms necessary and desirable for the implementation of the Deferral
Program.  The City Attorney is also authorized and directed to work with the
Court Committee of the Common Council to establish the amount of the Deferral
Program user's fee, at a level not to exceed the amounts authorized by law
and to submit said fees to the Common Council for approval.  The City
Attorney shall also establish all eligibility and participation criteria for
the Deferral Program, and take any and all other lawful actions necessary to
implement this section and administer the Deferral Program.



   (D)   All deferral fees from the Deferral Program shall be deposited
by the Clerk of the Court into the city's Deferral Fund.  The Deferral Fund
shall be administered by the fiscal officer of the city, who shall maintain
appropriately detailed records of all deferral fees deposited into and
transferred out of the Deferral Fund.



   (E)   The fiscal office of the city shall periodically certify to
the Common Council and City Attorney an accounting of the amount of deferral
fees received by and transferred from the Deferral Fund.  The
Clerk-Treasurer shall submit claims to the Common Council for the payment of
expenses set out herein from the deferral fees deposited in the Deferral Fund.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, in the
event the Deferral Program is discontinued by the city, or there are excess
funds in the Fund, and after all Deferral Program costs and expenses have
been paid in full, the deferral fees collected and on deposit in the Deferral
Fund shall be used to pay the expenses of the City Court, or may be
transferred to the city's General Fund.



   (G)   There is established a Deferral Fund pursuant to I.C.
33-19-8-3.  The Deferral Fund shall be used to help defray the cost and
expense of operating the Deferral Program, to pay the costs of prosecuting
city ordinance violations, and to help defer the costs of operating the City
Court.



(Ord. 1-1-01, passed 1-23-01)



§ 30.11  REVERSE AUCTION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Use of third party to conduct reverse auctions.



      (1)   (a)   The purchasing agency is authorized to use a
third party to conduct reverse auction on behalf of the city for the purchase
of supplies. The purchasing agent is authorized to select the third party
that will conduct the reverse auction, who must have prior experience in
conducting reverse auctions on behalf of local governments.



         (b)   The purchasing agent shall obtain a copy of the
procedures established by the third party to conduct the reverse auction on
behalf of the city and present those procedures to the Board for adoption and
inclusion in its applicable procedures prior to participating in a reverse
auction conducted by the third party.



   (B)   Transmission of notices, solicitations and specifications.



      (1)   Notices. The Board shall give notice of a reverse
auction by:



         (a)   Publishing notice of the invitation to bid two
times, at least one week apart, with the second publication at least seven
days before the commencement of the reverse auction in accordance with I.C.
5-22-7-5, and I.C. 5-22-18 and I.C. 5-3-1;



         (b)   Posting the invitation to bid on the city's
website; and



         (c)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agency, by posting, or permitting to have posted,
the invitation to bid on the third party's website.



Note: Posting the invitation to bid on a website requires compliance with
I.C. 5-22-3-4.



Note: The Board may also give notice of a reverse auction by electronic mail
or faxes.



      (2)   Solicitations and specifications. The Board shall
transmit solicitations and specifications:



         (a)   In accordance with the invitation to bid,
identifying a designated location where, during regular business hours, the
invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained;



         (b)   By making them available on the city's website or
providing information on the website identifying location where, during
regular business hours, the invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or
copies may be obtained; and



         (c)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agency, making them available on a third party's
website.



Note: Posting the invitation to bid on a website requires compliance with
I.C. 5-22-3-4



   (C)   Pre-qualification of bidders.



      (1)   All bidders desiring to participate in a reverse auction
must be pre-qualified by submitting materials to ensure that they meet the
specifications identified by the buyer as to the types of supplies to be
offered for purchase no later than 24 hours prior to the time for the
commencement of the reverse auction, as provided in the invitation to bid.



      (2)   The pre-qualification process shall be used to determine
whether the bidder is responsible and responsive, as provided in the Act,
whether there is any bidding or purchasing preferences applicable to a
particular bidder, and whether the bidder has submitted evidence of financial
responsibility, as required by the purchasing agency. In order to assist the
Board in pre-qualifying bidders, the bidder must submit, in accordance with
the invitation to bid, all documentation and other information relating to
the supplies being offered for purchase, except for price, and any other
information that may assist the Board in making its determination. Such
documentation will include evidence of financial responsibility or a
certified check, as specified in the invitation to bid.



      (3)   In determining whether a bidder is responsible, the
purchasing agent may consider the following factors:



         (a)   The ability and capacity of the bidder to provide
the supplies.



         (b)   The integrity, character, and reputation of the
bidder.



         (c)   The competency and experience of the bidder.



      (4)   In determining whether a bidder is responsive, a
purchasing agent may consider the following factors:



         (a)   Whether the bidder has submitted information
demonstrating his or her offer for supplies conforms in all material respects
to the specifications.



         (b)   Whether the bidder has submitted documentation
that complies specifically with the solicitation and the instructions to
bidders.



         (c)   Whether the bidder has complied with all
applicable statutes, ordinances, resolutions, or rules pertaining to the
award of a public contract.



      (5)   The determination that a bidder is not responsive or not
responsible must be made in writing.



      (6)   Pre-qualification of bidders must be done by the
purchasing agent or an authorized representative of the purchasing agency in
the presence of one or more witnesses and must be completed no later than 24
hours prior to the commencement of the reverse auction bidding period.



      (7)   The Board shall notify any bidder determined to be not
pre-qualified in writing, by facsimile, or electronic mail (as requested by
the bidder) and  shall exclude the bidder so notified from participation in
the reverse auction.



      (8)   The Board's determination that a bidder is not
pre-qualified is limited to the reverse auction for which the request for
pre-qualification was received.



   (D)   Contents of invitation to bid.  The invitation to bid must
include all of the following:



      (1)   A purchase description.



      (2)   A statement that bids will be accepted by means of a
reverse auction process.



      (3)   A description of all contractual terms and conditions
that apply to the purchase, including the requirement of a noncollusion
affirmation by the successful bidder.



      (4)   The criteria that will be used by the purchasing agency
to pre-qualify bidders to determine whether a bidder is responsive and
responsible.



      (5)   The information and other documentation required to be
submitted for pre-qualification, including a certified check or other
evidence of financial responsibility.



      (6)   The location and manner in which bidders must submit
information for pre-qualification, the deadline for submission of such
information, and the deadline by which the Board will determine whether a
bidder is pre-qualified.



      (7)   The location, including any websites, at which the
invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained,
including, if a third party is conducting the reverse auction, the procedures
to be used by the third party to conduct the reverse auction.



      (8)   A statement as to whether a third party is conducting
the reverse auction on behalf of the city.



      (9)   A statement that offers submitted by pre-qualified
bidders will only be received through the city's secure website; or if a
third party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the city, through
the third party's secure website.



      (10)   The date and time at which the reverse auction bidding
period will commence and the approximate length of time for which the reverse
auction will be conducted, allowing automatic extensions based upon resulting
competitive activity.



      (11)   The deadline by which pre-qualified bidders must submit
an initial price to a secure website for the purpose of establishing a
bidder's participation and initial ranking at the commencement of the reverse
auction bidding period.



      (12)   A statement explaining that the bidding period during
which the reverse auction is conducted may be extended based upon competitive
activity, at pre-determined periods determined by the purchasing agency.



      (13)   A statement identifying the circumstances under which
the reverse auction may be postponed, paused, rescheduled, or cancelled.



      (14)   The place and approximate time at which, following the
close of the bidding period, offers will be reviewed publicly by an
authorized representative of the purchasing agency in the presence of one or
more witnesses.



      (15)   A statement that the third party conducting the auction
on behalf of the city will collect a service charge from the successful
bidder for its participation in the reverse auction.



      (16)   The name, address, and telephone number of a
representative of the purchasing agency who can provide additional
information related to the reverse auction.



      (17)   If a third party is conducting the auction on behalf of
the city, the name, address and phone number of a representative of the third
party who can provide additional information related to the reverse auction,
including the mandatory training required of all pre-qualified bidders as a
condition of participating in the reverse auction.



      (18)   The conditions under which the invitation to bid may be
cancelled or postponed in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-1.



   (E)   Receiving offers.



      (1)   The Board shall receive offers only from bidders who
have been pre-qualified, in accordance with the invitation to bid.



      (2)   If a third party conducts the reverse auction on behalf
of the city, all pre-qualified bidders must receive training provided by the
third party in order to participate in the reverse auction.



      (3)   Prior to receiving electronic offers, the Board must
find: the invitation for bid for the reverse auction indicates the procedure
for transmitting the electronic offer; the electronic system on which the
offer is received has a security feature that protects the content of an
electronic offer with the same degree of protection as the content of an
offer that is not transmitted by electronic means.



      (4)   In accordance with the invitation to bid, offer
submitted by pre-qualified bidders will only be received:



         (a)   Through the city's secure website; or



         (b)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the city, through the third party's secure website.



   (F)   Reverse auction bidding period.



      (1)   For each reverse auction, the purchasing agent must
establish an initial bidding period during which bidders may submit prices
for which the supplies being offered may be purchased. The initial bidding
period shall not be less than one hour. The purchasing agent may
automatically extend the reverse auction bidding period for additional
pre-determined periods based upon competitive activity.



      (2)   During the bidding period for the reverse auction,
information available for public display is limited to the ranking, price and
name of bidders of each price bid relative to all other prices bid.



      (3)   The dollar amounts of the prices bid by bidders shall
not be disclosed to bidders until the close of the bidding period.



      (4)   All information received, obtained or retained during a
reverse auction remains confidential and may not be disclosed until after the
close of the reverse auction bidding period.



   (G)   Opening offers.



      (1)   In accordance with the Act, offers will be deemed to be
opened when a computer generated record of the information contained in all
bids received from pre-qualified responsive and responsible bidders is
reviewed publicly at the close of the bidding period for the reverse auction
in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in
the invitation for bids by the purchasing agency (or an authorized
representative of the purchasing agency, including the purchasing agent).



      (2)   The purchasing agency, and any of its agents or
employees are prohibited from displaying for public viewing the amount of
each initial bid price until the close of the initial bidding period for the
reverse auction. The purchasing agency is required to protect the identity of
a bidder and the prices which have been submitted by each bidder until the
initial bid has been placed until the reverse auction begins, at which time
bids will be deemed opened.



   (H)   Contract award.



      (1)   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-8, the purchasing agency
must award a contract for the purchase of supplies with reasonable promptness
by written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.



      (2)   If the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, the
purchasing agent must indicate the reasons for the award in writing.



      (3)   As provided in the invitation to bid, the third party
conducting the reverse auction may impose a fee as a term of the contract for
a purchase made by means of a reverse auction.



   (I)   Purchase orders and payments.



      (1)   A fully executed purchase order must be filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after the award of a contract of a purchase of
supplies through a reverse auction in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-5.



      (2)   Payments for supplies purchased in a reverse auction
shall be made only after receiving properly submitted claims in accordance
with I.C. 5-11-10, I.C. 36-4-8 and I.C. 36-5-4.



   (J)   Documentation.  The purchasing agency shall be required to
maintain adequate documentation regarding its reverse auctions so that the
transactions may be audited as provided by law. The purchasing agency shall
maintain an indexed file of specifications prepared by or under the authority
of its purchasing agents for each reverse auction in which the purchasing
agency participates.



(Res. RB-16-06, passed 8-14-06)



CHAPTER 31:  EXECUTIVE BRANCH



Section



   31.01   Execution of executive powers of city



   31.02   Mayor



   31.03   Clerk



   31.04   Board of Public Works and Safety; control of certain
executive departments



   31.05   Reserved



   31.06   Reserved



   31.07   Reserved



   31.08   Reserved



   31.09   Authority of departments to hire, purchase, contract



   31.10   Reserved



   31.11   Deputy Mayor



§ 31.01  EXECUTION OF EXECUTIVE POWERS OF CITY.



   (A)   All powers and duties of the city that are executive or
administrative in nature shall be exercised or performed by the Mayor,
another city officer, or a city department.



   (B)   An ordinance of the Council requiring an executive or
administrative function to be performed may:



      (1)   Designate the department that is to perform that
function; or



      (2)   Establish a new department or agency to perform that
function.



   (C)   If an executive or administrative function is not assigned by
a statute, ordinance, or resolution, the Mayor shall assign that function to
the proper department or officer.



(I.C. 36-4-4-3)



   (D)   The following city departments may be established by ordinance
passed by the Council upon the recommendation of the Mayor:



      (1)   Finance or administration;



      (2)   Law;



      (3)   Public works;



      (4)   Public safety;



      (5)   Parks and recreation;



      (6)   Human resources;



      (7)   Economic development; and



      (8)   Any other department considered necessary to efficiently
perform the administrative functions required to fulfill the needs of the
city's citizens. (I.C. 36-4-9-4)



   (E)   (1)   The Common Council affirms its establishment, upon
recommendation of the Mayor, the following executive departments for the City:



         (a)   Department of Finance and Accounting;



         (b)   Department of Law;



         (c)   Department of Engineering;



         (d)   Department of Human Resources;



         (e)   Department of Planning;



         (f)   Department of Parks and Recreation;



         (g)   Wastewater Utility;



         (h)   Street Department;



         (i)   Department of Information Technology;



         (j)   Maintenance Department;



         (k)   Department of Economic Development;



         (l)   Police Department; and



         (m)   Fire Department.



      (2)   Consistent with I.C. 36-4-9-4, the executive departments
shall perform the administrative functions assigned by statute and ordinance.



(‘61 Code, § 5.l) (Ord 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed
12-18-18)



§ 31.02  MAYOR.



   The Mayor is the city executive and head of the executive branch.  He
or she shall faithfully perform the duties and responsibilities contained in
I.C. 36-4-5 and other statutes of the state. All department directors, except
the Maintenance Department, are appointed by the Mayor and serve at his or
her pleasure. However, the Mayor's appointments are subject to the approval
of any statutory board or commission established in the department. (I.C.
36-4-9-6(b), I.C. 36-4-9-2)



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 31.03  CLERK.



   (A)   The Clerk is the Clerk of the Common Council. The Clerk shall
perform all duties as prescribed by statute or ordinance.



(Statutory reference: I.C. 36-4-6-9)



   (B)   The Clerk may appoint the number of deputies and employees
authorized by the Common Council.  The Clerk’s deputies and employees
serve at the Clerk’s pleasure (I.C. 36-4-11-4).



   (C)   The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, and shall perform all the duties incident to such office.



   (D)   the Clerk is the Clerk of the city Court and shall carry out
the duties prescribed by law.



   (E)   the Clerk shall maintain all records for Riverside Cemetery.



(Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18



               



Cross-reference:



   Fiscal branch of city government, see Chapter 33A.



Statutory reference:



   City Clerk as Clerk of Board, see I.C. 36-4-9-8(c)



   City Clerk As Clerk of City Court, see I.C. 33-35-3-2(a)



§ 31.04  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY; CONTROL OF CERTAIN EXECUTIVE
DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Public Works and Safety
within the executive branch.  The Board shall be the chief administrative
body of the city and shall have control of the day-to-day operations of the
following executive departments which are hereby established.



      (1)   Police Department.



      (2)   Fire Department.



      (3)   Wastewater Utility Department.



      (4)   Street Department.



      (5)   Department of Law.



   (B)   The members of the Board of Public Works and Safety are the
Mayor and two residents of the city who shall be appointed by the Mayor to
serve at his or her pleasure. No member of the Common Council shall serve on
the Board of Public Works.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 31.05  RESERVED.



§ 31.06  RESERVED.



§ 31.07  RESERVED.



§ 31.08  RESERVED.



§ 31.09  AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENTS TO HIRE, PURCHASE, CONTRACT.



   Subject to the appropriation power, claims approval, and fiscal
guidelines of the Common Council the departments listed in § 31.01 shall
have the ability to hire such employees, and purchase or contract for such
materials or services, as the Board of Works and Safety or other governing
board or commission deems necessary to perform their public functions.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 31.10  RESERVED.



§ 31.11  DEPUTY MAYOR.



   (A)   The Common Council hereby establishes the statutory position
of Deputy Mayor to be appointed by the Mayor of the city.



   (B)   The Deputy Mayor shall have all of the powers of the Mayor in
the event the Mayor is absent or, for any reason, is not able to carry out
any duties of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Deputy Mayor serves at the pleasure of the Mayor.



(Ord. 75-10-16, passed 10-11-16)



CHAPTER 32:  LEGISLATIVE BRANCH



Section



   32.01   Legislative authority



   32.02   Council members; councilmanic districts



   32.03   Council meetings



   32.04   Reserved



   32.05   Duties of Clerk



   32.06   Expulsion of members



   32.07   Powers of Council concerning ordinances



   32.08   Supervision of departments, officers, and employees;
investigatory powers



   32.09   Financial management powers



   32.10   Reserved



   32.11   Sale of city-owned real estate



   32.12   Council's rules of procedure



§ 32.01  LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The legislative branch of the city is the Common Council.  The Council
shall have exclusive authority to adopt ordinances, approve claims, and
appropriate monies received by the city, and to perform other necessary and
desirable legislative functions.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83)



§ 32.02  COUNCIL MEMBERS; COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   The Common Council shall be composed of nine members, six of whom are
elected from districts and three of whom are elected at large. The districts
are described in § 11.01.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 32.03  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The regularly scheduled meetings of the Common Council shall be at 7:00
p.m. on the Tuesdays immediately following the second and fourth Mondays of
each month. Special meetings shall be held on the call of the Mayor, or on
such other call as may be provided for by the rules. A majority of all the
members shall constitute a quorum. It shall require a majority vote of all
the members to pass an ordinance. Whenever it is required that any ordinance
or resolution shall be passed or other action of the Council taken by a 2/3
vote, such requirement shall be construed to mean a 2/3 vote of all the
members. All meetings of the Common Council shall be public or in accordance
with the Rules of Procedure in § 32.12 except executive sessions.



(I.C. 36-4-6-7)  (Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Res. RC-16-00, passed
8-28-00; Am. Ord. 25-04-16, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed
12-18-18)



§ 32.04  RESERVED.



§ 32.05  DUTIES OF CLERK.



   The Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Council and shall perform the
duties prescribed by I.C. 36-4-6-9 and such others as the Council may direct.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 25-04-16, passed 4-26-16)



§ 32.06  EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Common Council may do the following.



      (l)  Expel any member for violation of an official duty.



      (2)  Declare the seat of any member vacant if the member is
unable to perform the duties of the member’s office.



      (3)  Adopt its own rules to govern proceedings under this
section.



   (B)   A two-thirds vote is required to expel a member or vacate the
member’s seat.



(I.C. 36-4-6-6)



§ 32.07  POWERS OF COUNCIL CONCERNING ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The Common Council may pass ordinances, orders, resolutions,
and motions for the government of the city, the control of the city's
property and finances, and the appropriation of money.  (IC 36-4-6-18)



   (B)   An appropriation ordinance must specify, by items, the amount
of each appropriation and the department for which it is made. (IC 36-4-7-9)



   (C)   A majority vote of the Council is required to pass an
ordinance, unless a greater vote is required by statute.



(IC 36-4-6-12)



   (D)   A two-thirds vote of all the elected members, after unanimous
consent of the members present to consider the ordinance, is required to pass
an ordinance of the Common Council on the same day or at the same meeting at
which it is introduced.  This division does not apply to a zoning ordinance
or amendment to a zoning ordinance that is adopted under IC 36-7.  (IC
36-4-6-13)



   (E)   An ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the Common
Council is considered adopted when it is:  signed by the Presiding Officer;
and either approved by the Mayor or passed over his veto by the Common
Council, under IC 36-4-6-16.  If required by statute, an adopted ordinance,
order, or resolution must be promulgated or published before it takes effect.



      (1)   An ordinance prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a
violation must, before it takes effect, be published in the manner prescribed
by IC 5-3-l unless:



         (a)   It is published under division (2) below; or



         (b)   There is an urgent necessity requiring its
immediate effectiveness, the Mayor proclaims the urgent necessity, and copies
of the ordinance are posted in three public places in each of the districts
from which members are elected to the legislative body.



      (2)   If a city publishes any of its ordinances in book or
pamphlet form, no other publication is required.  If an ordinance
prescribing a penalty or forfeiture for a violation is published under this
division, it takes effect two weeks after the publication of the book or
pamphlet.  Publication under this division, if authorized by the Common
Council, constitutes presumptive evidence:



         (a)   Of the ordinances in the book or pamphlet;



         (b)   Of the date of adoption of the ordinances; and



         (c)   That the ordinances have been properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved.



      (3)   This division does not apply to a zoning ordinance or
amendment to a zoning ordinance, or a resolution approving a comprehensive
plan, that is adopted under IC 36-7.



      (4)   An ordinance increasing a building permit fee on new
development must:



         (a)   Be published:



            1.   One time in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1; and



            2.   Not later than 30 days after the ordinance is
adopted by the legislative body in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1.



         (b)   Delay the implementation of the fee increase for
90 days after the date the ordinance is published under subsection (4)(a).



(IC 36-4-6-14)



   (F)   After an ordinance, order, or resolution passed by the Common
Council has been signed by the presiding officer, the Clerk shall present it
to the Mayor, and record the time of the presentation.  (IC 36-4-6-15)



   (G)   (1)   Within ten days after an ordinance, order, or
resolution is presented to him, the Mayor shall do the following.



         (a)   Approve the ordinance, order, or resolution, by
entering his approval on it, signing it, and sending the Common Council a
message annoucing his approval.



         (b)   Veto the ordinance, order, or resolution, by
returning it to the Common Council with a message announcing his veto and
stating his reasons for the veto.



      (2)   The Mayor may approve or veto separate items of an
ordinance appropriating money or levying a tax.



      (3)   If the Mayor fails to perform his duty under this
division the ordinance, order, or resolution is considered vetoed.  Whenever
an ordinance, order, or resolution is vetoed by the Mayor, it is considered
defeated unless the Common Council, at its first regular or special meeting
after the ten-day period prescribed by this division passes the ordinance,
order, or resolution over his veto by a two-thirds vote.



(IC 36-4-6-16)



   (H)   Within a reasonable time after an ordinance of the Common
Council is adopted, the Clerk shall record it in a book kept for that
purpose.  The record must include the following.  The record or a certified
copy of it constitutes presumptive evidence of the adoption of the ordinance.



      (1)   The signature of the Presiding Officer.



      (2)   The attestation of the Clerk.



      (3)   The Mayor's approval or veto of the ordinance.



      (4)   If applicable, a memorandum of the passage of the
ordinance over the veto.



      (5)   The date of each recorded item.



(IC 36-4-6-17)



§ 32.08  SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES; INVESTIGATORY
POWERS.



   (A)   The Common Council may investigate:



      (1)   The departments, officers, and employees of the city;



      (2)   Any charges against a department, officer, or employee
of the city; and



      (3)   The affairs of a person with whom the city has entered
or is about to enter into a contract.



   (B)   When conducting an investigation under this section, the
Common Council:



      (1)   Is entitled to access to all records pertaining to the
investigation; and



      (2)   May compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of evidence by subpoena and attachment served and executed in the
county.



   (C)   If a person refuses to testify or produce evidence at an
investigation conducted under this section, the Common Council may order its
Clerk to immediately present to the circuit court, superior court, or probate
court of the county a written report of the facts relating to the refusal. 
The court shall hear all questions relating to the refusal to testify or
produce evidence, and shall also hear any new evidence not included in the
Clerk’s report.  If the court finds that the testimony or evidence sought
should be given or produced, it shall order the person to testify or produce
the evidence, or both.



(IC 36-4-6-21)



§ 32.09  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT POWERS.



   (A)   Exercise of powers.  The Common Council may manage the
finances of the city to the extent that that power is not vested in the
executive branch.  (IC 36-4-4-4(b))



   (B)   Loans by ordinance authorized.



      (1)   The Common Council may, by ordinance, make loans of
money and, subject to I.C. 5-1-11.5 and I.C. 5-11-1-4(c), issue bonds for the
purpose of refunding those loans.  The loans may be made only for the
purpose of procuring money to be used in the exercise of the powers of the
city or for the payment of city debts.



      (2)   An ordinance adopted under this section:



         (a)   Must include the terms of the bonds to be issued
in evidence of the loan;



         (b)   Must include the time and manner of giving notice
of the sale of the bonds;



         (c)   Must include the manner in which the bonds will be
sold; and



         (d)   May authorize a total amount for any issue of
bonds.



      (3)   Bonds issued under this section may be sold in parcels
of any size and at any time their proceeds are needed by the city.



      (4)   Bonds issued and sold by a city under this section:



         (a)   Are negotiable with or without registration, as
may be provided by the ordinance authorizing the issue;



         (b)   May bear interest at any rate;



         (c)   May run not longer than 30 years;



         (d)   May contain an option allowing the city to redeem
them in whole or in part at specifed times prior to maturity; and



         (e)   May be sold for not less than par value.



      (5)   The city fiscal officer shall:



         (a)   Manage and supervise the preparation,
advertisement, negotiations, and sale of bonds under this section, subject to
the terms of the ordinance authorizing the sale;



         (b)   Certify the amount the purchaser is to pay,
together with the name and address of the purchaser;



         (c)   Receive the amount of payment certified;



         (d)   Deliver the bonds to the purchaser;



         (e)   Take a receipt for the securities delivered;



         (f)   Pay the purchaser's payment into the city
treasury; and



         (g)   Report the proceedings in the sale to the
legislative body.



      (6)   The actions of the fiscal officer under this division
are ministerial.



(IC 36-4-6-19)



   (C)   Temporary borrowing in anticipation of revenue.



      (1)   The Common Council may, by ordinance, make loans of
money for not more than five years and issue notes for the purpose of
refunding those loans.  The loans may be made only for the purpose of
procuring money to be used in the exercise of the powers of the city, and the
total amount of outstanding loans under this division (C)(1) of this section
may not exceed 5% of the city's total tax levy in the current year, excluding
amounts levied to pay debt service and lease rentals.  Loans under division
(C)(1) of this section shall be made in the same manner as loans under IC
36-4-6-19 except that:



         (a)   The ordinance authorizing the loans must pledge to
their payment a sufficient amount of tax revenues over the ensuing five years
to provide for refunding the loans; and



         (b)   The loans must be evidenced by notes of the city
in terms designating the nature of the consideration, the time and place
payable, and the revenues out of which they will be payable.  Notes issued
under division (C)(1) of this section are not bonded indebtedness for
purposes of I.C. 6-1.1-18.5.



      (2)   The Common Council may, by ordinance, make temporary
loans in anticipation of current revenues of the city that have been levied
and are being collected for the fiscal year in which the loans are made. 
Loans under division (C)(1) of this section shall be made in the same manner
as loans made under IC 36-4-6-19, except that:



         (a)   The ordinance authorizing the loans must
appropriate and pledge to their payment a sufficient amount of the revenues
in anticipation of which the are issued and out of which they are payable; and



         (b)   The loans must be evidenced by time warrants of
the city in terms designating the nature of the consideration, the time and
place payable, and the revenues in anticipation of which they are issued and
out of which they are payable.



      (3)   An action to contest the validity of a loan made under
this section must be brought within 15 days from the day on which the
ordinance is adopted.



(IC 36-4-6-20)



§ 32.10  RESERVED.



§ 32.11  SALE OF CITY-OWNED REAL ESTATE.



   The Mayor and Common Council shall follow the procedures in state
statute (see I.C. 36-1-11-1 et seq.) in selling any real estate owned by the
city.



(Ord. 966, passed 10-26-72; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 32.12  COUNCIL'S RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   Rule 1:  Regular meeting.  The Council shall hold a regular meeting
the Tuesdays immediately following the second and fourth Mondays of each
month, except that if a regular meeting is a legal holiday, the meeting shall
be held on the next business day.  The meeting shall be held at the
Noblesville City Hall and shall begin at 7:00 p.m.



   Rule 2:  Special meetings.  The Council President or Council Vice
President in the President’s absence, or any five members of the Council
may at any time call a special Council meeting by signing a written notice
stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be
considered.  The notice shall be delivered to the Mayor and each Councilman
or left at his usual dwelling place and place of business at least six hours
before the meeting.  Special meetings may be held at any time when the Mayor
and all members of the Council are present and consent thereto or when those
not present have signed a written waiver of notice.  Only those items of
business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special meeting,
unless all members are present or have signed a written waiver of notice. 
Any news media which have requested notice of meetings shall be given notice
of special meetings in the same manner as the members of the Council.



   Rule 3:  Organization meeting.  The organization meeting of the
Council shall be on the first Monday in January at a time agreed upon by the
Council in the Council chamber or their regular meeting place. At this
meeting, the Council shall elect from its members a President and Vice
President.



   Rule 4:  Agenda.  The Clerk shall prepare the proposed agenda for the
regular meeting.  A request to have an item of business placed on the
proposed agenda must be received at least three working days before the
regular meeting.  Any Council Member may, by a timely request, have an item
placed on the proposed agenda.  The proposed agenda shall include, for each
item of business placed on it, as much background information on the subject
as is available and feasible to reproduce.  A copy of all proposed
ordinances shall be attached to the proposed agenda.  Each Council Member
shall receive a copy of the proposed agenda before the meeting and it shall
be available for public inspection or distribution at least 48 hours prior to
the regular meeting.  The Council may, by majority vote, add an item that is
not on the proposed agenda.



   Rule 5: (A)   Public request to address the Council.  Any
individual or group who wishes to address the Council shall make a request
pursuant to the Meeting Guidelines adopted at the Council’s organization
meeting in January of each year.



      (B)   Citizen input.  Before any person will be allowed to
speak to the presiding officer they must be recognized by the presiding
officer and identify themselves by name and address; at that time they shall
come forward before the presiding officer and speak into a microphone or at a
place designated.  Any person failing to comply with these rules may be
ruled out of order by the presiding officer and at that time may be removed
from the council room by the Chief of Police or his representative at the
instruction of the presiding officer.



   Rule 6.  Order of business.  Items shall be placed on the proposed
agenda according to the order of business.  The order of business for each
regular meeting shall be as follows:



      Call to order;



      Roll call;



      Minutes;



      Petitions or comments by those citizens present;



      Reports from committees and officers;



      Claims;



      Unfinished business;



      New business;



      Miscellaneous business;



      Adjournment.



   By motion seconded and majority vote of the Council, items may be
considered out-of-order.



   Rule 7:  Duties of the Clerk of the Council.  The Clerk shall be the
Clerk of the City Council and it shall be his or her duty as Clerk to keep
the files and papers of the Council, to make and keep an accurate journal of
the proceedings and minutes, to enter the votes of each Council Member on the
passage of every ordinance and resolution or on any other vote whenever
requested by two members of the Council, and to perform all other duties
requested by the Council to insure the orderly progress and preservation of
Council business.



   Rule 8:  Offices of the Council President and Vice President; powers;
rules of succession.  The Council President shall preside all meetings of
the City Council for that year he or she is elected. The Vice President shall
serve in the President’s absence for that year. Council members who serve
as Council President and Vice President shall be entitled to vote on all
matters and shall be considered Council Members for all purposes, including
the determination of whether a quorum is present. The presiding officer shall
have the following powers: (A) to rule motions in or out of order, including
any motion patently offered for obstructive or dilatory purposes; (B) to
determine whether a speaker has gone beyond reasonable standards of courtesy
in his or her remarks and to entertain and rule on objections from other
members on this ground; (C) to call a brief recess at any time; and (D) to
adjourn the meeting in an emergency. In the event the President is unable to
serve out his/her term as President, due to death or resignation, then the
Vice President shall succeed as President of the Council until the
organization meeting the following January. The Council shall also elect a
new Vice President from its members to serve until the organization meeting
the following January.



   Rule 9:  Duty to vote.  Every member must vote aye, nay, or abstain
unless excused by the remaining members according to law.  A member may
recuse him or herself from voting only on matters involving the consideration
of his own financial interest or official conduct. The order of roll call
votes shall be rotated so that the same order is not used for every vote. The
first roll call will be alphabetical, the second roll call will begin with
the second alphabetical name and end with the first, and so on, with the
exception being that the presiding officer will always vote last.



   Rule 10:  Action by Council. The Council shall proceed by motion. Any
member may make a motion.



   Rule 11:  Adoption by majority vote. A majority of all members of the
Council shall constitute a quorum. A majority of all members of the Council,
not only those present, is required to take any official action. When a
two-thirds vote is required by law, a two-thirds vote of all members of the
Council, not only those present is required.



   Rule 12:  Procedural Motions. The following are procedural motions
allows during any meeting of the Council: (A) To postpone to a certain time.
An item under consideration may be postponed to a particular date by motion,
second, and a majority vote; (B) To postpone indefinitely. An item under
consideration may be postponed without a time limit by motion, second, and a
majority vote. The item may be restored to the agenda at any future date by
motion, second, and a majority vote, or may be withdraw by the petitioner.
Any item postponed indefinitely will be listed at the bottom of the agenda
(after adjournment) as postponed indefinitely until it is restored to the
agenda or withdrawn; and (C) Call of the previous question. The motion is not
in order until every member has had an opportunity to speak one time.



   Rule 13:  Introduction of ordinances.  A proposed ordinance shall be
introduced at the first meeting at which it is actually considered by the
Council.  The ordinance must have been previously distributed of the Council
members so that they are familiar with the contents of the ordinance.



   Rule 14:  Adoption of ordinances.  An affirmative vote equal to a
majority of all the members of the Council not recused from voting on the
question in issue shall be required to adopt an ordinance or to take any
action that has the effect of an ordinance.  No ordinance shall be passed on
the date which it is first read or introduced and final action shall not be
taken on any ordinance until the second meeting at which it is considered. 
Final action may be taken on an ordinance on the date on which it is first
introduced only by unanimous vote of the Council.  Any other action taken
with regard to the passage or operation of any ordinance shall be done in
compliance with statutory law. This rule does not apply to zoning ordinances.



   Rule 15:  Adoption of the budget ordinance.  Any action with regard
to adoption of a city budget shall be done in compliance with state
statute.  During the period beginning with the submission of the budget to
the Council and ending with the adoption of the budget ordinance, the Council
may hold any special meetings that may be necessary to complete its work on
the budget ordinance.  Any provisions of law concerning the call of special
meetings do not apply during that period so long as each member of the
Council has actual notice of each special meeting called for the purpose of
considering the budget, and no business other than consideration of the
budget is taken up.



   Rule 16:  Executive sessions.  The Council may hold executive
sessions as provided by law.



   Rule 17:  Quorum.  A majority of the actual membership of the
Council, excluding vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum.  A member who
has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused by majority vote of the
remaining members present shall be counted as present for purposes of
determining whether a quorum is present.



   Rule 18:  Public hearings.  Public hearings required by law or deemed
advisable by the Council shall be organized and a notice published as
required by statute or administrative regulation. At the public hearing, the
Council President or Vice President in the President’s absence, shall call
the hearing to order, announce any rules for the specific hearing including
the length of time for public comments and preside over it. When the allotted
time expiresand public input has concluded, the presiding officer shall
declare the hearing ended after a motion, second and majority vote of the
Council.



   Rule 19:  Quorum at public hearings.  A quorum of Council shall be
required at all public hearings required by state and federal law.



   Rule 20:  Committees.  At its organizational meetings or first
regular meeting hereafter, the Council President shall appoint the Council
members to committees. All committees shall automatically terminate at the
end of the year.



   Rule 21:  Repealer.  The provisions of these rules of procedure take
precedence over all prior ordinances and those parts of prior ordinances in
conflict with the provisions of these rules, and such ordinances or parts of
ordinances are hereby repealed.



   Rule 22:  Reference to Robert’s Rules of Order.  To the extent not
provided for in these rules, and to the extent it does not conflict with the
spirit of these rules and the laws of the State of Indiana, the Council shall
refer to the most recent published version of Robert’s Rules of Order for
unresolved procedural questions.



(Ord. 1323, passed 2-11-80; Am. Ord. 1386, passed l-26-81; Am. Ord. 1481,
passed 5-9-83; Am. Ord. 25-04-16, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 16-05-18, passed
5-29-18)



CHAPTER 33:  JUDICIAL BRANCH



Section



   33.01   Establishment of City Court



§ 33.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY COURT.



   There is hereby established a City Court to be headed and operated by a
City Judge elected and seated pursuant to IC 33-10.1-1-3.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83)



CHAPTER 33A:  FISCAL BRANCH



Section




   33A.01   City Controller as fiscal officer





   33A.02   Deputy Clerk-Treasurer





   33A.03   Fee for preparation of bid packets




               



Cross-reference:



   Clerk-Treasurer, see § 31.03



§ 33A.01  CITY CONTROLLER AS FISCAL OFFICER.



   The City Controller is the fiscal officer of the city and the head of
the fiscal branch.  He or she shall perform the duties assigned by I.C.
36-4-10 et seq., and such other duties as the Common Council may, by
ordinance, require.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 33A.02  DEPUTY CLERK-TREASURER.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized, pursuant to IC 36-4-11-4, to
appoint one Deputy Clerk-Treasurer to be paid soley from funds appropriated
for the office of Clerk-Treasurer.  Such deputy shall work under the
exclusive direction of the Clerk-Treasurer. Such deputy shall work under the
exclusive direction of the Clerk-Treasurer, and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 1479, passed  -  -83)



§ 33A.03  FEE FOR PREPARATION OF BID PACKETS.



   (A)   The Clerk is hereby authorized to assess a nonrefundable fee
in an amount to be determined but in no event to exceed $100, to any person
or entity requesting a bid packet preliminary to submission of a bid on any
advertising bid letting of the city.



   (B)   The amount of the nonrefundable fee shall be determined prior
to the advertisement for bids and made part of the bid specifications based
upon the actual cost of reproduction and assembly of the bid packet, subject
to the maximum limitations set out in division (A) above.  Such calculations
shall be made by the Clerk in consultation with the City Engineer or such
department heads as may be involved in the development of the bid
specifications.  The nonrefundable fee shall be set out and clearly stated
in the advertisement for bids.



   (C)   The Clerk shall maintain appropriate books and records of the
fees charged and the receipts thereto and the fees so collected shall be
deposited in the General Fund.



(Ord. 78-11-89, passed 12-11-89; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



CHAPTER 34:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



   34.01   Downtown Economic Development Authority




Board of Public Works and Safety




   34.05   Composition of Board



   34.06   Powers and duties



   34.07   Contingent fund



   34.08   Care of the Riverside cemetery; fee schedule



   34.09   City Engineer



   34.10   Meetings




Department of Economic Development and Economic Development Commission




   34.20   Establishment of Economic Development Commission



   34.21   Purpose; powers and duties



   34.22   Economic Development Commission




Human Relations Commission




   34.30   Policy



   34.31   Definitions



   34.32   Commission on Human Relations



   34.33   Functions of the Commission; annual reports



   34.34   Discriminatory housing practices



   34.35   Discrimination in employment based on disability



   34.36   Limitations on application of provisions



   34.37   City contracts



   34.38   Relations with city departments and agencies



   34.39   Relationship to the Indiana Civil Rights Commission




Department of Parks and Recreation




   34.40   Establishment



   34.41   Composition and term of Board of Parks and Recreation



   34.42   Officials of the Board



   34.43   Powers and duties of the Board



   34.44   Advisory council, committees



   34.45   Annual budget



   34.46   Capital fund



   34.47   City employee use of parks




Emergency-Disaster Department




   34.55   Establishment



   34.56   Officers



   34.57   National Incident Management System adopted




Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority




   34.65   Establishment



   34.66   Term



   34.67   Powers



   34.68   Purpose



   34.69   Organization



   34.70   Fiscal affairs



   34.71   Bylaws




Redevelopment Authority




   34.80   Creation



   34.81   Membership




Department of Redevelopment




   34.85   Establishment



   34.86   Redevelopment Commission



   34.87   Membership



   34.88   Qualifications; salary



   34.89   Duties of City Officers



Community Vision for Excellence Committee



   34.95   Organization



   34.96   Committee responsibilities



Impact Fee Review Board



   34.110   Establishment



   34.111   Membership



   34.112   Term



   34.113   Appointment



   34.114   Duties




Historic Preservation Commission




   34.125   Purpose



   34.126   Definitions



   34.127   Establishment and organization



   34.128   Powers and duties



   34.129   Establishment of districts



   34.130   Certificates of appropriateness (COA)



   34.131   Staff approvals



   34.132   Visual compatibility



   34.133   Preservation of historical and architectural character upon
alteration or relocation mandated



   34.134   Appeal provisions



   34.135   Maintenance



   34.136   Relationship with zoning districts



   34.137   Interested parties



   34.138   Code of ethics



   34.139   Enforcement, penalties, and judicial review




Downtown Strategic Action Committee




   34.150   Purpose



   34.151   Establishment and composition



   34.152   Term



   34.153   Meetings



   34.154   Administrative and technical support



   34.155   General provisions



§ 34.01  DOWNTOWN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.



   The city hereby creates the Noblesville Downtown Economic Development
Authority.



(Res. RC-31-03, passed 7-29-03)



BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY



§ 34.05  COMPOSITION OF BOARD.



   For provisions concerning membership of the Board of Public Works and
Safety, see Code §§ 30.02, 31.04 and I.C. 36-4-9-8(c).



(Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.06  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall administer the Police and Fire Departments of the city,
except as provided by any statute or ordinance. The Board has exclusive
control over all matters and property relating to the Police Department, Fire
Department (including fire alarms and fire escapes), animal shelters and
inspection of buildings. The Board shall have all responsibilities, duties
and powers as set forth in I.C. § 36-9-6 et seq. and I.C. § 36-8-3-2, and
as may be amended from time to time.



(Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



Cross-reference:



   Code § 31.04 and I.C. 36-4-9 et seq. and 36-8-3-2.



§ 34.07  CONTINGENT FUND.



   (A)   There is created a special contingent fund designated as the
building demolition, repair, and contingent fund of the city.



   (B)   The fund shall be maintained by levy of tax on property in the
city at the minimum level of $5,000.



   (C)   The fund shall be administered and expended by the authority
of the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city. 



(Ord. 827, passed 7-26-65)



§ 34.08  CARE OF THE RIVERSIDE CEMETERY; FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees and a group known as “The Old
Graveyard Association” is abolished.  The care and maintenance of the city
cemetery, also known as “The Old Cemetery” is placed in the Board of
Public Works and Safety.  All monies and property currently held by or under
the control of “The Old Graveyard Association” or the Board of Trustees 
of  that association shall immediately be turned over to the Board of Public
Works and Safety and shall from December 8, 1980, be under the care, custody,
and control of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Fee schedules.



      (1)   Lots purchased in Riverside Cemetery.



         City of Noblesville resident            $150



         Hamilton County resident               $200



         Outside Hamilton County               $400



      (2)   Opening and closing of graves at Riverside Cemetery.



         City of Noblesville resident (adult)         $250



         City of Noblesville resident (infant)         $125



         City of Noblesville resident (cremation)   $125



         Hamilton County resident
(adult)                  $300



         Hamilton County resident
(infant)               $150



         Hamilton County resident (cremation)         $200



         Outside Hamilton County
(adult)                  $500



         Outside Hamilton County
(infant)                  $250



         Outside Hamilton County
(cremation)            $300



(Ord. 1381, passed 12-8-80; Am. Ord. 10-03-04, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ord.
53-12-18, passed 12-18-18) 



§ 34.09  CITY ENGINEER.



   (A)  There is created the office of City Engineer.



   (B)  The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
termination and removal as other appointed city officials.



(Ord. 960, passed 10-23-72; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



Cross-reference:



   Code § 30.02; § 31.01



§ 34.10  MEETINGS.



   Beginning September 26,2000, the regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board shall be at 9:00 on the Tuesday immediately following the second and
fourth Monday of each month. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the
power of the Board to call such special meetings as the board deems
reasonable.



(Res. RB-17-00, passed 8-28-00; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 34.20  ESTABLISHMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   The Common Council previously established the Department of economic
Development and the Noblesville Economic Development Commission. Code §§
31.01, 34.22.



(Ord. 2010, passed 6-11-74; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



Statutory reference:



   I.C. 36-7-12 et seq.



§ 34.21  PURPOSE; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Noblesville Economic Development Commission shall have all powers
and duties granted by I.C. § 36-7-12, et seq. and as may be amended from
time to time with respect to the promotion of economic development,
including, without limitation, the financing of single, identified economic
development or pollution control facilities and the provision of a program to
finance multiple, unidentified economic development or pollution control
facilities that promote a substantial likelihood of: creating or retaining
opportunities for gainful employment; creating business opportunities;
providing reliable water services; the abatement, reduction, or prevention of
pollution; or the removal or treatment of substances in materials being
processed that otherwise would cause pollution when used; serve a public
purpose and will be of benefit to the health or general welfare of the unit
proposing to issue bonds for the financing or program or of the unit where
the facilities that are to be financed are located.



(I.C. 36-7-12-3) (Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.22  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation.  There is created in the city a Department of
Economic Development.



   (B)   Control.  The Department of Economic Development shall be
controlled by the Economic Development Commission.  (IC 36-7-12-4)



   (C)   Appointment of members; terms.



      (1)   The members of the Economic Development Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor.  One of the members shall be selected by the
Mayor, one shall be nominated by the County Council and one shall be
nominated by the Common Council.



      (2)   The Economic Development Commissioners shall take office
upon their appointment, and their terms run from February 1 after their
original appointment, for a period of:



         (a)   Three years, if selected by the Mayor;



         (b)   Two years, if nominated by the Common Council; and



         (c)   One year, if nominated by the county Council.



(IC 36-7-12-5)



   (D)   Selections and nominations; expiration of terms.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall promptly notify the executives and
fiscal bodies required to make selections and nominations by this chapter. 
The officers required to make selections and nominations shall do so within
15 days after receiving that notice.  Each selectee and nominee shall be
appointed by the appropriate executive officer within ten days after he or
she receives the nomination.



      (2)   At the expiration of the respective terms of each of the
original Economic Development Commissioners, their respective successors
shall be selected and nominated, before the expiration of the term, in the
same manner as the original Commissioner, and each succeeding Commissioner
shall serve for a term of four years.  A Commissioner shall hold over after
the expiration of his or her term until his successor is appointed and has
qualified.



(I.C. 36-7-12-9)



   (E)   Vacancies.



      (1)   If the Common Council or County Council fails to make a
nomination within the time specified by I.C. 36-7-12-9, the Mayor may select
and appoint a person without a nomination.



      (2)   If a person appointed as an Economic Development
Commissioner fails to take the oath of office required by I.C. 36-7-12-11
within ten days after the notice of his or her appointment is mailed to him
or her, or if any Commissioner, after qualifying, dies, resigns, vacates his
or her office, or is removed from office, a new Commissioner shall be
appointed to fill the vacancy in the same manner as the Commissioner in
respect to whom the vacancy occurs was appointed.  A Commissioner appointed
under this division shall serve for the remainder of the vacated term.



(I.C. 36-7-12-10)



   (F)   Oath of office.  Before beginning his duties, each Economic
Development Commissioner shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the
usual form, to be indorsed upon the certificate of his appointment.  The
certificate shall be promptly filed with the City Clerk.



(I.C. 36-7-12-11)



   (G)   Meetings; officers.



      (1)   The Economic Development Commission shall meet within 30
days after its original appointment, at a time and place designated by the
Mayor, for the purpose of organization, and shall meet to reorganize in
February of each succeeding year.



      (2)   At the meeting required by division (1) above, the
Economic Development Commission shall elect one of its members as President,
one as Vice-President, and one as Secretary.  Each officer shall serve from
the date of his or her election until January 31 after his or her election,
and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.



(I.C. 36-7-12-12)



   (H)   Bylaws; quorum; public records.



      (1)   The Economic Development Commission may adopt the
bylaws, rules, and regulations that it considers necessary.  Regular or
special meetings shall be held at times and upon notice fixed by the
Commission, either by resolution or in accordance with the bylaws, rules, and
regulations adopted.



      (2)   A majority of the members of the Economic Development
Commission constitutes a quorum.



      (3)   Actions of the Economic Development Commission must be
approved by a majority of the members of the Commission.



      (4)   The records of the Economic Development Commission are
public records.



(I.C. 36-7-12-13)



(Ord. 1020, passed 6-11-74; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION



§ 34.30  POLICY.



   (A)   There dwells in the city a population varying in race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, and ancestry; and persons differing in ages
and handicaps.  The peace, good order, security, and welfare of the city and
its  inhabitants may be  threatened by the existence within it  of
groups  antagonistic to  one another or prejudiced against each  other
because  of differences  of race,  color,  religion,  sex,  age, 
handicap,  national  origin,  or ancestry.  The  Common Council finds
and declares that any prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, disorder, or
discrimination occasioned thereby threatens not only the rights and proper
privileges of its inhabitants but menaces the institutions of the city.



   (B)   The practice of denying to a person his civil rights by reason
of race, religion, color, sex, age, handicap, national origin, or ancestry of
that person is contrary to the principle of equal opportunity, and shall be
considered contrary to public policy.



   (C)   To the end that prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, disorder, and
discrimination shall be eliminated, this subchapter is enacted to provide an
instrumentality through which the city officially may encourage and bring
about mutual self-respect and understanding of each other by all groups in
the city, and help give effect to the guarantees of equal rights contained in
the constitution, the laws, and the public policies of this state and of the
United States.



(Ord. 870, passed 5- -68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75; Am. Ord. 1387,
passed 3-23-81)



§ 34.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   "AFFIRMATIVE ACTION."  Those acts that the Commission determines
necessary to assure compliance with Indiana Civil Rights Law.



   "APPRAISER."  Any person who for a fee or otherwise, establishes or
estimates a value for a housing unit, as defined below.



   "BUSINESS."  Any corporation, proprietorship, partnership, firm, or
public association organized for profit.



   "COMMISSION."  The Commission on Human Relations created by this
subchapter.



   "COMPLAINT."  Any written grievance that is sufficiently complete and
filed by a complainant with the Commission; or filed by a complainant as a
civil action in the circuit or superior court having jurisdiction in the
county in which the alleged discriminatory practice occurred.  The original
of any complaint filed under this definition shall be signed and verified by
the complainant.



   "DISABLED or DISABILITY."  The physical or mental condition of a
person that constitutes a substantial disability.  In reference to
employment, under this subchapter, "DISABLED or DISABILITY" also means the
physical or mental condition of a person that constitutes a substantial
disability unrelated to the person's ability to engage in a particular
occupation.



   “DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE.” 



      (1)   The exclusion of a person from equal opportunities
because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry,
or status as a veteran;



      (2)   A system which excludes persons from equal opportunities
because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry,
or status as a veteran;



      (3)   The promotion of racial segregation or separation in any
manner including, but not limited to, the inducing of or the attempting to
induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry in the neighborhood
of a person or persons of a particular race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin, or ancestry;



      (4)   A violation of I.C. 22-9-5 that occurs after July 25,
1992 and is committed by a covered entity (as defined in I.C. 22-9-5-4);



      (5)   The performance of an abortion solely because of the
race, color, sex, disability, national origin, or ancestry of the fetus; or



      (6)   A violation of any of the following statutes protecting
the right of conscience regarding abortion:



         (a)   I.C. 16-34-1-4.



         (b)   I.C. 16-34-1-5.



         (c)   I.C. 16-34-1-6.



      Every discriminatory practice relating to the acquisition or sale
of real estate, education, public accommodations, employment, or the
extending of credit as “credit” as defined in I.C. 24-4.5- 1-301.5, shall
be considered unlawful unless it is specifically exempted by this subchapter.



   “EMPLOYEE.”  Any person employed by another for wages or salary.
However, it shall not include any individual employed by the individual’s
parents, spouse, or child, or in the domestic service of any person.



   "EMPLOYER."  The city and any person employing six or more persons
within the city, except that the term "EMPLOYER" does not include any
nonprofit corporation or association organized exclusively for fraternal or
religious purposes, nor any school, educational, or charitable religious
institution owned or conducted by or affiliated with a church or religious
institution, nor any exclusively social club, corporation, or association
that is not organized for profit.



   "HOUSING UNIT."  Any area which is a single room or suite of rooms, an
apartment, or a dwelling occupied or intended for occupancy as separate
living quarters by an individual, by a family, or by a group of individuals
living together; or a parcel of real property or a lot available for the
construction of a housing unit.



   "INSURANCE COMPANY."  Any person, as defined below, underwriting
losses caused by the usual hazards covered by those persons.



   "LABOR ORGANIZATION."  Any organization that exists for the purpose in
whole or in part of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers
concerning grievances, terms, or conditions of employment or for other mutual
aid or protection in relation to employment.



   "LENDING INSTITUTION."  Any person regularly engaged in the business
of lending money or guaranteeing loans.



   "OWNER."  The lessee, sub-lessee, assignee, managing agent, or other
person having right of ownership or possession or the right to sell, rent, or
lease any housing unit.



   "PERSON."  One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, limited liability companies, corporations, labor
organizations, cooperatives, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, and other organized groups of persons.



   "PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION."  Any establishment which caters or offers its
services or facilities or goods to the general public.



   "REAL ESTATE BROKER."  Any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, which for a fee or other valuable consideration sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents, negotiates, or offers or attempts to negotiate
the sale, purchase, exchange, or rental of the real property of another, or
holds itself out as engaged in the business of selling, purchasing,
exchanging, or renting the real property of another, or which collects rental
for the use of real property of another.



   "REAL ESTATE SALESMAN OR AGENT."  Any person employed by a real estate
broker to perform or assist in the performance of any or all of the functions
of a real estate broker.  The term does not include the owner, publisher, or
operator or employees of the owner, publisher, or operator of any newspaper,
radio, or television station with respect to any announcement, advertisement,
or commercial purchased by any other person for publication or broadcast in
or by any newspaper, radio, or television station or with respect to any news
story, editorial, or comment by a member of the public published or broadcast
in or by any newspaper, radio, or television station.



   "RELIGIOUS OR DENOMINATIONAL INSTITUTION."  An institution which is
operated, supervised, or controlled by a religious or denominational
organization.



   “SEX.” As it applies to segregation or separation in this chapter
applies to all types of employment, education, public accommodations, and
housing. However:



      (1)   It shall not be a discriminatory practice to maintain
separate restrooms;



      (2)   It shall not be an unlawful employment practice for an
employer to hire and employ employees, for an employment agency to classify
or refer for employment any individual, for a labor organization to classify
its membership or to classify or refer for employment any individual, or for
an employer, labor organization, or joint labor management committee
controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining programs to admit
or employ any other individual in any program on the basis of sex in those
certain instances where sex is a bona fide operation of that particular
business or enterprise; and



      (3)   It shall not be a discriminatory practice for a private
or religious educational institution to continue to maintain and enforce a
policy of admitting students of one sex only.



(IC 22-9-1-3)  (Ord. 870, passed 5-  -68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75;
Am. Ord. 1387, passed 3-23-81)



§ 34.32  COMMISSION ON HUMAN RELATIONS.




   (A)   Effective April 1, 1998, there is hereby re-established the
Human Relations Commission for the City of Noblesville.





   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine members serving without
compensation and broadly representative of the various religious, rational,
ethnic, educational, and political groups within the City.





   (C)   The Mayor of the City shall appoint four members to the Board
within 30 days of the date of the chapter. One of these appointments shall be
nominated by the Noblesville inner church council.





   (D)   The Common Council of the City of Noblesville shall appoint
five members to the Board within 30 days of the date of this section. One of
these appointments shall be nominated by the Noblesville School Board, and
the appointee may be a member of the Board.





   (E)   Any other organizations or individuals within the City of
Noblesville, including churches, individuals, and other organizations
representing various ethnic, religious, educational, economic, or political
groups may nominate persons to the Mayor or the City Council to serve on the
Board.





   (F)   The members of the Board shall be reappointed every two years
by April first in even numbered years. All members of the Board shall
continue to serve until their successor is appointed and qualified.





   (G)   The Commission shall select from its membership once each year
a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary. The Commission shall hold the
organizational meeting in May of each year after their appointment and shall
meet at any special meetings as the chair may deem appropriate.




(Ord. 870, passed 5- -68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75; Am. Ord. 1387,
passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord. 14-3-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.33  FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION; ANNUAL REPORTS.




   (A)   For the purpose of promoting the public policy of the city,
and the public policy of this state, the Commission is hereby empowered to do
all of the following.





      (1)   Investigate, conciliate, and hear complaints.





      (2)    Request verbally or in writing the attendance of
witnesses and request production of pertinent documents and records.





      (3)    Administer oaths.





      (4)   Examine witnesses.





      (5)   Appoint hearing examiners or panels.





      (6)   Make findings and recommendations.





      (7)    Recommend cease and desist agreements which require
remedial action.





      (8)   Recommend the payment of actual damages, except that
damages paid as a result of discriminatory practices relating to employment
shall be limited to lost wages, salaries, commissions, or fringe benefits.





      (9)   Recommend that individuals institute actions in their
own name for appropriate legal or equitable relief before the Indiana Human
Relations Commission or in a circuit or superior court.





      (10)   Employ an Executive Director and other staff personnel,
if authorized by resolution, and funding by the Common Council.





      (11)   Adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
Commission.





      (12)   Initiate complaints, except that no person who
initiates a complaint may participate as a member of the agency in the
hearing or disposition of the complaint.





      (13)   Conduct programs and activities to carry out the public
policy of this city and state as declared in § 34.30.





      (14)   The Commission shall submit an annual report of its
activities in the preceding year to the Mayor and Common Council.





   (B)   In the event any person fails to comply with the
recommendations of the Commission as set out in (A)(7) and (A)(8) above, any
aggrieved person may initiate an action with the Indiana Human Relations
Commission to seek enforcement and/or modification of the recommendations of
the Noblesville Human Relations Commission.




(I.C. 22-9-1-12.1)  (Ord. 870, passed 5- -68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75;
Am. Ord. 1387, passed 3-23-81; Am. Ord. 14-3-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.34  DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES.



   The following are declared to be discriminatory practices, and contrary
to the policy of this subchapter.



   (A)   For any person or agent to refuse to sell, lease, rent,
assign, or otherwise transfer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale, lease,
sublease, rental, or other transfer of the title, leasehold, or other
interest in any housing unit to any person, or to represent that the housing
unit is not available for inspection, sale, lease, sub-lease, rental,
assignment, or other transfer when, in fact, it is so available, or otherwise
to deny or withhold any housing unit from any person because of race, color,
sex, age, handicap, national origin, or ancestry.



   (B)   For any person or agent to discriminate in the terms,
conditions, or privileges, or in the sale, rental, or lease of any housing
unit or in the furnishing of any facilities or services for any housing unit
to any person on account of race, color, sex, age, handicap, national origin,
or ancestry.



   (C)   For any person or agent to publish or circulate or cause to be
published or circulated any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to
announce a policy or to use any form of application for the purchase, lease,
rental, financing, or insuring of a housing unit in connection with the
prospective purchase, rental, or lease thereof which expresses directly or
indirectly any limitation or specification as to race, color, marital status,
source of income, sex, age, handicap, national origin, or ancestry, or
exhibits any intent to make any of these limitations, specifications, or
discrimination.



   (D)   For any lending institution to discriminate in lending money,
guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise making available funds
for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or
maintenance of any housing unit because of race, color, sex, age, handicap,
national origin or ancestry of any prospective buyer or seller.



   (E)   For any person, individually or in combination, to aid,
incite, compel, coerce, participate in, or contract for the joining of any
act declared to be a discriminatory practice under this section, or to commit
any such act, either directly or indirectly.  (Ord. 1387, passed 3-23-81)



§ 34.35  DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT BASED ON DISABILITY.



   (A)   The prohibition against discrimination in employment because
of disability does not apply to failure of an employer to employ or to retain
as an employee any person who because of a disability is physically or
otherwise unable to efficiently and safely perform, at the standards set by
the employer, the duties required in that job.



   (B)   After a a person with a disability is employed, the employer
shall not be required under this subchapter to promote or transfer such
person to another job or occupation, unless, prior to the transfer, such
person by training or experience is qualified for the job or occupation.



   (C)   This section shall not be construed to require any employer to
modify any physical accommodations or administrative procedures to
accommodate a  person with a disability.



(IC 22-9-1-13)



§ 34.36  LIMITATIONS ON APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the state
or federal governments, nor to any agencies or instrumentalities of either of
them.



   (B)   It shall not be deemed a discriminatory practice under this
subchapter for a religious or denominational institution to prefer members of
its own religion or denomination.



   (C)   The following shall not be deemed a discriminatory practice
under this subchapter.



      (1)   To maintain separate restrooms for members of the
opposite sexes.



      (2)   For an employer to hire and employ employees, or for an
employment agency to classify or refer individuals for employment, or for an
employer, labor union, or joint labor-management committee controlling
apprenticeship programs or other training or retraining programs to admit or
employ any individual in the program, or for a labor union to classify its
membership, on the basis of sex in those instances where sex is a bona fide
occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of
that particular business or enterprise.



      (3)   For a private or religious educational institution to
maintain and enforce a policy of admitting students of one sex only.



      (4)   For the owner of a single-family dwelling who resides
therein but rents or leases rooms in that same dwelling to lease to persons
of one sex only.



   (D)   The prohibition against discrimination in employment because
of handicap does not apply to failure of any employer to employ or to retain
as an employee any person who because of a handicap is physically or
otherwise unable to efficiently and safely perform at the standards set by
the employer all the duties required in that job.  After a handicapped
individual is employed, the employer shall not be required under this
subchapter to promote or transfer the individual to another job or
occupation, unless, prior to the transfer, the individual is or becomes
qualified for the job or occupation by training and experience.



   (E)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to
require any employer to modify any physical accomodations or administrative
procedures to accommodate a handicapped person.



   (F)   No preferential treatment of any person or group pursuant to
an approved affirmative action program, or any federal or state program
mandating preference shall be deemed a discriminatory practice, if preference
is given pursuant to the written guidelines established in the program.



(Ord. 1387, passed 3-23-81)



§ 34.37  CITY CONTRACTS.



   Every contract to which the city is a party, including franchises
granted to public utilities, shall contain a provision requiring the
contractor and his subcontractors not to discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment to be employed in the performance of such contract,
with respect to his hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment or any matter directly or indirectly related to employment,
because of his race, religion, color, sex, disability, natural origin, or
ancestry.  Breach of this covenant may be regarded as a material breach of
the contract.



(IC 22-9-1-10) (Ord. 1387, passed 3-23-81)



§ 34.38  RELATIONS WITH CITY DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.



   The services of all other city departments and agencies shall be made
available by their respective heads to the Commission at its request, and
information in the possession of any department or agency shall be furnished
to the Commission when it is requested.  The Commission may make
recommendations to the departments and agencies for the effectuating of the
purposes of this subchapter.  Whenever necessary and requested by the
Commission, one or more attorneys from the office of the City Attorney shall
be made available to it to assist in the conduct of its investigations. 



(Ord. 870, passed 5--68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75; Am. Ord. 1387, passed
3-23-81)



§ 34.39  RELATIONSHIP TO THE INDIANA CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall, when requested, act in an advisory capacity to
and otherwise cooperate with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission wherever
possible to effect compliance with state laws.  Any person who files a
complaint with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission may not also file a
complaint with the Human Relations Commission.  In the event any complaint
filed with the Indiana Civil Rights Commission is also filed with the Human
Relations Commission, the Human Relations Commission may transfer the
complaint to the State Commission if that Commission has jurisdiction.  In 
all such cases, the Human Relations Commission shall defer to the wishes of
the State Commission in the matter of transfer, and the provisions of IC
22-9-1-12.1 shall be controlling.



(Ord. 870, passed 5- -68; Am. Ord. 1051, passed 8-12-75; Am. Ord. 1387,
passed 3-23-81)



DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION



§ 34.40  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Common Council has established the Department of Parks and
Recreation and the Board of Parks and Recreation.



(Code § 31.01; Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.41  COMPOSITION AND TERM OF BOARD OF PARKS AND RECREATION.



   (A)   Upon the establishment of a Board, the terms of the members
initially appointed shall be one, two, three, and four years. Thereafter as a
term expires, each new appointment shall be for a four- year term.  All
terms shall expire on the first Monday of January, but an appointee shall
continue in office until his successor is appointed.  (I.C. 36-10-3-5(a))



   (B)   The Mayor shall make the appointments to the Board consisting
of four (4) members and one (1) or two (2) ex-officio members. Members shall
be appointed on the basis of their interest in and knowledge of parks and
recreation, but no more than two (2) members may be affiliated with the same
political party. Ex-officio members shall either be a member of the local
school board selected by the school board, or a member of the library
district selected by the library board, or from both entities. (I.C.
36-10-3-4)



(Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.42  OFFICIALS OF THE BOARD.



   At its first regular meeting in each year, the Board shall elect a
President and a Vice-President.  The Vice-President shall have authority to
act as the president of the Board during the absence or disability of the
President.



(Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.43  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   The Board shall have the general power and duties to perform all acts
necessary to acquire and develop sites and facilities and to conduct such
programs as are generally understood to be park and recreation functions
including all duties authorized by I.C. 36-10-3-10 and I.C. 36-10-3-11.



(Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 887, passed l-13-69; Am. Ord. 53-12-18,
passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.44  ADVISORY COUNCIL, COMMITTEES.



   The Board may create an advisory council and special committees
composed of citizens interested in the problem of parks and recreation.



(Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.45  ANNUAL BUDGET.



   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual budget in the same manner
as other departments of the city government.  The Board may accept gifts,
donations, and subsidies for park and recreation purposes.



(Ord. 841, passed 5-9-66; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.46  CAPITAL FUND.



   (A)   There is created pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-20 a special
nonreverting capital fund for the purpose of acquiring land or making
specific capital improvements upon properties owned by the city and operated
by the Department of Parks and Recreation.



   (B)   Moneys withdrawn from the fund shall be used by the Department
of Parks and Recreation of the city for the acquisition of land or the
creation of improvements upon land owned by the city and operated by the
Department of Parks and Recreation, all as determined by official action of
the Park and Recreation Board of the city and upon the consent of the Common
Council of the city as evidenced by a resolution approving the application of
the funds.



(Ord. 52-7-90, passed 8-27-90)



§ 34.47  CITY EMPLOYEE USE OF PARKS.



   (A)   Use of city golf courses.



      (1)   Full-time city employees, current members of the City
Park Board, current City elected officials, compensated appointed city
officials, retired employees having at least 20 years of service, retired
City Directors having at least eight years of service as a Director, retired
Elected Officials having served at least two terms, and their respective
spouses and minor dependents of each of these groups may play the city golf
courses without payment of green fees at all times the courses are open to
the public, except tee times prior to 10:30 a.m., on Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays.



      (2)   Part time employees may play the city golf courses at
all times the courses are open to the public by paying 50% of the green fees
being charged to the public at that time, except tee times prior to 10:30
a.m., on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.



      (3)   Any person listed in (A)(1) or (2) of this section shall
pay full green fees for any rounds with a tee time prior to 10:30 a.m. on
Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.



      (4)   Golf passes shall be obtained by the persons entitled to
the benefits of divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section, by showing a city
employee identification or other acceptable identification. The pass shall
identify whether the pass holder is described in division (A)(1) or division
(A)(2) of this section.



      (5)   For income tax purposes, the Park Department shall
report to the City Controller the number of rounds played in a calendar year
by each pass holder. The City Controller shall issue a Form 1099 to each pass
holder for the number of rounds played by a person listed in division (A)(1)
of this section multiplied by the lowest greens fee charged to members of the
general public. The City Controller shall annually issue a Form 1099 to each
pass holder for the number of rounds played by a person listed in division
(A)(2) of this section multiplied by 50% of the lowest greens fee charged to
members of the general public.



   (B)   Use of the city park facilities.



      (1)   Full-time city employees, current members of the City
Park Board, current city elected officials, compensated appointed City
officials, retired employees having at least 20 years of service, retired
City Directors having at least eight years of service as a Director, retired
Elected Officials having served at least two terms, may reserve and use park
buildings or shelters for their use and the use of their guests without
rental fee charges, except on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays during the
months of May through August.



      (2)   Part time employees may reserve and use the park
buildings or shelters for their use and the use of their guests by paying 50%
of the rental fees for the buildings or shelters, other than on Saturdays,
Sundays, and holidays during the months of May through August.



      (3)   Any person listed in division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section may reserve and use park buildings and shelters for their use and the
use of their guests on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays during the months of
May through August by paying the full not-for-profit rental fees.



      (4)   For income tax purposes, the Parks Department shall
report to the City Controller the names of any person listed in division
(b)(1) or (2) of this section who have used the park buildings or structures
for their use and the number of times they have done so in a calendar year.
The report shall include whether the person’s use(s) were at no charge or
at the 50% rate. The City Controller shall issue a Form 1099 for the
difference between the rate the user paid and the amount paid by a
not-for-profit entity.



   (C)   The benefits provided in this section do not apply to cart
rental fees at the golf courses, security fees for rental of structures, or
other charges which are not specifically identified in this section.



(Ord. 09-02-16, passed 3-29-16; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



EMERGENCY-DISASTER DEPARTMENT



§ 34.55  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established within the city  an organization for civil
defense to be operated in conformity with the Indiana Civil Defense and
Disaster Law of 1975.  This organization will be known as the Noblesville
Emergency-Disaster Department, in conjunction with the State of Indiana Civil
Defense Department.



(Ord. 1327, passed 2-7-80)



§ 34.56  OFFICERS.



   (A)   A Director/Coordinator will be appointed for the organization
to serve during the pleasure of Common Council.



   (B)   The Controller will be responsible for the receipt and
disbursement of all civil defense funds, where funds are provided for civil
defense purpose.



(Ord. 1327, passed 2-7-80; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



                   



Statutory reference:



   Civil Defense and Disaster Law, see IC 10-4-1-1 et seq.



§ 34.57 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ADOPTED.



   The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS)
as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents.



(Res. RC-24-05, passed 8-23-05)



HISTORIC RAILROAD MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL PORT AUTHORITY



§ 34.65  ESTABLISHMENT.




   (A)   Upon mutual adoption by the Town of Fishers and the City of
Noblesville and the County of Hamilton, the multi-jurisdictional port
authority previously created is hereby re-established as the Historic
Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority subject to all of the powers and
authority granted and conferred by the Indiana Code, as from time to time
amended.





   (B)   In addition to the re-establishment of the Historic Railroad
Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority by the city and the Town of Fishers and
the County of Hamilton (which shall be hereafter referred to as “The
Jurisdictional Members”), the Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port
Authority may be expanded to include other municipal corporations in the
following manner:





      (1)   The municipal corporation seeking to join the
multi-jurisdictional port authority shall make application in a form
prescribed by the Board of Trustees seeking admission thereof;





      (2)   The Board of Trustees and the applicant shall define the
appropriate consideration for such admission;





      (3)   The Board of Trustees must vote unanimously in favor of
accepting the application;





      (4)   Upon unanimous acceptance of the application by the
Board of Trustees, the applicant must adopt an ordinance which is in
substantially the same form as this subchapter subject only to the following
amendments which shall be incorporated by amendment to this subchapter by the
legislative bodies of the Jurisdictional Members participating in the
multi-jurisdictional port authority:  That the membership of the Board of
Trustees shall be expanded to include additional members for each municipal
corporation added hereafter, such members to serve for terms of three years
to be appointed by the Executive Officer of the Jurisdictional Member joining
the port authority, or in accordance with such other provision for
appointment as the Jurisdictional Member may determine.




(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.66  TERM.



   The term of existence of the Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional
Port Authority shall be in perpetuity.



(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.67  POWERS.



   The Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority shall have
all the powers permitted under the laws of the state as from time to time
amended, limited only by the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.68  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port
Authority shall be to protect and preserve the existence of the real property
described in Exhibit A of Ordinance 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94 and Ordinance
21-4-98, passed 4-27-98 as a single parcel of real estate in perpetuity for
such uses as may benefit the citizens of Jurisdictional Members including,
but not necessarily limited to, recreational, transportation, and tourism
purposes.



(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.69  ORGANIZATION.




   (A)   Members.  The business and affairs of the Historic Railroad
Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority shall be conducted by a Board of Trustees
consisting of six members, two of whom shall be appointed by the Town Council
of Fishers, so long as it is organized as a town, and if ever changed to a
city, the Mayor of that city thereafter, and two of whom shall be appointed
by the Mayor of Noblesville, and two of whom shall be appointed by Hamilton
County. In regard to the Hamilton County appointments, one shall be made by
the Hamilton County Council and one shall be made by the Hamilton County
Commissioners.





   (B)   Terms.  Members of the Board of Trustees shall be appointed
for a term of three years. The appointing executive shall deliver a
certificate of appointment to such trustee designating the term of his or her
office.





   (C)   There shall be no limit on the number of successive terms a
trustee may serve.





   (D)   A trustee may be removed at any time without cause by the
appointing authority of such trustee.  A replacement appointment shall serve
the unexpired term of the trustee so removed.





   (E)   Each trustee upon appointment shall take an oath of office in
the appropriate form.





   (F)   Officers.  From the membership of the Board shall be elected
the following offices for a term of one year:





      (1)   President





      (2)   Vice-President





      (3)   Secretary





      (4)   Treasurer





      (5)   Officers may serve successive terms if elected.




(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.70  FISCAL AFFAIRS.



   (A)   All funds of the Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port
Authority shall be deposited in a special account known as the Historic
Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority Fund which shall be maintained
under the supervision of the Treasurer and subject to annual audit as may be
required by the Indiana State Board of Accounts.  For the purpose of
identifying audit responsibility only, the members agree that fiscal
reporting shall be done by the Town Fishers.  Monies received shall be
deposited in accordance with sound fiscal practice; and shall be paid only
upon claims approved by the Board.



   (B)   No claims shall be approved for any expenditure not consistent
with the purposes set forth herein.  No contract or undertaking shall be
approved with any third party which shall cause the Historic Railroad
Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority to become liable for the expenditure of
funds which is not consistent with the purposes set forth herein.



(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



§ 34.71  BYLAWS.



   The Board of Trustees shall adopt bylaws for the conduct of the affairs
of the Historic Railroad Multi-Jurisdictional Port Authority as needed and
not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or state law.



(Ord. 35-9-94, passed 11-28-94; Am. Ord. 21-4-98, passed 4-27-98)



REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 34.80  CREATION.



   There is hereby created the Noblesville Redevelopment Authority as a
separate body corporated and politic and as an instrumentality of the city,
for the purposes with all powers and duties now or hereafter granted to it by
this subchapter.



(Ord. 60-7-89, passed 7-10-89)



§ 34.81  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Authority shall be under the control of a Board of
Directors consisting of three members, who must be residents of the city
appointed by the Mayor.



   (B)   A member is entitled to serve a three-year term.  A member
may be reappointed to subsequent terms.



   (C)   If a vacancy occurs on the Board, the Mayor shall file the
vacancy by appointing a new member for the remainder of the vacated term.



   (D)   A Board member may be removed for cause by the Mayor.



   (E)   Each member, before entering upon the duties of office, must
take and subscribe an oath of office under IC 5-4-1, which shall be endorsed
the certificate of appointment and filed with the records of the Board.



   (F)   A member may not receive a salary, and no profit or money of
the Authority inures to the benefit of a member.



(Ord. 60-7-89, passed 7-10-89)



DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT



§ 34.85  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is created the City Department of Redevelopment, which shall be
entitled to exercise all the rights, powers, privileges and immunities
accorded to such department by the Redevelopment Acts of the General Assembly
of the State of Indiana, 1955, as amended.



(Ord. 20-9-88, passed 10-11-88)



§ 34.86  REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   The Department of Redevelopment shall be under the control of a Board
of five members to be known as the Noblesville Redevelopment Commission.



(Ord. 20-9-88, passed 10-11-88)



§ 34.87  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   There is created a Board to be known as the Noblesville
Redevelopment Commission.  Three of said Commissioners shall be appointed by
the Mayor, and two shall be appointed by the Common Council.  The
nominations made by the Common Council shall be transmitted to the Mayor in
writing within ten days after the final passage of this subchapter.  Each
Redevelopment Commissioner shall serve for one year from the first day of
January after his  appointment and until his or her successor is appointed
and has qualified, except that the original Commissioners shall serve from
the date of their appointment until the first day of January in the second
year after their appointment.  If a vacancy occurs, a successor shall be
appointed in the same manner as the original Commissioner and the successor
shall serve for the remainder of the vacated term. The Mayor shall also
appoint an individual to serve as a nonvoting adviser to the Commission.



   (B)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or her
duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the form prescribed by
law, to be endorsed on the certificate of his or her appointment, which shall
be promptly filed with the City Clerk.



   (C)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or her
duties, shall execute a bond payable to the state, with surety to be approved
by the Mayor.  The bond must be in a penal sum of $15,000 and must be
conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office
and the accounting for all monies and property that may come into his or her
hands at or under his or her control.  The cost of the bond shall be paid by
the special taxing district.



(Ord. 20-9-88, passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



§ 34.88  QUALIFICATIONS; SALARY.



   Such Commissioners shall have the qualifications prescribed by the laws
of the state as from time to time amended and shall qualify as therein
provided; and shall exercise and enjoy the rights and powers and assume the
duties and obligations conferred and imposed by said Act, including but not
limited to the following qualifications:



   (A)   A Redevelopment Commissioner must be at least 18 years of age
and must be a resident of the city.  If a Commissioner ceases to be
qualified under this section, he or she forfeits his or her office.



   (B)   No City Redevelopment Commissioner shall receive a salary; but
such Redevelopment Commissioners are entitled to reimbursement for expenses
necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties.



   (C)   A Redevelopment Commissioner may not have a pecuniary interest
in any contract, employment, purchase or sale made under the provisions of
this subchapter and the underlying statutes.  However, any property required
for redevelopment purposes in which a Commissioner has a pecuniary interest
may be acquired, but only by a gift or condemnation.  A transaction made in
violation of this section is void.



(Ord. 20-9-88, passed 10-11-88)



§ 34.89  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-14-23, each officer of the city who has duties in
respect to the funds and accounts of the city shall perform the same duties
with respect to the funds and accounts of the Department of Redevelopment,
except as otherwise provided by law. An officer performing these duties is
not entitled to any additional compensation.



(Ord. 53-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



COMMUNITY VISION FOR EXCELLENCE COMMITTEE



§ 34.95  ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Noblesville Community Vision
for Excellence Committee (the "Committee"). The Committee shall be comprised
of seven members as follows:



      (1)   Community Citizen/Volunteer (Chairman), Mayor's
appointment;



      (2)   Administrative Officer, City of Noblesville;



      (3)   Superintendent, Noblesville School Corporation;



      (4)   CEO, Riverview Hospital;



      (5)   President, Noblesville Common Council;



      (6)   Community Development Director, City of Noblesville or
Mayor's appointment;



      (7)   Executive Director, Noblesville Chamber of Commerce.



   (B)   The appointments to the Committee shall be for a term of one
year commencing with the calendar year 2011. There shall be no limit to the
number of terms that a member may serve on the Committee. The Superintendent
of Noblesville Schools Corporation, CEO of Riverview Hospital, President of
the Common Council, Community Development Director, Administrative Officer,
City of Noblesville and Executive Director of the Noblesville Chamber of
Commerce shall be permanent members. Appointed members shall continue to
serve on the Committee until his/her successor has been duly appointed by the
appropriate appointment authority. All appointed members shall be residents
of the city or zoning jurisdictional area within Noblesville Township.



   (C)   The Chairperson is to be appointed by the Mayor. At the
committee's discretion, a Vice Chairperson may be elected from its membership
who shall be responsible for chairing the meetings of the Committee in the
Chairperson's absence. However, the Committee may organize itself in any
manner necessary to achieve its responsibilities subject to the appointments
as set forth above.



(Ord. 27-8-11, passed 9-13-11)



§ 34.96  COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Committee's primary purpose will be to assure progress toward the
goals established by the Noblesville Community Vision for Excellence
Strategic Plan and benchmarks associated therewith. Working with the city
department managers, community leaders and other resource providers, the
Committee shall:



   (A)   Annually update the benchmarks contained in the Strategic Plan;



   (B)   The Committee shall provide the Council on an annual basis a
report containing the updated benchmark information set out in division (A)
above. As part of this report, recommendations to the Common Council shall be
made with respect to specific benchmarks in need of improvement.
Recommendations may include, but not be limited to, suggested monetary
appropriations to be considered to initiate improvements for specific
improvements.



   (C)   Prepare a report to be presented to the Common Council no less
frequently than semi-annually containing progress made to date on specific
initiatives identified by the Committee tied to improvement of specific
benchmarks or identified objectives of the Committee.



   (D)   As a part of its first semi-annual report to Common Council
each year, the Committee shall make any monetary requests necessary to fund
the activities of the Committee. These monetary requests shall be focused on
obtaining information to further support the completion of initiatives or to
obtain needed information to accurately update benchmarks contained in the
Strategic Plan.



   (E)   The Committee shall recommend any changes to the Strategic
Plan as it sees fit. These changes in the Strategic Plan are expected in
order to reflect the current and future direction of the city.



   (F)   In addition to the foregoing, the Committee shall undertake
such other activities as the Common Council may prescribe by resolution.



(Ord. 27-8-11, passed 9-13-11)



IMPACT FEE REVIEW BOARD



§ 34.110  ESTABLISHMENT.



    There is hereby established the Noblesville Park Impact Fee Review
Board, hereinafter referred to as the Board.



(Ord. 17-4-96, passed 4-22-96)



§ 34.111  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Board shall have three members pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1338(B) who
shall be as follows:



   (A)   A real estate broker licensed in Indiana;



   (B)   An engineer licensed in Indiana; and



   (C)   A certified public accountant.



(Ord. 17-4-96, passed 4-22-96)



§ 34.112  TERM.



   The members of the Board shall serve terms of four years beginning on
February 1st of their year of appointment, except for the initial
appointments whose terms shall expire as follows:



   (A)   The initial term of the licensed real estate broker shall end
on January 31, 1998;



   (B)   The initial term of the licensed engineer shall end on January
31, 1999;



   (C)   The initial term of the certified public accountant shall end
on January 31, 2000.



(Ord. 17-4-96, passed 4-22-96)



§ 34.113  APPOINTMENT.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1338(A) the members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor.



(Ord. 17-4-96, passed 4-22-96)



§ 34.114  DUTIES.



   The Board shall hear all appeals which are filed from the Park Impact
Fee Ordinance under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-4-1336.



(Ord. 17-4-96, passed 4-22-96)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 34.125  PURPOSE.



   In order to promote the educational, cultural and general welfare of
the citizens of the city and to insure the harmonious and orderly growth and
development of the municipality; to maintain established residential
neighborhoods in danger of having their distinctiveness destroyed; to enhance
property values and the city's quality of life and attract new residents; to
ensure the viability of the traditional Downtown area and to enhance tourism
within the city; it is deemed essential by the city that qualities relating
to its history and harmonious outward appearance of its structures be
preserved. This purpose is advanced through the restoration and preservation
of historic areas and buildings, the construction of compatible new buildings
where appropriate, and the maintenance and insurance of compatibility in
regards to style, form, proportion, texture, and material between historic
buildings and those of contemporary design. It is the intention of the city
through this subchapter to preserve and protect historic and architecturally
worthy buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, and
neighborhoods that impart a distinct aesthetic quality to the city and serve
as visible reminders of its historic heritage.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.126  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms shall have the following meaning unless a contrary
meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed.  Words in
the present tense includes the future tense.  The singular number includes
the plural, in addition, the plural, the singular. The word "shall" is always
mandatory. The word "person" includes a firm, a partnership, a limited
liability company, or a corporation, as well as an individual. Terms not
defined in this section shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them.



   "ALTERATION."  Materials change in the external architectural features
of any building, structure, or site within a designated historic district.



   "CITY."  The City of Noblesville, Hamilton County, Indiana.



   "CLASSIFICATIONS."



      (1)   "OUTSTANDING."  The "O" classification means that the
property has sufficient historic or architectural significance that is
listed, or is eligible for individual listing, in the National Register of
Historic Places. Outstanding resources can be of local, state, or national
importance.



      (2)   "NOTABLE."  A classification of "N" means that the
property does not merit the outstanding rating, but it is still above average
in its importance. A notable structure may be eligible for the National
Register.



      (3)   "CONTRIBUTING."  A "C" classification means the
property is at least 40 years old, but does not meet the criteria for an "O"
or "N" classification. Such resources are important to the density or
continuity of the area's historic fabric. Contributing structures can be
listed in the National Register only as part of a historic district.



      (4)   "NON-CONTRIBUTING."  Property classified as "NC" is not
included in an inventory unless it is located within the boundaries of a
historic district. Such properties may be less than 50 years old, or they may
be older structures that have been altered in such a way that they have lost
their historic character, or they may be otherwise incompatible with their
historic surroundings. These properties are not eligible for listing in the
National Register.



(Classification ratings by the U.S. Department of Interior and the Hamilton
County Historic Sites and Structures Survey.)



   "DEMOLITION."  The complete or substantial removal of any building,
structure, or site.



   "GUIDELINE COMPONENTS."  Statements within the guidelines which
specify the requirements and recommendation for the preservation of the
characteristics relationships of the various features that are significant to
the appearance of the overall historic district and/or site.



   "GUIDELINE CATEGORIES."  Categories are as follows: 



      (1)   "REQUIRED."  Work that shall be completed in a
preservation project in order to restore or maintain the original or existing
character of the structure or site;



      (2)   "RECOMMENDED."  Work that should be completed in a
preservation project to help restore or maintain the original or existing
character of the structure or site;



      (3)   "PROHIBITED."  Work that shall not be permitted in a
preservation project because it may have a negative impact on the original or
existing character of the structure or site; and



      (4)   "NOT RECOMMENDED."  Work that should not be undertaken
in a preservation project because it may have a negative impact on the
structure or site.



   "HISTORIC DISTRICT."  A single building, structure, object, or site or
a concentration of buildings, structures, objects, spaces, or sites, the
boundaries of which are described or delineated on a map approved in a
separate ordinance adopted under this title.



   "INTERESTED PARTY."  Means one of the following:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   The City Council;



      (3)   The Noblesville Plan Commission;



      (4)   A neighborhood association, whether incorporated or
unincorporated, a majority of whose members are residents of a historic
district designated by an ordinance adopted under this title;



      (5)   An owner or occupant of property located in a historic
district established by a separate ordinance adopted under this title;



      (6)   Historic Landmarks Foundation of Indiana, Inc., or any
of its successors;



      (7)   The State Historic Preservation Officer designated under
I.C. 14-3-3.4-10;



      (8)   Noblesville Preservation Alliance; or



      (9)   Noblesville Main Street.



   "PRESERVATION GUIDELINES."  Criteria, locally developed, which
identify local design concerns in an effort to assist property owners in
maintaining the character of the designated district or buildings during the
process of rehabilitation or new construction.



   "REHABILITATION."  Repair, alterations, additions and upgrades made to
a structure for its reuse.



   "RESTORATION."  The reconstruction or repair of something to its
original or former state.



   "ROUTINE MAINTENANCE."  Work for which no certificate of
appropriateness is required.



   "SHALL."  Is an expression of something that is mandatory or must be
completed.



   "SHOULD."  Is an expression of obligation, something that ought to be
completed but is open to compromise.



   "STREETSCAPE."  Appearance from a public way, the distinguishing
characteristics of which are created by the width of the street and
sidewalks, and their paving material, the design of the street furniture
(e.g., streetlights, trash receptacles, benches, etc.), use of plant
materials such as trees and shrubs, and the setback, mass, and proportion of
those buildings that enclose the street.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.127  ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby established the Historic
Preservation Commission of the city (hereinafter referred to as the
"Commission").



   (B)   Composition.  The Commission shall consist of not less than
seven voting members.  The voting members shall be appointed as follows:
three by the Mayor, three by the City Council, and one by the Noblesville
Planning and Development Director from among the Planning Department staff.
All members shall be residents of the city who are interested in the
preservation and development of historic areas. The members of the Commission
should include professionals in the disciplines of architectural history,
planning, and other disciplines related to historic preservation, to the
extent that those professionals are available in the community. Non-voting,
advisory member(s) may be appointed to the Commission by the Mayor with
approval by the City Council. Commission members shall serve without
compensation, except for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties.



   (C)   Term.  Voting members shall serve for a term of three years;
however, the initial terms of members shall be for one year, two years, and
three years in order for the terms to be staggered. The term for nonvoting,
advisory members shall be for three years. A vacancy shall be filled within
90 days for the duration of the term.



   (D)   Commission administrator.  The Noblesville Planning and
Development Director shall serve as the ex-officio administrator of the
Commission. The administrator shall provide staff assistance to the
Commission, act as the Commission's secretary, promote consistency with other
strategic planning and economic development initiatives in Noblesville, and
issue certificates of appropriateness as directed by the Commission.



   (E)   Officers.  The Commission shall elect from its membership a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson who shall serve for one year and who may be
re-elected.



   (F)   Rules.  The Commission shall adopt rules consistent with this
title for the transaction of its business. The rules must include the time
and place of regular meetings and a procedure for the calling of special
meetings.



   (G)   Meetings.  Commission meetings must be open to the public in
accordance with Indiana's Open Door Law and a public record shall be kept of
the Commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The Commission shall
hold regular meetings, at least monthly, except when it has no business
pending. Special meetings may be called in a manner determined by the
Commission and its rules.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.128  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall be concerned with those elements of
development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and preservation that affect
visual quality in a historic district, which includes but are not limited to
landscapes, and streetscapes of historic importance. The Commission may not
consider details of design, interior arrangements, or building features, if
those details, arrangements, or features are not subject to public view, and
may not make any requirements except for the purpose of preventing
development, alteration, or demolition in the historic district obviously
incongruous with the historic district.



   (B)   The Commission shall conduct surveys and recommend to the City
Council the adoption of historic preservation districts.



   (C)   The Commission shall adopt preservation guidelines for
architectural review to be published and made readily accessible to the
public.



   (D)   The Commission has the authority to receive funds in order to
promote its stated purpose.



   (E)   The Commission shall promote public interest in historic
preservation by initiating and carrying on a public relations and community
education program.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.129  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   The establishment of a historic district requires two separate
procedures. The first is for the planning phase and the second is for the
approval phase.



   (A)   Planning phase.  Any landowner or group of landowners, who
are interested in establishing a historic district with guidelines, may
petition the Commission to establish a historic district. After receiving a
request the Commission shall initiate the planning phase by holding public
meetings to inform the landowners of the opportunities afforded to landowners
in a historic district; explaining the operation of the Commission in the
creation and regulations of land uses within a historic district; and
informing landowners of the effect of the establishment of a district on
subsequent owners of property. At the conclusion of the planning phase, the
Commission shall prepare the form of a formal petition for approval of the
historic district. The terms of the formal petition should reflect the
opinions of the landowners within the proposed district and shall include the
following:



      (1)   The names and address of all landowners within the
proposed district as provided by the records located in the Hamilton County
Tax Mapping Department.



      (2)   A list of objective standards as proposed for the
district.



      (3)   A list of any powers or procedures of the Commission set
forth in this subchapter, which are proposed to be altered or modified.



      (4)   Any proposed provisions for the landowners to elect out
of the restrictions imposed within the proposed district.



      (5)   The identity of historic building, structures, and sites
located within the district (architectural style).



      (6)   A designation of primary areas and secondary areas
within the district, which are delineated as follows:



         (a)   Primary area: The principal area of historic and
architectural significance.



         (b)   Secondary area: An area adjacent to a primary area
that has a visual relationship to the primary area and could affect the
preservation of the primary area. The purpose of designating a secondary area
is to assure its compatibility and harmony with an adjacent primary area.



      (7)   A designation of all buildings, structures, and sites as
being historic and non-historic on a map.



      (8)   The Commission shall classify and designate on the map
all buildings, structures, and sites within each historic district described
on the map. Buildings, structures, and sites shall be classified as historic
or non-historic. Historic buildings, structures, and sites must possess
identified historic or architectural merit of a degree warranting their
preservation. The Commission shall further classify and designate all
buildings and structures within a proposed historic district as follows:



         (a)   Outstanding;



         (b)   Notable;



         (c)   Contributing; or



         (d)   Non-contributing.



Non-historic buildings, structures, and sites are those not classified on the
map as historic. In lieu of other classifications, the Commission may devise
its own system of further classification of historic buildings, structures,
and sites.



      (9)   Any other issues that the landowners within the proposed
district believe are relevant to the petition.



   (B)   Approval phase.



      (1)   Prior to the submission of an ordinance approving a
historic district, the landowners within the proposed district shall be
provided a copy of the formal petition.  That petition shall be mailed by
Certified Mail, return receipt requested, to each of the landowners within
the proposed district, along with form of a "Consent to the Establishment of
the District", which shall be substantially similar to the following:



Consent to the Establishment of the                 Historic District.



             (fill in name)



I (we), the owner(s) of the property located at                    



certify as follows:            (Tax Parcel Number)



(1)   I (we) are the owners of fee simple of the above described parcel of
real estate.



(2)   I (we) have read the "Formal Petition" prepared by the Noblesville
Historic Preservation Commission, concerning the proposed establishment of
the                   Historic District.



(3)   I (we) believe that the establishment of the              
Historic District is in the best interest of all of the landowners in the
proposed district and consent to all of the restrictions set forth within the
"Formal Petition" of the Noblesville Historic Preservation Commission, dated
        , being made part of an ordinance, which would regulate the use
of my (our) real estate.



(4)   I (we) further understand that the ordinance adopted pursuant to the
"Formal Petition" ("the Ordinance'), will be recorded in the Office of the
Hamilton County Recorder, and will be binding on the successors in title to
my (our) real estate.



(5)   I (we) further acknowledge that I (we) will receive notice by
Certified Mail of a public hearing before the Noblesville Plan Commission
concerning the adoption of the Ordinance, and copy of the Ordinance before
the Ordinance is considered by the Noblesville Plan Commission and Common
Council.



Dated this     day of             , 200  .



LANDOWNER(S)



By:                         By:                      
 



Printed:                   Printed                    



      (2)   In order for a designation of a historic district to be
considered by the Plan Commission and Common Council, the above "Formal
Petition" must be Approved by either:



         (a)   The signed consent of 65% of the landowners within
the district. Such signatures may be obtained by either the return of the
consent to establishment of the (insert name) Historic District contained in
the notice described in division (B)(1) of this section or by solicitation by
either the Plan Commission or other persons interested in the formation of
the district. All of said "formal petitions" shall be signed and dated within
120 days of the initial mailing of notices as set forth in division (B)(1) of
this section; or,



         (b)   In the event signatures are for less than 65% of
the persons in the district, a request that an ordinance be passed
establishing the district, but specifically stating that only those
landowners who signed the consent(s) and any subsequent landowners within the
district who file consent(s) with the city, within 120 days of notice will be
bound by the terms of the ordinance.



         (c)   Upon either of the above formal petitions being
submitted, the Director of Planning shall cause an ordinance creating the
historic district to be prepared implementing the terms and conditions of the
formal petition.  The procedure for creation of the district shall be
considered pursuant to the terms of I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq.



         (d)   The ordinance, if adopted, shall be recorded and
cross-referenced with the deeds of all landowners who are subject to said
ordinance.



         (e)   The recording of the map in the Office of the
Hamilton County Recorder that establishes the boundaries of the historic
district and delineation of participating structures in the district.



      (3)   Conservation districts. The Commission may recommend,
and the City Council may provide that the establishment of a historic
district shall occur in two phases. During the first phase, which continues
for a period of three years from the date the ordinance is adopted, a
certificate of appropriateness is required for the following activities: the
demolition of any building; the moving of any building; and any new
construction of a principal building or accessory building or structure
subject to view from a public way.



         (a)   At the expiration of the initial three year
period, the first phase of a conservation district continues and the second
phase does not become effective if a majority of the property owners in the
district object to the Commission, in writing, to the requirement that
certificates of appropriateness be issued for the following activities:



            1.   A conspicuous change in the exterior
appearance of historic buildings by additions, construction, alteration, or
maintenance;



            2.   A change in walls and fences or construction
of walls and fences, if along public ways;



            3.   A conspicuous change in the exterior
appearance of non-historic buildings subject to view from a public way by
additions, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance.



         (b)   The objections of a majority of the property
owners must be received by the Commission not earlier than 180 days or later
than 60 days before the third anniversary of the adoption of the ordinance.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.130  CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA).



   Certificates of appropriateness (COA) required.  A certificate of
appropriateness must be issued by the Commission before a permit is issued
for, or work is begun on, any of the following:



   (A)   Within all areas of a historic district:



      (1)   The demolition of any building or structure;



      (2)   The moving of any building or structure;



      (3)   A conspicuous change in the exterior appearance of any
historic building or any part of or appurtenance to such a building,
including walls, fences, reconstruction, or alteration, involving exterior
change; or



      (4)   Any new construction of a principal building or
accessory building or structure subject to view from a public way.



   (B)   Application for certificates of appropriateness. An
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made in the Office
of the Commission that being the Department of Planning and Development, on
forms provided by said office. Rules may include, but are not limited to:
filing deadlines and application requirements such as sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions, or other information that the Commission requires
to make a decision.



   (C)   Approval or denial of certificates of appropriateness. The
Commission may approve or deny certificates of appropriateness for any
actions covered by this subchapter.  If an application for a certificate of
appropriateness is approved by the Commission, or is not acted on by the
Commission within 45 days after it is filed, a certificate of appropriateness
shall be issued. The Commission may grant an extension of the 45 day limit if
the applicant agrees to it. The Commission must report its findings and the
reasons for its decision in written form, and supply the applicant with a
copy of its report. A copy of the certificate of appropriateness must be
submitted with the application for a building or demolition permit; no
building or demolition permit shall be issued unless a copy of the
certificate of appropriateness is provided by the applicant with the
application.



   (D)   Criteria for considering effect of actions on historic
buildings.  The Commission, in considering the appropriateness of any
reconstruction, alteration, maintenance, or moving of a historic building,
structure, site or any part of or appurtenance to such building or structure,
including walls, fences, shall require that such work be done in a manner
that will preserve the historical and architectural character of the
building, structure, or appurtenance. In considering historic and
architectural character, the Commission shall consider, among other things,
the following:



      (1)   Purposes of the historic preservation ordinances;



      (2)   Historical and architectural value and significance of
the building, structure, or site;



      (3)   Compatibility and significance of additions,
alterations, details, materials, or other non-original elements, which may be
of a different style and construction, date than the original;



      (4)   The texture, material, style, and detailing of the
building, structure, or site;



      (5)   The continued preservation and protection of original or
otherwise significant structure, material, and ornamentation;



      (6)   The relationship of buildings, structures,
appurtenances, or architectural features similar to ones within the same
historic district, including visual compatibility; and,



      (7)   The position of the building or structure in
relationship to the street, public right-of-way and to other buildings and
structures.



      (8)   The National Park Service adopted "Standards for
Rehabilitation of Historic Structures" shall be the referenced guidelines.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.131  STAFF APPROVALS.



   (A)   The Commission may authorize the staff of the Commission, on
behalf of the Commission, to grant or deny an application for a certificate
of appropriateness.



   (B)   The Commission shall specify by rule, the types of
applications for certificates of appropriateness that the staff of the
Commission is authorized to grant or deny. The staff may not be authorized to
grant or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the
following:



      (1)   The demolition of a building, structure, or site.



      (2)   The moving of a building or structure.



      (3)   The construction of an addition to a building or
structure.



      (4)   The construction of a new building or structure.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.132  VISUAL COMPATIBILITY.



   (A)   For new construction, contemporary design, and non-historic
buildings.  To preserve and encourage the integrity of historic buildings,
structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes, and neighborhoods and to ensure
their compatibility with any new work, the construction of a new building or
structure, and the moving, reconstruction, alteration, major maintenance, or
repair conspicuously affecting the external appearance of any non-historic
building, structure, or appurtenance within the primary area must be
generally of a design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building
material, texture, and location on a lot compatible with other buildings in
the historic district and with places to which it is visually related.



   (B)   Criteria for considering visual compatibility within historic
primary areas. 



      (1)   Within the primary area of a historic district, new
buildings, structures, buildings and structures that are moved,
reconstructed, materially altered, or repaired, must be visually compatible
with buildings and places to which they are visually related generally in
terms of the following visual compatibility factors.



      (2)   Height. The height of proposed buildings must be
visually compatible with adjacent buildings.



         (a)   Proportion of building's front facade. The
relationship of the width of a building to the height of the front elevation
must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it
is visually related.



         (b)   Proportion of openings within the facility. The
relationship of the width of the windows to the height of windows in a
building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.



         (c)   Relationship of solids to voids in front facades.
The relationship of solids to voids in the front facade of a building must be
visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.



         (d)   Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The
relationship of a building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related.



         (e)   Rhythm of entrances and porch projections. The
relationship of entrances and porch projections of a building to sidewalks
must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it
is visually related.



         (f)   Relationship of materials and texture. The
relationship of the materials and texture of the facade of a building must be
visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.



         (g)   Roof shapes.  The roof shape of a building must
be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to which it is
visually related.



         (h)   Wall of continuity.  Appurtenances of a building
or site, such as walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, and
building facades, must form cohesive walls of enclosure along the street, if
necessary to ensure visual compatibility of the building to the buildings and
places to which it is visually related.



         (i)   Scale of the building. The size of a building, and
the building mass of a building in relation to open spaces, windows, door
openings, porches, and balconies must be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.



         (j)   Directional expression of front elevation. A
building must be visually compatible with buildings, squares, and places to
which it is visually related in its directional character, including vertical
character, horizontal character, or non-directional character.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.133  PRESERVATION OF HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL CHARACTER UPON
ALTERATION OR RELOCATION MANDATED.



   (A)   A historic building or structure or any part of or
appurtenance to such a building or structure, including stone walls, fences,
may be moved, reconstructed, altered, or maintained only in a manner that
will preserve the historical and architectural character of the building,
structure, or appurtenance.



   (B)   Preservation on its current site is inconsistent with division
(A) of this section.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.134  APPEAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to preserve historic buildings
that are important to the education, culture, traditions, and economic values
of the city and to afford the city, historical organizations, property
owners, and other interested persons the opportunity to acquire or to arrange
for the preservation of these buildings.



   (B)   If the Commission denies the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for the demolition of a building, structure, or site, a
demolition permit may be issued by the Director of Planning and Development
and the building, structure or site may be demolished, but only after the
property owner has demonstrated to the Director of Planning and Development
that the historic building, structure, or site is incapable of earning an
economic return on its value, as appraised by two licensed real estate
appraisers.



   (C)   Notice of the proposed demolition must be given for a period
fixed by the Commission, based on the Commission's classification on the
approved map, but not less than 60 days or more than one year. Notice must be
posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition
in a location clearly visible from the street. In addition, notice must be
published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three times
before demolition, with the first publication not more than 15 days after the
application for a permit to demolish is filed, and the final publication at
least 15 days before the date of the permit.



   (D)   The Commission may approve a certificate of appropriateness at
any time during the notice period under division (C) of this section.  If
the certificate of appropriateness is approved, a demolition permit shall be
issued without further delay, and demolition may proceed.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.135  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Historic buildings, structures, and sites shall be maintained
to meet the applicable requirements established under state statute for
buildings generally, so as to prevent the loss of historic material and the
deterioration of important character defining details and features.



   (B)   Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Nothing in this section
shall be construed so as to prevent the ordinary repairs and maintenance of
any building, structure, or site, provided that such repairs or maintenance
do not result in a conspicuous change in the design, form, proportion, mass,
configuration, building material, texture, location, or external visual
appearance of any structure, or part thereof.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.136  RELATIONSHIP WITH ZONING DISTRICTS.



   Structures lying within the boundaries of the historic district are
subject to regulations for both the zoning district and the historic
district. If there is a conflict between the requirements of the zoning
district and the requirements of the historic district, the more restrictive
requirements shall apply.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.137  INTERESTED PARTIES.



   (A)   An interested party has a private right of action to enforce
and prevent violation of provisions of this subchapter or an ordinance
adopted by the city under this subchapter, and with respect to any building,
structure, or site within a historic district, and has the right to restrain,
enjoin, or enforce by restraining order or injunction, temporarily or
permanently, any person from violating a provision of this subchapter or an
ordinance adopted under this subchapter.



   (B)   The interested party does not have to allege or prove
irreparable harm or injury to any person or property to obtain relief under
this section.



   (C)   The interested party bringing an action under this section
does not have to post a bond unless the court, after a hearing, determines
that a bond should be required in the interest of justice.



   (D)   The interested party that brings an action under this section
is not liable to any person for damages resulting from bringing or
prosecuting the action unless the action was brought without good faith or
without a reasonable belief that a provision of this subchapter, or an
ordinance adopted by a unit under this subchapter, had been, or was about to
be violated.



   (E)   An interested party who obtains a favorable judgment in an
action under this section may recover reasonable attorney fees and court
costs from the person against whom judgment was rendered.



   (F)   An action arising under this section must be brought in the
Circuit or Superior Courts of Hamilton County and no change of venue from the
county shall be allowed in the action.



   (G)   The remedy provided in this section is in addition to other
remedies that may be available at law or in equity.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.138  CODE OF ETHICS.



   Each member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall adhere to the
following:



   (A)   Uphold the Constitution, laws, and regulations of the United
States, the State of Indiana, Hamilton County, and the City of Noblesville.



   (B)   Shall not knowingly solicit, accept, or receive:



      (1)   Gifts;



      (2)   Favors;



      (3)   Service;



      (4)   Entertainment;



      (5)   Food;



      (6)   Drink;



      (7)   Travel expenses; or



      (8)   Application fees



from a person who has a business relationship with the Historic Preservation
Commission or is seeking to influence the action of the Commission.



   (C)   Honoraria. A member shall not personally accept an honorarium
for any activity that may be considered part of the Commission's official
duties.  However, a member may accept an honorarium on behalf of the
Commission.



   (D)   Political activity. A member shall not engage in political
activity including solicitation of political contributions from anyone when
acting in an official capacity. However, such activity may be conducted when
not serving in the official capacity of a Commission member.



   (E)   Shall not pay or offer to pay any compensation for the
performance of the Commission's duties except as permitted by law.



   (F)   Shall not benefit from or permit any other person to benefit
from information of a confidential nature except as permitted or required by
law.



   (G)   Shall not engage in other conduct which is unbecoming to a
member or that constitutes a breach of public trust.



   (H)   Shall not take any official action with regard to any matter
under circumstances that he or she knows or should know that he or she has a
direct or indirect monetary interest in the subject matter or in the outcome
of such official action.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



§ 34.139  ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, AND JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   (A)   Any person, whether as principal, agent, owner, lessee,
tenant, contractor, builder, architect, engineer, or otherwise, who violates
any provision of this subchapter shall be subject to a fine as follows, for
each offense:



      (1)   Not less than $10 nor more than $2,500 for demolition;
and,



      (2)   Not less than $10 nor more than $300 for all other
offenses.



   (B)   Each day of the existence of any violation of this subchapter
shall be a separate offense.



   (C)   The erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair,
demolition, or moving, of any building, structure, or appurtenance which is
begun, continued, or maintained contrary to any provisions of this subchapter
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and in violation of this subchapter and
unlawful. The city may institute a suit for injunction in the Circuit Court
or Superior Courts of Hamilton County to restrain any person or government
unit from violating any provision of this subchapter and to cause such
violation to be prevented, abated, or removed. Such action may also be
instituted by any property owner who is adversely affected by the violation
of any provision of this subchapter.



   (D)   The remedies provided for in this section shall be cumulative
and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law.



   (E)   Any person or party aggrieved by a decision or action taken by
the Commission shall be entitled to a judicial review hereof in accordance
with I.C. 4-22-1.



(Ord. 40-8-07, passed 9-11-07)



DOWNTOWN STRATEGIC ACTION COMMITTEE



§ 34.150  PURPOSE.



   The general purpose of the Downtown Strategic Action Committee
(Committee) shall be to take a leadership role in implementing the actions
and policies outlined in the city's Downtown Strategic Development Plan (the
Plan) as approved by the Common Council March 13th, 2007. Specifically, the
Downtown Strategic Action Committee shall build consensus amongst downtown
stakeholders and make recommendations to Council on the following:



   (A)   Implementation, promotion and monitoring of the Common Council
approved target actions and policies outlined in the Plan;



   (B)   Orderly planning and development of Downtown Noblesville; and



   (C)   Programs pertaining to the maintenance and enhancement of
Downtown Noblesville.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



§ 34.151  ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby established the Downtown Strategic
Action Committee of the city (hereinafter referred to as the Committee).



   (B)   Composition.  The Committee shall consist of 11 voting
members.



      (1)   The voting members shall serve/be appointed as follows:



         (a)   The Mayor or his or her appointee;



         (b)   Three members of the Common Council who serve on
the Old Town Economic Development Subcommittee;



         (c)   One representative of Hamilton County Government
appointed by the County Commissioners;



         (d)   Three downtown commercial business owners; two
appointed by the Mayor and one appointed by the Common Council;



         (e)   One representative of Noblesville Main Street
appointed by its Board;



         (f)   One representative of the Noblesville Preservation
Alliance appointed by its Board; and



         (g)   One representative of the Noblesville Chamber of
Commerce appointed by its Board.



      (2)   Committee members shall not be represented in their
absence by an alternate or proxy.



      (3)   If any member misses three consecutive meetings without
the approval of the Committee, the member may be struck from Committee
membership by a majority vote and replaced by appointment of the vacated
member's original appointing body.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



§ 34.152  TERM.



   Committee members may serve a maximum period of six consecutive years
on the Committee.



   (A)   To assist in the continuity of the Committee, initial
appointments shall be as follows:



      (1)   Members of Council will serve corresponding terms with
their tenure in the Old Town Economic Development Subcommittee;



      (2)   Representative from Hamilton County Government will
serve a two year term;



      (3)   Downtown commercial business owners will serve two year
terms with one initially serving a one year term in order to alternate terms
and avoid an overlap in position absences. In subsequent years all terms will
return to two year terms.



      (4)   Noblesville Main Street, Noblesville Preservation
Alliance (NPA), and Noblesville Chamber of Commerce representatives will each
serve two year terms with the NPA representative initially serving a one year
term. After the completion of the initial one year term the NPA
representative will then serve two year terms in perpetuity.



   (B)   If a vacancy occurs on the Committee, the departed member's
original appointing body shall fill the vacancy by appointing a new member
for the remainder of the vacated term.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



§ 34.153  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be elected annually
by the Committee from among the members of the Committee.



   (B)   The time and date of regular meetings of the Committee shall
be established by the Chair.



   (C)   A quorum of the Committee shall be the majority of appointed
members.



   (D)   All applicable decisions of the Committee shall be in the form
of resolutions duly passed by a majority (minimum of six) of its members.
These resolutions will be forwarded on to the Mayor and Common Council for
final action.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



§ 34.154  ADMINISTRATIVE AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT.



   (A)   The Assistant Director of Economic Development or his or her
designate(s) shall provide administrative support and advice to the Committee.



   (B)   Administrative support shall include the preparation and
circulation of agendas, the preparation and circulation of minutes of
meetings of the Committee, and the forwarding of approved minutes to the
Common Council and the Mayor.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



§ 34.155  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   The Committee shall report to the Common Council through its
city staff liaison who will present the Committee's findings on a monthly
basis.



   (B)   The Committee shall share information and undertake periodic
liaison with other committees appointed by Council.



   (C)   The Committee shall explicitly have advisory authority to the
Common Council concerning committing financial resources of the city toward
downtown projects and programs.



(Res. RC-22-07, passed 4-10-07)



CHAPTER 35:  POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS




Police Department




   35.01   Powers and duties of officers and members of the police force



   35.02   Special powers



   35.03   Members of the police force; duties; qualifications



   35.04   Position of parking meter policeman established



   35.05   Juvenile aid division established



   35.06   Juvenile aid council



   35.07   Juvenile aid council; finances



   35.08   Traffic division established



   35.09   Duty of traffic division



   35.10   Records of traffic violations



   35.11   Traffic division to investigate accidents



   35.12   Traffic accident studies



   35.13   Maintenance of traffic accident reports



   35.14   Drivers' files to be maintained



   35.15   Annual traffic safety report



   35.16   Direction of traffic, police and firemen



   35.17   Traffic commission established



   35.18   Duties of traffic commission



   35.19   Meetings of traffic commission



   35.20   Traffic violations bureau created



   35.21   Duties, procedures of traffic violations bureau



   35.22   Bureau to keep records



   35.23   Reserve police force



   35.24   Appointments, demotions



   35.25   Duties determined by chief



   35.26   Police Department Policy and Procedure Manual adopted



   35.27   Merit system



   35.28   Police Department traffic safety partnership




Fire Department




   35.30   Members of the Fire Department; duties; qualifications



   35.31   Call-in time



   35.32   (Reserved)



   35.33   Merit system




Employee Benefits and Regulations




   35.35   Police pension fund created; board of trustees



   35.36   Firemen's pension fund created; board of trustees



   35.37   Longevity pay for Police and Fire Departments



   35.38   Education incentives for Police and Fire Departments



   35.381   Educational assistance



   35.39   Vacation schedules



   35.40   Sick leave for Police and Fire Departments



   35.41   Bereavement leave



   35.42   Jury duty leave for Police and Fire Departments



   35.43   Reinstatement of employee



   35.44   Holidays



   35.441   Hours worked compensation for Police



   35.45   Court time for Police and Fire Departments



   35.46   Clothing allowance for Fire Department



   35.47   Fire Department Headquarter Captain compensation



   35.48   Family and Medical Leave



   35.49   Worker’s compensation



   35.50   Military leave



   35.51   Benefits continuation (COBRA)



   35.52   Deferred compensation



   35.53   Employee insurance



   35.54   Retired employees/elected officials insurance




Volunteer Reserve Police Department




   35.60   Created



   35.61   Supervision



   35.62   Activities



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 35.01  POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND MEMBERS OF THE POLICE FORCE.



   (A)   The officers and members of the police force of the city
possess all the common-law and statutory powers of constables, except in
relation to the service of civil process.  Any warrant of search or arrest,
issued by any judge, may be executed in any part thereof by any member of the
police force, subject to the laws governing arrest and bail.



   (B)   The members of the police force shall serve all process within
the city issuing from the City Court.  They shall arrest, without process,
all persons who within view violate the statutes of the state, or the
ordinances of the city.  The members of the police force shall take the
violators before the court having jurisdiction of the offense and retain them
in custody until the cause of such arrest has been investigated.  The
members of the police force shall suppress all breaches of the peace within
their knowledge, and may call to their aid the power of the city, and pursue
and commit to jail persons guilty of violation of the statutes of this state,
or of the ordinances of the city.



   (C)   They shall serve all process issued by the Common Council or
any committee thereof, or by any of the executive departments of the city.



   (D)   They shall attend upon the City Court and assist the bailiff
to preserve order in the Court.  The members of the police force, under the
direction of the Chief of Police, shall convey prisoners to and from the
county jail or station houses of the city for arraignment or trial in the
City Court, or to the place of imprisonment, under sentence of the Court.



   (E)   The police officers shall enforce city ordinances in
accordance with IC 36-1-6.  (IC 36-8-3-6)



§ 35.02  SPECIAL POWERS.



   (A)   The police department, shall, within the city, preserve peace;
prevent offenses; detect and arrest criminals; suppress riots, mobs, and
insurrections; disperse unlawful and dangerous assemblages, and assemblages
which obstruct the  free  passage  of  public  streets, sidewalks,
parks, and places; protect the rights of persons and property; guard the
public health; preserve order at elections and public meetings; direct the
movement of vehicles in public ways or public places; remove all nuisances in
public parks or public ways; provide proper police assistance at fires;
assist, advise, and protect strangers and travelers in public ways or at
transportation facilities; carefully observe and inspect all places of
business under license, or required to have the same, and enforce and prevent
the violation of all ordinances and laws in force in the city.



   (B)   The Chief of Police and each Captain in his precinct or
district shall  possess the power of supervision and inspection over all
pawnbrokers, vendors, junk shop keepers, cartmen, expressmen, dealers in
secondhand merchandise, intelligence offices, architectural salvage material
dealers (as defined in I.C. 24-4-16-3), and auctions  Any member of the
force may be authorized by the Chief in writing to exercise the same powers.



(IC 36-8-3-10)



§ 35.03  MEMBERS OF THE POLICE FORCE; DUTIES; QUALIFICATIONS.



   The common council of the city classifies by rank the members of the
police department of the city as:



   (A)   Police Chief.  The highest rank of any member of the police
department appointed by the Mayor to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor,
whose function it will be to direct, supervise, and control the activities of
the police department.  A member must have served 5  full  years  on 
the  department  before  being  appointed  to  the position of Police
Chief.



   (B)   Assistant Chief.  The Assistant Chief shall be the second
highest ranking member of the Police Department and shall be appointed by the
Chief of Police with the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety. 
The function of the Assistant Chief will be to direct the activities of the
police force in the absence of the Chief and to perform such other duties as
may from time to time be defined by the rules and regulations of the City
Police Department or pursuant to the direction of the Chief of Police. 
There shall be one assistant Chief for the Police Department.  A member of
the Department must have served a minimum of four full years on the
Department before being eligible to be appointed Assistant Chief.



   (C)   Deputy Chief.  There shall be three positions of Deputy
Chief: First Deputy Chief, Second Deputy Chief and Third Deputy Chief.  The
positions of Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Police Chief with the
approval of the City Board of Public Works and Safety.  The function of the
Deputy Chiefs shall be to direct the activities of the police force in the
absence of the Chief and/or the Assistant Chief.  The Deputy Chiefs shall
perform such other duties as may from time to time be defined by the rules
and regulations of the City Police Department or by direction of the Police
Chief.  In order to be appointed a Deputy Chief, a member of the Department
must have served four full years on the Department.



   (D)   Lieutenant.  Any member of the police department of the city
appointed by the Police Chief with the approval of the board of public works
and safety who shall perform such functions and duties as may from time to
time be def ined in the rules and regulations of the police department of the
city or by direction of the Police Chief.  There may be as many Lieutenants
as may be determined by the board of public works and safety.  A member must
have served 3 full years on the department before becoming a Lieutenant.



   (E)   Sergeant.  A member of the police department appointed by the
Police Chief with the approval of the board of public works and safety,  and
whose functions and duties shall be those as may be defined from time to time
in the rules and regulations of the police department or by direction of the
Police Chief.  A member must have served 2 years on the department before
becoming a Sergeant.  There may be as many Sergeants as may be determined
from time to time by the board of public works and safety.



   (F)   Technical Sergeant.  A member of the police department
appointed by the Police Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, and whose functions and duties shall be those as may be defined
from time to time in the rules and regulations of the police department or by
direction of the Police Chief.  Technical Sergeants serve at the discretion
of the Chief of Police.  A member must have served two years on the
department before becoming a Technical Sergeant.  There may be as many
Technical Sergeants as may be determined from time to time by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



   (G)   Master Patrolman.  A member of the police department who has
had ten full years service on the department, but who does not hold the rank
of Police Chief, Captain, Lieutenant or Sergeant, and whose functions and
duties shall be defined by the rules and regulations of the police department
or by direction of the Police Chief.



   (H)   Patrolman First Class.  A member of the police department who
has had at least four years of service, but fewer than ten years of service
on the department and whose functions and duties shall be defined by the
rules and regulations of the police department or by direction of the Police
Chief and who does not hold the rank of Police Chief, Captain, Lieutenant or
Sergeant.



   (I)   Patrolman Second Class.  A member of the police department
who has had at least two years of service and whose functions and duties
shall be defined by the rules and regulations of the police department or by
direction of the Police Chief.



   (J)   Patrolman Third Class.  A member of the police department who
has less than one year of service and whose functions and duties shall be
defined by the rules and regulations of the police department or by direction
of the Police Chief.



   (K)   Recruit Patrolman.  A member of the police department who has
less than one year of service and who has not yet completed his/her
certification by the Indiana Law Enforcement Academy.  Their functions and
duties shall be defined by the rules and regulations of the police department
or by direction of the Police Chief.  All patrolmen shall be subject to the
direct supervision of the Police Chief, and in the absence of the Police
Chief, the next highest-ranking officer on duty at the time.



(Ord. 989, passed 4-24-73; amend. Ord. 1096, passed 2-28-77; amend. Ord.
1288, passed 7-9-79; amend. Ord. 63-12-95, passed 12-26-95; Am. Ord. 22-7-99,
passed 7-26-99)



§ 35.04  POSITION OF PARKING METER POLICEMAN ESTABLISHED.



   The Mayor is authorized to employ a special policeman or policewoman 
for  the purpose  of checking  the  parking  spaces  which are
controlled by parking meters, and for issuing parking tickets for the
violation of the parking regulations where parking meters are installed and
for any other purpose designated by the Mayor for the enforcement of  the 
laws of  the  state and the ordinances of the city.  The Mayor shall
recommend to the common council the salary to be paid the special policeman
or policewoman and the common council shall establish the salary.  The
special policeman or policewoman may be dismissed at the discretion of the
Mayor.



(Ord. 792, passed 7-25-60)



§ 35.05  JUVENILE AID DIVISION ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is established in the police department of the city, a
juvenile aid division to be under the control of the board of public works
and safety and the juvenile aid council.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the juvenile aid division, with such
aid as may be rendered by other such law enforcing agencies, to create and
maintain the following activities of the juvenile aid division:  school 
safety  patrols,  junior  police,  scouts,  bicycle licensing, 
bicycle  courts,  or  any  other  activity  which  in  the opinion of
the juvenile aid council will be beneficial to juveniles in  promoting 
better  citizenship or  juvenile  safety.  (Ord. 628, passed 6-14-43)



§ 35.06  JUVENILE AID COUNCIL.



   (A)   There is established a juvenile aid council consisting of the
juvenile officer and 6 additional members which shall be appointed by the
mayor subject to approval by the common council. The members, with the
exception of the juvenile officer, will serve without compensation.  The
appointees of the mayor may be dismissed by him at any time for any reason
that he may deem proper.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the juvenile aid council, and to this
end it shall have authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal,
to carry on any activities which, in the opinion of the juvenile aid council,
will aid and assist in the solution or alleviation  of  juvenile 
delinquency  or  the  personal  safety  of juveniles.  These 
activities  shall  include  the  licensing  of bicycles, the receiving
and investigating of any complaints having to do with juvenile delinquency,
and the conduct of bicycle courts, such courts to be held under rules and
regulations set out by the juvenile aid council. 



(Ord. 628, s 3, passed 6-14-43; amend. Ord. 1096, passed 2-28-77)



§ 35.07  JUVENILE AID COUNCIL; FINANCES.



   (A)   The common council of the city may, upon recommendation of the
juvenile aid council, appropriate sums of money from the general fund of the
city for the purpose of paying the necessary expenses to be incurred by the
juvenile aid council.



   (B)   Any moneys derived by the juvenile aid division from the
operation of  licensing of bicycles or  from any other  source of
operation shall be turned over to the general fund of the city by the
juvenile aid division through its juvenile officer. 



(Ord. 628, §§ 4, 5, passed 6-14-43)



§ 35.08  TRAFFIC DIVISION ESTABLISHED.



   There  is established  in the police department of the city a traffic
division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and
directly responsible to the chief of police.



(`61 Code, § 15.3)



§ 35.09  DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION.



   It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be
rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the traffic
code and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the
city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, to
cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the
administration of the traffic laws and  in  the  development  of  ways 
and  means  to  improve  traffic conditions, and to carry out those
duties specially imposed upon the division by this code.  (`61 Code, s 15.4)



               



Cross-reference:



   Traffic engineer, §§ 70.25 through 70.52



§ 35.10  RECORDS OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The police department, or the traffic division thereof, shall
keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of the city or of
the state vehicle laws of which any person has been. charged, together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each.  The record shall accumulate during at least a 5-year period, and from
that time the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most
recent 5-year period.



   (B)   All  forms  for  records  of  violations  and 
notices  of violations shall be serially numbered.  For each month and year
a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal
of all such forms.



   (C)   All  such  records  and  reports  shall  be  public 
records. (`61 Code, § 15.5)



§ 35.11  TRAFFIC DIVISION TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.



   It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police
officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest, and
to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law
causing or contributing to accidents.



(`61 Code, § 15.6)



§ 35.12  TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.



   Whenever  the  accidents  at  any  particular  location  become
numerous,  the  traffic  division  shall cooperate with  the  traffic
engineer  in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial
measures. 



(`61 Code, § 15.7)



§ 35.13  MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic
accident reports.  Accident reports, or cards referring to them, shall be
filed alphabetically by location.  The reports shall be available for the
use and information of the traffic engineer.



(`61 Code, § 15.8)



§ 35.14  DRIVERS' FILES TO BE MAINTAINED.



   (A)   The police department or the traffic division thereof shall
maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests,
convictions, and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.



   (B)   The division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged
with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in
frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, shall attempt to discover
the reasons therefor.  The division shall take whatever steps are lawful and
reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons
suspended or revoked.



   (C)   Such  records  shall  accumulate  during  at  least 
a  5-year period and from that time such records shall be maintained
complete for at least the most recent 5 year period.



(`61 Code, § 15.9)



§ 35.15  ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT.



   The traffic division shall annually prepare a  traffic report which 
shall be filed with the mayor.  Such report shall contain information on
traffic matters in this city as follows:



   (A)   The  number  of  traffic  accidents,  the  number  of
persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic
accident data.



   (B)   The  number  of  traffic  accidents  investigated  and 
other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.



   (C)   The plans and recommendations of the division for future
traffic safety activities. 



(`61 Code, § 15.10)



§ 35.16  DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC, POLICE AND FIREMEN.



   (A)   Officers of the police department or such officers as are
assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with the traffic code and state law;
provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite
traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police  department 
may  direct  traffic  as  conditions  may  require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic code or state law.



   (B)   Officers of the fire department, when in uniform, may direct
or assist the police in directing  traffic. 



(`61 Code, § 15.11)



§ 35.17  TRAFFIC COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.



   There is established a traffic commission to serve without
compensation.  It shall consist of the traffic engineer, or in his
discretion, as his representative the chief of the traffic division, the
mayor,  the fire chief,  the street commissioner, and the city attorney and
such number of other city officers and representatives of  unofficial
bodies  as may be determined and appointed by the mayor.  The chairman of
the commission shall be appointed by the mayor. 



(`61 Code, § 15.50)



§ 35.18  DUTIES OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   It shall be the duty of the traffic commission, and to this end it
shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to
coordinate traffic activities; to carry on educational activities  in 
traffic matters;  to  supervise  the  preparation and publication of
traffic reports; to receive complaints having to do with traffic matters; and
to recommend to the legislative body of the city and  to  the  traffic
engineer,  the chief of the traffic division,  and other  city officials
ways and means for  improving traffic conditions and the administration and
enforcement of traffic regulations.



(`61 Code, § 15.51)



§ 35.19  MEETINGS OF TRAFFIC COMMISSION.



   The traffic commission shall meet when called into session by the
commission chairman or  the mayor.  The commission shall meet biannually,
once in the first half and once during the second half of  the  fiscal 
year,  to  review  current  traffic  problems.  The commission can be
called into session any time throughout the year, with a reasonable advance
notice.  The number of sessions over the minimum requirements shall be left
to the discretion of the mayor and the chairman of the commission. 



(`61 Code, § 15.52)



§ 35.20  TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU CREATED.



   (A)   The city judge shall establish a traffic violations bureau to
assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases.  The bureau shall
be in charge of a person or persons and shall be open at such hours as the
city judge may designate.



   (B)   The judge or judges who hear traffic cases shall designate the
specified offenses under the traffic code and the state traffic laws in
respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations
bureau in satisfaction thereof, shall specify by suitable schedules the
amount of such fines for first, second, and subsequent  offenses, 
provided  such  fines  are  within  the  limits declared by law or
ordinance, and shall further specify what number of such offenses shall
require appearance before the magistrate.



(`61 Code, § 15.55)



§ 35.21  DUTIES, PROCEDURES OF TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   The following duties are  imposed upon the traffic violations bureau
in reference to traffic offenses:



   (A)   It  shall  accept  designated  fines,  issue 
receipts,  and represent in court such violators as are permitted and desire
to plead guilty, waive court appearance, and give power to attorney.



   (B)   It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the
persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of the
appearance on the court docket, and notify the arresting officer and -
witnesses, if any, to be present.



   (C)   It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations
for  which  each  person has  been  guilty during  the  preceding  12
months,  whether  such  guilt  was  established  in  court or  in 
the traffic violations bureau.



   (D)   The traffic violations bureau shall follow such procedure as
may be prescribed by the traffic code or as may be required by any laws of
this state.



(`61 Code, § 15.56)



§ 35.22  BUREAU TO KEEP RECORDS.



   The traffic violations bureau shall keep records and submit summarized
monthly reports to the city court of all notices issued and arrests made for
violations of the' traffic code. and state laws, of all the fines collected
by the traffic violations bureau or the court, and of the final disposition
or present status of every case of violation of the provisions of said laws
and ordinances.  The records shall be so maintained as to show all types of
violations and the totals of each.  The records shall be public records.



(`61 Code, § 15.57)



§ 35.23  RESERVE POLICE FORCE.



   (A)   There is created the reserve police department.



   (B)   Upon recommendation of the board of works and safety of the
city,  the maximum number of authorized reserve police officers is hereby
established to be not more than the regular police officers from time to time
in the employ of the city.



   (C)   The chief of police of the city is designated to establish
rules directing and governing the activities of all police reserves, the
rules to be in writing and maintained on file with the public records of the
city.



   (D)   In all other respects, the operation, appointment,
compensation, and training shall be governed by the laws of the state as from
time to time amended.



   (E)   There may be appropriated by the common council of the city
such funds as may be allowed by the laws of the state for use for or on
behalf of police reserve officers. 



(Ord. 1061, passed 5-10-76)



                   



Statutory reference:



   Police reserves, IC 36-8-3-20



§ 35.24  APPOINTMENTS, DEMOTIONS.



   The appointments to offices set forth in this chapter may be made 
by  the  police  chief  or  fire  chief  for  their  respective
departments  with  the  approval  of  the board of public works and
safety.  However, any demotion from a rank may be made by the police chief
for the police department or by the fire chief for the fire department
without the approval of the board of public works and safety. 



(Ord. 989, passed 4-24-73)



§ 35.25  DUTIES DETERMINED BY CHIEF.



   In the event the rules and regulations of the police or fire department
fail to define the functions and duties to be performed by a particular
officer or member of a department, then the functions and duties of such
officer or member will be determined by the chief of department. 



(Ord. 989, passed 4-24-73)



                   



Statutory reference:



   Civilian technical and clerical personnel appointment and merit system,
IC 36-8-3-8(a), (b)



   Arrest procedure, IC 35-33-7



   Humane officers, IC 36-8-3-18



   Police matrons, IC 36-8-3-19



   Special duty of policemen and firemen, IC 36-8-3-7



   Disciplinary removal, appeals of policemen and firemen, IC 36-8-3-4(b)
- (n) through  36-8-3-5



   Chiefs, oaths, depositions, IC 36-8-3-9



   Interference with political process, IC 36-8-3-12



   Insurance fund, IC 36-8-3-14



   Exemption from jury and military service, IC 36-8-3-15



§ 35.26 POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL ADOPTED.



   The Noblesville Police Department Policy and Procedure Manual is hereby
approved. The Chief of the Noblesville Police Department, and/or his
designee, shall prepare sufficient copies of the Policy and Procedure Manual
so that each member of the Police Department shall receive, and acknowledge
receipt of, the Policy and Procedure Manual. Any member of the Noblesville
Police Department who violates any of the rules and regulations set out in
the Noblesville Police Department Policy and Procedure Manual may be
disciplined pursuant to General Order 26 of the Police Policy and Procedure
Manual and pursuant to I.C. 36-8-3.



(Res. RB-2-05, passed 1-1-04)



§ 35.27  MERIT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Effective January 1, 2009, a merit system is hereby
established for the Police Department (hereinafter referred to as
"Department") to govern the selection and appointment of persons to be
employed as members of the Department, and to govern the promotion, demotion,
discipline and dismissal of members of the Department.  The operation of the
merit board shall be in accordance with the terms and provisions of I.C.
36-8-3.5-1 et seq., the terms of which are hereby adopted in their entirety
and constitute the basis for the merit system which is established by this
section, except for the following:



      (1)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) are amended by
this section so that "upper level policymaking positions" include all ranks
above the level of Lieutenant.



      (2)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) are amended by
this section so that the second sentence in I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) shall read as
"the Chief of the Police Department shall appoint and may remove a member in
an upper level policymaking position."



      (3)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-6(a) are amended by this
section to remove all mention of different political parties and political
affiliation, to read in its entirety, as follows:



   A Merit Commission consisting of five (5) commissioners shall be
established for each department of a unit having a merit system. The
commissioners are:



         (1)   Two (2) persons appointed by the unit's executive;



         (2)   One (1) person appointed by the unit's legislative
body; and,



         (3)   Two (2) persons elected by the active members of
the department.



   (B)   Members of the Department who hold the rank of Patrolman Third
Class, Patrolman Second Class, Patrolman First Class, Master Patrolman,
Sergeant or Lieutenant as of the date of the adoption of this section shall
retain that rank and be considered merit officers. Years of service in any of
the Patrolman ranks shall accrue from the date the officer was originally
hired.  The years of service for Sergeants and Lieutenants shall accrue from
the officers' original date(s) of promotion.



   (C)   The order of merit ranks will be Patrolman Third Class,
Patrolman Second Class, Patrolman First Class, Master Patrolman, Sergeant and
Lieutenant. Patrolmen with sufficient years of service, as determined by the
merit commission, are eligible to test for a Sergeant position. Only
Sergeants with sufficient years of service as a Sergeant, as determined by
the merit commission, are eligible to test for Lieutenant.



   (D)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-13(b) (which states that
promotions must come from the next lowest rank) do not apply to upper level
policy making positions.  However, the merit commission may impose a length
of service on the Department requirement for those positions.



   (E)   Hiring and promotional lists in effect as of the date of
adoption of this section shall remain in effect for two years from the date
on which the list was first accepted.



   (F)   The establishment of a merit system by this section is subject
to the approval of the merit system by a majority of the active members of
the Department. A meeting of the active members of the Department for the
purpose of their voting by secret ballot to accept or reject the merit system
shall be convened pursuant to notice as prescribed in I.C. 36-8-3.5-4. The
notice must be given prior to November 7, 2008, as required by I.C.
36-8-3.5-4(a).



(Ord. 52-10-08, passed 11-10-08)



§ 35.28  POLICE DEPARTMENT TRAFFIC SAFETY PARTNERSHIP.



   All hours worked by police officers on grants paid through Hamilton
County to agency members of the Hamilton County Traffic Safety Partnership
will be compensated at the rate of one and one-half of an officer’s regular
rate of pay. These hours are not considered as hours worked for the city, and
are not factored in when calculating city paid overtime compensation.



(Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15 ; Am. Ord.
42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 35.30  MEMBERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT; DUTIES; QUALIFICATIONS.



   The common council of the city classifies by rank the members of the
fire department of the city as:



   (A)   Fire Chief.  The highest rank of any member of the Fire
Department appointed by the Mayor to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor,
whose function will be to direct, supervise, and control the activities of
the Fire Department.  The Chief shall have sole and exclusive control over
all members of the Fire Department, subject to the direction of the Mayor and
Board of Public Wotks and Safety.  A member must have served 5 full years on
the Department before being appointed to the position of Fire Chief.



   (B)   Assistant Fire Chief.  The second highest rank of the Fire
Department, appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of
Public Works and Safety, whose functions and duties will be to direct the
activities of the fire force in the absence of the Chief, and who shall
perform such other duties as may from time to time be defined by the rules
and regulations of the Fire Department of the city or as prescribed by the
Fire Chief.  A member must have served 4 full years on the Department before
becoming an Assistant Fire Chief.



   (C)   Fire Investigator.  The position of Fire Investigator shall
be appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  The Fire Investigator shall perform such other duties as may
from time to time be defined by the rules and regulations of the fire
department or by direction of the Fire Chief.  The Fire Investigator shall
have the power to enforce and issue summonses for any violation of the
Noblesville Municipal Code and State Fire Code that is related to fire
prevention and enforcement or safety (such as, but not limited to, fire code
violations, illegal burning, illegal parking that blocks a fire land or fire
hydrant, etc.).  In order to be appointed a Fire Investigator, a member of
the department must have served three full years on the department.  Full
time Fire Fighters employed by the fire department that are assigned to
duties as "Fire Investigator" may maintain status as a Noblesville Reserve
Police Officer to assist in the execution of their fire
prevention/enforcement/safety duties provided they meet the criteria set out
by state statute for appointment as a Reserve Police Officer and meet any
additional qualifications and/or training directed by the Chief of Police. 
The authority of a Fire Investigator is for Noblesville Municipal Code and
State Fire Code violations only.



   (D)   Fire Inspector.  The position of Fire Inspector shall be
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  The Fire Inspector shall perform such other duties as may from
time to time be defined by the rules and regulations of the fire department
or by direction of the Fire Chief.  The Fire Inspector shall have the power
to enforce and issue summonses for any violation of the Noblesville Municipal
Code and State Fire Code that is related to fire prevention and enforcement
or safety (such as, but not limited to, fire code violations, illegal
burning, illegal parking that blocks a fire lane or fire hydrant, etc.).  In
order to be appointed a Fire Inspector, a member of the department must have
served three full years on the department.  Full time Fire Fighters employed
by the fire department that are assigned to duties as "Fire Inspector" may
maintain status as a Noblesville Reserve Police Officer to assist in the
execution of their fire prevention/enforcement/safety duties provided they
meet the criteria set out by state statute for appointment as a Reserve
Police Officer and meet any additional qualifications and/or training
directed by the Chief of Police.  Their authority is for Noblesville
Municipal Code and State Fire Code only.



   (E)   Training Officer.  The position of Training Officer shall be
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  The Training Officer shall perform such other duties as may
from time to time be defined by the rules and regulations of the fire
department or by direction of the Fire Chief.



   (F)   EMS Director.  The position of EMS Director shall be
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety.  The EMS Director shall perform such other duties as may from
time to time be defined by the rules and regulations of the fire department
or by direction of the Fire Chief.



   (G)   Battalion Chief.  There shall be three Battalion Chiefs. 
The positions of Battalion Chief shall be appointed by the Fire Chief with
the approval of the Board of Public Works and Safety.  The function of the
Battalion Chiefs shall be to direct the activities of the fire department in
the absence of the Chief and/or the Assistant Chief.  The Battalion Chiefs
shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be defined by the
rules and regulations of the fire department or by direction of the Fire
Chief.  In order to be appointed a Battalion Chief, a member of the
department must have served four full years on the department.



   (H)   Captain.  Any member of the Fire Department of the city
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, who shall perform such functions and duties as may from time to
time be defined in the rules and regulations of the Fire Department of the
city.  There may be as many Captains as may be determined by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.  A member must have served 3 full years on the
Department before becoming a Captain.



   (I)   Lieutenant.  A member of the Fire Department of the city
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, who shall perform such functions and duties as may from time to
time be defined in the rules and regulations of the Fire Department of the
city or by direction of the Fire Chief.  A member must have served 2 years
in the Department before, becoming a Lieutenant.



   (J)   Corporal.  Any member of the Fire Department of the city
appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the Board of Public Works
and Safety, who shall perform such functions and duties as may from time to
time be defined in the rules and regulations of the Fire Department of the
city or by direction of the Fire Chief.  There may be as many Corporals as
may be determined by the Board of PublicWorks and Safety.  A member must
have served at least 2 full years on the Department before becoming a
Corporal.



   (K)   Senior Fireman.  A member of the Fire Department who has had
5 years' service on the Department who does not hold the rank of Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, or Corporal, and whose functions
and duties shall be defined by the rules and regulations  of the Fire
Department or by direction of the Fire Chief.



   (L)   Fireman First Class.  A member of the Fire Department who has
had at least 4 years' service but less than 5 years of service, whose
functions and duties shall be defined by the rules and regulations of the
Fire Department or by direction of the Fire Chief, and who does not hold the
rank of Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, or Corporal.



   (M)   Pipeman.  A member of the Fire Department who has had less
than 4 years' service and whose functions and duties shall be defined by the
rules and regulations of the Fire Department or by direction of the Fire
Chief. 



   (N)   Probationary Fireman.  A member of the fire department who
has less than one year of service and whose functions and duties shall be
defined by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department or by direction
of the Fire Chief. 



(Ord. 989, passed 4-24-73; Am. Ord. 22-7-99, passed 7-26-99)



Cross-reference:



   Appointments, demotions; duties determined by Chief, §§ 35.24 and
35.25



   Bureau of Fire Prevention, § 91.03 et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Special duty of policemen and firemen, IC 36-8-3-7



   Disciplinary removal, appeals of policemen and firemen, 36-8-3-4 (b) -
(n)



   Insurance fund, IC 36-8-3-14



   Exemption from jury and military service, IC 36-8-3-15



§ 35.31  CALL-IN TIME.



   See current, effective Meet and Confer agreement between the City of
Noblesville and the members of the Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 49-11-01, passed 11-27-01; Am.  Ord.  47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am.
Ord. 51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2- 07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.32  (RESERVED).



§ 35.33  MERIT SYSTEM.



   (A)   Effective July 1, 2006, a merit system is hereby established
for the Fire Department ("Department") to govern the selection and
appointment of persons to be employed as members of the Department, and to
govern the promotion, demotion, discipline and dismissal of members of the
Department, all in accordance with the terms and provisions of I.C.
36-8-3.5-1 et seq., which are hereby adopted in their entirety and constitute
the basis for the merit system established by this section, except for the
following:



      (1)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) are amended by
this section, as it applies to the Fire Department merit system, so that
"upper level policy making positions" include all ranks higher than battalion
chief.



      (2)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) are further
amended by this section, as it applies to the Fire Department merit system,
so that the second sentence in I.C. 36-8-3.5-11a) reads as "the Chief of the
Fire Department shall appoint Divisions Chiefs."



      (3)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(a) are further
amended by this section, as it applies to the Fire Department merit system,
so that those firefighters with the rank of Division Chief hold an "upper
level policy making position". However, a Division Chief maintains a right to
appeal his or her removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in I.C.
36-8-3.5-17 and I.C. 36-8-3.5-11(d).



      (4)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-13 are amended by this
section as follows:



         (a)   Rules governing promotions must provide that the
following factors be considered in rating a member of the department for a
promotion:



            (1)   The score received by the member on a
written competitive examination.



            (2)   The score received by the member on an oral
competitive interview.



            (3)   The performance record of the member in the
department.



            (4)   The member's length of service.



   The commission shall determine the weight to be given to each of the
factors. However, neither a member's length of service nor the score received
on the oral interview may comprise more than twenty percent (20%) each of the
rating.



         (b)   Promotions to a rank must be from the next lower
rank. In addition, the member being promoted must have served at the lower
rank for a period determined by the commission. With the exception of
privates, who meet the required qualifications as determined by the
commission, who shall be eligible to promote to the rank of lieutenant. as
long as they will complete the years of continuous service approved by the
Commission during the life of the eligibility list.



         The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-13 (b) (that promotions
must come from the next lowest rank), as it applies to the Fire Department
merit system, do not apply to upper level policy making positions nor to the
merit rank of lieutenant. However, the merit commission may impose a length
of service on the Department requirement for those positions



         (c)   Only members who are qualified in rank and will
achieve the time in rank approved by the Commission during the life of the
eligibility list may be given the competitive examinations and placed on an
eligibility list. Eligible candidates may not be promoted until the time in
rank approved by the Commission has been served. The eligibility list for a
position consists of members who have been placed on the list in order of
their cumulative score on all rating factors. The eligibility list shall be
maintained for two (2) years from the date of certification, after which time
the list shall be retired and a new list established. The retired list shall
be kept for five (5) years and then destroyed.



   (Italics added to emphasize the amendments.)



      (5)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-15(a) are amended by
this section, as it applies to the Fire Department merit system, to provide
that performance ratings shall be made at least every 12 months instead of
every six months.



      (6)   The provisions of I.C. 36-8-3.5-6(a) are amended by this
section, as it applies to the Fire Department merit system, to remove all
mention of different political parties and political affiliation, to read in
its entirety, as follows:



   A Merit commission consisting of five (5) commissioners shall be
established for each department of a unit having a merit system. The
commissioners are:



         (1)   Two (2) persons appointed by the unit's executive;



         (2)   One (1) person appointed by the unit's legislative
body; and



         (3)   Two (2) persons elected by the active members of
the department.



   (B)   Members of the Department who are currently receiving pay to
be an engineer, as of May 9, 2006, shall be considered to hold the special
merit rank of engineer. Years of service in the rank of engineer shall accrue
from the date the firefighter began receiving pay to be an engineer.



   (C)   Members of the Department who hold the rank of private,
lieutenant, captain and battalion chief as of May 9, 2006 shall retain that
rank and be considered merit firefighters or fire officers. Years of service
in the rank of private shall accrue from date the firefighters' original
probation was completed. The years of service for officers will accrue from
the officers' original date(s) of promotion.



   (D)   The order of merit ranks will be: private, engineer,
lieutenant, captain and battalion chief. Firefighters or engineers with
sufficient years of service as determined by the merit commission are
eligible to test for a lieutenant position. Only lieutenants with sufficient
years of service as lieutenants as determined by the merit commission are
eligible to test for captain. Only captains with sufficient years of service
as captains as determined by the merit commission are eligible to test for
battalion chief.



   (E)   Hiring and promotional lists in effect as of May 9, 2006 shall
remain in effect for two years from the date on which they were first
accepted.



   (F)   The establishment of a merit system by this section is subject
to the approval of the merit system by a majority of the active members of
the Department. A meeting of the active members of the Department for the
purpose of their voting by secret ballot to accept or reject the merit system
shall be convened pursuant to notice as prescribed in I.C. 36-8-3.5-4. The
notice must be given prior to July 8, 2006, as required by I.C. §
36-8-3.5-4(a).



(Ord. 36-04-06, passed 5-9-06; Am. Ord. 91-10-06, passed 10-24-06)



EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND REGULATIONS



§ 35.35 POLICE PENSION FUND CREATED; BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There is created a Police Pension Fund and a Board of Trustees to
administer such Fund pursuant to the acts of the General Assembly of the
state.  ('61 Code, § 6.1)



Statutory reference:



   Police pension funds, IC 36-8-6-1 et seq. and 36-8-8-1 et seq.



§ 35.36  FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND CREATED; BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   There is created a Firemen's Pension Fund and a Board of Trustees to
administer such Fund pursuant to the acts of the General Assembly of the
state.  (`61 Code, § 6.2)



Statutory reference:



   Firemen's Pension Funds, IC 36-8-7-1 et seq. and 36-8-8-1 et seq.



§ 35.37  LONGEVITY PAY FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   Longevity pay for Police Department.



      (1)   Sworn members of the Police Department receive longevity
pay based upon consecutive years of service with the city.  An employee
starting his or her full-time employment with the city on January 1 will be
considered as having completed a year of service as of December 31 of that
same year. Effective January 1, longevity pay for years of service 1-19 is
paid in the amount of $120 for each calendar year of service. Longevity pay
for year 20 is $250 per year ($5,000 annual), and every year thereafter, with
no additional yearly increase beyond 20 years of service. Longevity pay is
paid in equal bi-weekly payments during such year according to the regular
payrolls of the city.



      (2)   Longevity pay is received after the one-year anniversary
date of full-time service and paid on a bi-weekly basis. The effective date
of the start of the longevity pay will be the pay period that the one-year
anniversary date falls within, as long as that date falls within the first
week of the pay period.  Otherwise, if the anniversary date falls within the
second week of the pay period, the longevity pay will start the following pay
period.  This longevity pay will be paid at a prorated amount through the
end of that calendar year. Then, starting with the first full pay period of
the next calendar year, longevity pay will be paid out at a two-year service
rate and will be paid in equal bi-weekly payments with each regularly
scheduled city payroll.



      (3)   When calculating overtime compensation, longevity pay
shall be in addition to the employee’s regular rate of pay and is figured
on an hourly basis and added to employee’s regular rate of pay.



      (4)   Upon termination of employment, employees do not receive
payment of the remaining balance of their longevity benefit. However, an
employee will receive payment of the unused balance of his or her vacation,
accrued vacation, float, compensatory hours, and sick time hours calculated
at the employee’s base rate, plus longevity rate, plus education incentive
pay. (Please refer to §§ 35.39 and 35.40 regarding the payment of accrued
vacation and sick time hours upon termination.)



      (5)   No police officer shall remain on active duty in the
Police or Fire Department of the City of Noblesville after reaching the age
of 70 years.



   (B)   Longevity pay for Fire Department. See current, effective Meet
and Confer agreement between the City of Noblesville and the members of the
Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 19-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord.
58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.38  EDUCATION INCENTIVES FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   For firefighters, see current, effective Meet and Confer
agreement between the City of Noblesville and the members of the Noblesville
Fire Department.



   (B)   City sworn police officers shall receive the following amounts
of compensation for completing certain police-related education requirements,
as follows:



      (1)   $750 additional pay per year for having acquired
one-half the required hours for a Bachelor’s Degree from an accredited
institution of higher education.



      (2)   $1,500 additional pay per year for receiving a
Bachelor’s Degree from an accredited institution of higher education.



      (3)   $2,000 additional pay per year for receiving a
Master’s Degree from an accredited institution of higher education.



      (4)   $3,000 additional pay per year for receiving a Doctorate
from an accredited institution of higher education.



   (C)   Compensation will be paid to an individual qualifying
hereunder for having acquired the highest degree as outlined in this
section.  No individual will receive cumulative incentive compensation for
two or more degrees.



   (D)   Other education incentives for Police Department. 



      (1)   City sworn police officers shall receive the following
amounts of compensation for completing certain police- or fire-related
education requirements which do not lead to a higher education degree as
follows:



         (a)   $250 additional pay per year for having acquired
120 hours of continuing education within 36 months.



         (b)   $500 additional pay per year for having acquired
240 hours of continuing education within 60 months.



         (c)   $750 additional pay per year for having acquired
400 hours of continuing education within 72 months.



      (2)   If a police officer does not obtain the necessary hours
to reach the next level of pay within one of the above described time
periods, they shall retain the previous amount of additional pay they are
entitled to receive.



      (3)   All city police officers receiving or hereafter becoming
entitled to receive additional education compensation shall continue to
receive said additional pay only if they completed 40 hours of continuing
education in the previous year not including any year prior to 1987.



      (4)   With respect to the educational incentives for sworn
police officers the Board of Public Works and Safety for the City of
Noblesville shall determine which institutions are accredited, which courses
at the various institutions are employment related and which types of
training, schooling and continuing education qualify for incentives.



   (E)   Other education incentives for Fire Department.  See current,
effective Meet and Confer agreement between the City of Noblesville and the
members of the Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-03, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12 -15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord.
08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord.
42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.381  EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   Educational assistance for Fire Department.  Effective
January 1, 2009, per the agreement between the city and Noblesville
Professional Firefighters International Association of Firefighters Local
4416, the parties agree to discontinue the college tuition reimbursement
policy for firefighters.



   (B)   Educational assistance for city sworn police officers. 
Educational assistance for sworn police officers is contingent upon the
availability of budgetary resources. Specific details are available in the
Human Resources Department.



(Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.39  VACATION SCHEDULES.



   (A)   Vacation schedules for Police Department.



      (1)   Sworn members of the Police Department hired after
January 1, 2019 will receive three vacation days after successfully
completing 90 days of full-time employment. Sworn officers may schedule and
take off the three days during their first year of employment; otherwise the
vacation hours will be forfeited. Sworn officers who terminate their
employment within the first year will not receive payment of unused vacation
hours. Sworn members of the Police Department hired prior to January 1, 2019
shall not be entitled to vacation time during their first year of employment.
After completion of their first year, their time shall be prorated until the
end of the calendar year. All vacation time thereafter shall begin and end
during the calendar year.



      (2)   Vacation for sworn officers employed after January 1,
1993, shall be in accordance with the following schedule:



         (a)   Second through fourth year: Ten vacation days.



         (b)   Fifth through ninth year: Fifteen vacation days.



         (c)   Tenth through nineteenth year: Twenty vacation
days.



         (d)   Twentieth year and thereafter: Twenty-five
vacation days.



      (3)   Vacation for sworn officers employed prior to January 1,
1993, shall be in accordance with the following schedule:



         (a)   Second through fourth year: Twelve vacation days.



         (b)   Fifth through ninth year: Eighteen vacation days.



         (c)   Tenth year: Nineteen vacation days.



         (d)   Eleventh year: Twenty vacation days.



         (e)   Twelfth year: Twenty-one vacation days.



         (f)   Thirteenth year: Twenty-two vacation days.



         (g)   Fourteenth year: Twenty-three vacation days.



         (h)   Fifteenth year: Twenty-four vacation days.



         (i)   Sixteenth year: Twenty-five vacation days.



         (j)   Seventeenth year: Twenty-six vacation days.



         (k)   Eighteenth year: Twenty-seven vacation days.



         (l)   Nineteenth year: Twenty-eight vacation days.



         (m)   Twentieth year and thereafter: Twenty-nine
vacation days.



      (4)   Vacation time may not accrue beyond the maximum of 25
days for any sworn officers of the Police Department hired after January 1,
1993. Vacation time for those officers hired prior to January 1, 1993, and
who have over 20 years of service in 1993 shall not accrue beyond what they
receive in the year 1993. Vacation time for those officers hired prior to
January 1, 1993, but who have less than 20 years of service, shall not be
accrued beyond the maximum of 29 days.



      (5)   Police may take their vacation time in two hour
increments and floating holiday time in 15 minute increments.



      (6)   Upon termination of employment, sworn officers are
entitled to payment of unused vacation time regardless of date hired. In
addition, employees who have completed a minimum of one year of full-time
service are entitled to payment of their accrued vacation time for the next
calendar year. Payment of accrued vacation time will be paid out based on the
number of vacation hours to be received the following calendar year. The
number of months worked during the current calendar year, including the month
termination occurred, will be multiplied by the hours described below.
Payment of vacation hours will not exceed total annual amount allotted.



         (a)   Vacation hours accrued each month for sworn
officers working an eight-hour day.



 

Vacation to be received next year
 
Amount accrued each month




Ten vacation days
 
6.75 hours


Twelve vacation days
 
8 hours


Fifteen vacation days
 
10 hours


Eighteen vacation days
 
12 hours


Nineteen vacation days
 
12.75 hours


Twenty vacation days
 
13.5 hours


Twenty-one vacation days
 
14 hours


Twenty-two vacation days
 
14.75 hours


Twenty-three vacation days
 
15.5 hours


Twenty-four vacation days
 
16 hours


Twenty-five vacation days
 
16.75 hours


Twenty-six vacation days
 
17.5 hours


Twenty-seven vacation days
 
18 hours


Twenty-eight vacation days
 
18.75 hours


Twenty-nine vacation days
 
19.5 hours




 



         (b)   Vacation hours accrued each month for sworn
officers working a ten-hour day.



 

Vacation to be received next year
 
Amount accrued each month




Ten vacation days
 
8.5 hours


Twelve vacation days
 
10 hours


Fifteen vacation days
 
12.5 hours


Eighteen vacation days
 
15 hours


Nineteen vacation days
 
16 hours


Twenty vacation days
 
16.75 hours


Twenty-one vacation days
 
17.5 hours


Twenty-two vacation days
 
18.5 hours


Twenty-three vacation days
 
19.25 hours


Twenty-four vacation days
 
20 hours


Twenty-five vacation days
 
21 hours


Twenty-six vacation days
 
21.75 hours


Twenty-seven vacation days
 
22.5 hours


Twenty-eight vacation days
 
23.5 hours


Twenty-nine vacation days
 
24.25 hours




 



         (c)   Vacation hours accrued each month for sworn
officers working a 12-hour day.



 

Vacation to be received next year
 
Amount accrued each month




Ten vacation days
 
10 hours


Twelve vacation days
 
12 hours


Fifteen vacation days
 
15 hours


Eighteen vacation days
 
18 hours


Nineteen vacation days
 
19 hours


Twenty vacation days
 
20 hours


Twenty-one vacation days
 
21 hours


Twenty-two vacation days
 
22 hours


Twenty-three vacation days
 
23 hours


Twenty-four vacation days
 
24 hours


Twenty-five vacation days
 
25 hours


Twenty-six vacation days
 
26 hours


Twenty-seven vacation days
 
27 hours


Twenty-eight vacation days
 
28 hours


Twenty-nine vacation days
 
29 hours




 



      (7)   Upon termination, sworn officers will receive payment of
vacation, float and compensatory time. Sworn officers will receive payment of
unused sick time based on years of full-time service with the city.  Please
refer to § 35.40, Sick Leave for Police and Fire Departments.



   (B)   Vacation schedule for Fire Department.



      (1)   Vacation eligibility for firefighters of the Fire
Department working a 56-hour week who have obtained the rank of Pipeman after
January 1, 2009, or who are employed after January 1, 2009, will be
determined by the following schedule according to their length of service on
January 1 of each calendar year:



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation


Completion of one year
 
Prorated to end of calendar year


2nd through 7th year
 
9 days


8th through 15th year
 
12 days


16th year plus
 
15 days



 



      (2)   Vacation eligibility for firefighters of the Fire
Department working a 56-hour week and those that have completed their
probationary period and have been promoted to the rank of Pipeman or higher
as of January 1, 2009, will be determined by the following schedule according
to their length of service on January 1 of each calendar year:



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation


Completion of 1 year
 
Prorated to end of calendar year


2nd, 3rd, and 4th year
 
9 days


5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th years
 
12 days


10th through 19th years
 
15 days


20th year plus
 
18 days



 



      (3)   Vacation eligibility for firefighters of the Fire
Department working a 56-hour week and those employed prior to January 1,
1993, will be determined by the following schedule according to their length
of service on January 1 of each calendar year:



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation


2nd through 9th year
 
14 days


10th through 14th year
 
15 days


15th year and thereafter
 
18 days



 



      (4)   Vacation eligibility for firefighters of the Fire
Department working a 40-hour week and those employed prior and after January
1, 1993, will be determined by the following schedule according to their
length of service on January 1 of each calendar year:



 

Length of Service
 
Vacation


Completion of 1 year
 
Prorated to end of calendar year


2nd, 3rd and 4th years
 
2 weeks after 1 year


5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th years
 
3 weeks


10th through 19th years
 
4 weeks


20 years plus
 
5 weeks



 



      (5)   In the event of conflicting schedules or items not
covered, the Fire Chief shall make a reasonable ruling in regard to such
conflict.



      (6)   Vacation and floating holiday time may be taken as
described: 40-hour non-suppression employee may take vacation or floating
holiday time in 2-hour increments. Fifty-six-hour suppression employees may
take vacation or floating holiday time in 24 or 12-hour increments or as
otherwise stated in the Meet and Confer Agreement between the City of
Noblesville and the members of the Fire Department.



      (7)   One 24-hour float holiday or 24-hour vacation for
56-hour suppression employees may be taken in increments of 2, 4, 6, 8, 12,
or 24 hours at the discretion of the Battalion Chief. Leave under this
section may not be taken if it results in overtime for the Department.



      (8)   Firefighters may not use their vacation hours while on
disciplinary suspension.



      (9)   Upon termination of employment, firefighters are
entitled to payment of unused vacation time regardless of date hired. In
addition, employees who have completed a minimum of one year of full-time
service are entitled to payment of their accrued vacation time for the next
calendar year. Payment of accrued vacation time will be paid out based on the
number of vacation hours to be received the following calendar year. The
number of months worked during the current calendar year, including the month
termination occurred, will be multiplied by the hours described below.
Payment of vacation hours will not exceed total annual amount allotted.



         (a)   Vacation hours accrued each month for firefighters
working a 56-hour week.



 

Vacation to be received next year
 
Amount accrued each month


Nine days
 
18 hours


Eleven days
 
22 hours


Twelve days
 
24 hours


Fifteen days
 
30 hours


Eighteen days
 
36 hours



 



         (b)   Vacation hours accrued each month for firefighters
working a 40-hour week.



 

Vacation to be received next year
 
Amount accrued each month


Two weeks
 
6.75 hours


Three weeks
 
10 hours


Four weeks
 
13.5 hours


Five weeks
 
16.75 hours



 



      (10)   Upon termination, firefighters will receive payment of
vacation and float time. Firefighters will receive payment of unused sick
time based on years of full-time service with the city. Please refer to §
35.40, Sick Leave for Police and Fire Departments.



      (11)   As of their date of hire, firefighter recruits will be
given three days of vacation and will have one year from the date of hire to
use the vacation days. The three days of vacation may be used while in a
recruit-school setting, with approval of Fire Chief or his or her designated
personnel. Upon completing recruit school, vacation days are converted to
vacation time equivalent to that of a 56-hour week. For example, a recruit
with a remaining 16 hours (two days) of floating holiday time would have his
or her time converted to 48 hours (two days) of floating holiday time.



      (12)   At the Fire Chief’s discretion, firefighters may
voluntarily sell back vacation time and floating holidays at the
firefighters’ regular rate of pay.  See current, effective Meet and Confer
Agreement between the City of Noblesville and the members of the Fire
Department.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
3-1-97, passed 1-10-97; Am. Ord. 21-7-99, passed 7-26-99; Am. Ord. 49-11-01,
passed 11-27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord. 51-11-02,
passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10- 06,
passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed
12-16-07; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed
12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14;
Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am.
Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.40  SICK LEAVE FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   Sick leave for Police Department.



      (1)   Accrual. Effective September 1, 2005, full-time sworn
employees shall accrue sick leave hours at the rate of seven hours per month,
starting the last day of the first full month of employment. Earned sick
leave time shall be accumulated from year to year, not to exceed 960 hours
total. Part-time employees shall not accrue sick leave.



      (2)   Doctor’s statement required. When an employee is
returning to work from a sick leave of three consecutive days or more, the
employee shall have a statement from his or her physician releasing them to
return to work.



      (3)   Illness longer than accrued time.  In case of illness
or accident where an employee is off for more than his or her accrued sick
time, and he or she has used all available other time off (vacation,
compensation time, etc.), it shall be the employee’s responsibility to
apply to the Local Pension Board for disability leave. When disability leave
is applied for, it shall be done in accordance with the state law governing
policy pensions. If disability leave is not applied for or not granted, the
employee’s salary shall be discontinued until he or she can return to work.



         (a)   Police officers seriously injured in the line of
duty status shall be paid for 60 work days from the time of injury at normal
rate of pay, with no penalty to sick time, vacation time, comp time, or
holiday pay. To qualify for serious body injury pay in an on-duty status, the
Chief of Police and/or designee must submit complete reports to the Board of
Works for approval. After the 60- day period, must revert back to division
(A)(3). Any PERF Disability payments received during the 60-work-day period,
while being paid by the city, shall be returned to the city.



         (b)   Any extensive illness or injury that is not
job-related, where a police officer that was employed after January 1, 1993,
is unable to perform his or her duties for a period longer than 120
consecutive days, shall be referred to the Police Pension Board and the Board
of Public Works and Safety for a final disposition.  The city will assume
its share of the cost for the police officer insurance premiums for a period
of three months while such police officer is on sick leave. After such period
of time, the city shall not be liable for the insurance premiums unless
extended by the appropriate board. Such leave of absence shall not affect the
police officer’s employment seniority status.  Such police officer shall
receive his or her regular rate of pay until otherwise determined by the
Pension Board and/or the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (4)   Use of sick leave. Sick leave shall only be used for
bona fide illness. During the regular working hours of the employee, he or
she shall remain at home, or at some other location approved by his or her
supervisor. Visits to a physician, a pharmacy or some other type of care
facility are approved during these hours. If a physician orders some other
type of rest or recuperation, the employee must notify his or her supervisor.
The Chief of Police and/or designee may approve this time if an emergency
exists in his or her immediate family (mother, father, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, wife, husband, children, step-children).



      (5)   (a)   If an employee left his or her employment with
the city prior to January 1, 2007, after serving at least 365 days of
full-time employment, is then rehired within one year of separation from
employment, and then completes an additional 365 days of full-time
employment, he or she will receive prior service credit for years worked as a
full-time employee, and shall be credited with the balance of his or her
prior sick leave hours.



         (b)   Full-time employees hired prior to January 1,
2018, are entitled to payment of their unused sick time hours not to exceed a
set maximum amount of hours. The set maximum amount of hours is established
per employee. The maximum amount of sick time hours is determined and set at
the highest balance of sick time hours the employee has accrued during the
2018 calendar year. Employees will be provided a letter of acknowledgment
stating their set maximum amount of sick time hours. Once acknowledged and
signed by the employee, the letter will remain in the employee’s personnel
file.



         (c)   The amount of hours accrued at the time of
termination, not to exceed the set maximum amount of sick time hours per
individual, will then be paid based on their years of full-time service with
the city. If an employee leaves his or her employment with the city on or
after January 1, 2007, after serving at least 365 days of full-time
employment, is then rehired within one year of separation from employment,
and then completes an additional 365 days of full-time employment, he or she
will receive prior service credit for years worked as a full-time employee.
However, the rehired employee will not receive sick time hours left unpaid to
him or her at the time of his or her termination date. The rehired employee
will start their re-employment with the city with a zero sick time balance.



         (d)   Payment of accrued sick time is as follows:



 

Years of Full-time Service
 
Percentage of Sick Time Payout


5 Years
 
30%


10 Years
 
50%


15 Years
 
75%


20 Years
 
100%



 



         (e)   Payment will be calculated at the employee’s
current base rate, plus longevity rate, plus education incentive pay rate,
and may be included in the employee’s last regular earnings paycheck, if
possible, or in a separate check. Full-time employees hired or rehired on or
after January 1, 2018, are not entitled to payment of their unused sick time
hours.



   (B)   Sick leave for Fire Department. The city’s policies for sick
leave and sick accrual are set out in the current, effective Meet and Confer
agreement between the City of Noblesville and the members of the Noblesville
Fire Department.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15- 09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord.
08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord.
42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.41  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   (A)   City sworn police officers and firefighters are entitled to
paid bereavement leave as of their date of hire. An employee wishing to take
time off for the death of a family member should notify the department head
immediately.



   (B)   Employees are eligible for leave with pay for attending the
funeral of a relative or other member of the household. Such leave may be
granted upon the death of:



      (1)   A spouse;



      (2)   A father, mother, son, step-son, daughter,
step-daughter, brother, half-brother, step-brother, sister,  half-sister,
step-sister, grandparent, grandchildren, step-grandchildren, aunt, uncle or
the spouse of any of these;



      (3)   Persons listed in division (B)(2) above that are members
of the employee’s spouse’s family;



      (4)   A person living in the same household with the employee.



   (C)   Exceptions may be granted at the discretion of the department
head for other deaths.



   (D)   For sworn police officers and firefighters working a 40-hour
week, bereavement leave should not exceed three regularly scheduled working
days, and the days must be in conjunction with the date of the death or the
funeral.  Five regularly scheduled working days in conjunction with the date
of death or the funeral may be granted to the employee if the funeral site is
over 250 miles from Noblesville.



   (E)   For firefighters working a 56-hour week, bereavement leave
should not exceed two regularly scheduled 24-hour shifts, and the shifts must
be in conjunction with the date of the death or the funeral.  Two regularly
scheduled 24-hour shifts in conjunction with the date of death or the funeral
may be granted to the employee if the funeral site is over 250 miles from
Noblesville.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15- 09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord.
08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord.
42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.42  JURY DUTY LEAVE FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   The city encourages employees to fulfill their civic
responsibilities by serving jury duty when summoned. The pay of any employee
who has received a subpoena for jury duty or as a witness will continue at
the regular rate. All jury duty pay received by the employee shall be
returned to the city to be credited against regular salary.  Payment by the
court to the employee for travel expense at the prevailing rate may be
retained by the employee.



   (B)   Employees must show the jury duty summons to the department
head or designated supervisor as soon as possible so the city may make
arrangements to accommodate the employee’s absence. The employee is
expected to report for work whenever the court schedule permits. Either the
city or the employee may request an excuse from jury duty if, in the
employer’s judgment, the employee’s absence would create serious
operational difficulties.



   (C)   If an employee is released from jury duty with more than half
of his or her regularly scheduled shift remaining, the employee is expected
to report to work.



   (D)   The city will continue to provide and accrue all regular
benefits for the full term of the jury duty absence. Such time spent on jury
duty shall be counted as hours worked in calculating overtime.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am.  Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16- 07; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.43  REINSTATEMENT OF EMPLOYEE.



   The Noblesville Common Council hereby authorizes the department head,
with the approval of the appropriate Merit Commission and Board of Works, to
reinstate said benefits to any police or fireman who, after serving at least
365 days of full-time employment, resigns from the department, is then
rehired within one year of separation from employment, and completes an
additional 365 days of full-time employment. All of which is subject to
aforementioned authority with completion of requirements under conditional
offer of employment.



(Ord.  51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am.
Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10- 24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.44  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   Holidays for sworn police officers. 



      (1)   Police officers who work on a city-recognized holiday
will be compensated at the rate of one and one-half times their regular
compensation rate.



      (2)   Police officers shall not be compensated for a
city-recognized holiday if that holiday falls on a day upon which they are
otherwise not scheduled to work.



      (3)   Police officers who are scheduled to work on a
city-recognized holiday and take an approved day off from scheduled work,
will receive a paid holiday at their regular compensation rate and for the
number of hours scheduled to work. If at any time during the approved holiday
off the police officer is called into work, he or she will receive
ompensation at the rate of one and one-half times his or her regular
compensation rate. The paid holiday hours will not be reduced by hours worked
from being called in. The holiday hours will be paid in addition to the hours
worked during the call-in.



      (4)   For purposes of sworn officers assigned to the Patrol
Division within the Police Department, holiday hours shall be defined as a
24-hour period commencing at the start of the day shift that begins on the
actual holiday and terminates 24 hours later.  For sworn officers not
assigned to the Patrol Division, holiday hours shall be midnight to midnight
on the actual holiday.  By way of example, because the Police Department
currently starts its Patrol Division day shift at 5:00 a.m., holiday hours
for the Patrol Division would begin at 5:00 a.m. on the actual holiday and
end at 5:00 a.m. the next day.  Because the Police Department needs the
flexibility to schedule shifts as determined by the Police Chief, the 5:00
a.m. start date is not specifically listed herein and should be determined by
the actual practice and procedure currently established for the department by
the Police Chief.



   (B)   Holidays for firefighters.  A full-time firefighter working a
56-hour week who is scheduled to work, or is called to work during any part
of a holiday, shall be paid an additional $10 per hour for those hours worked
during the holiday.



      (1)   In any 28-day pay period in which a full-time
firefighter receives holiday pay shall only be paid overtime when required by
Section 207(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act found at 29 U.S.C. Section
207(k). Overtime shall be paid at the time and a half rate as defined in the
Fair Labor Standards Act. The $10 per hour holiday pay shall not be used to
calculate time and a half during that pay period.



      (2)   Effective December 1, 2009, a full-time firefighter
working a 40-hour week called to work during any part of a holiday shall be
paid at two times his or her normal rate of pay.



      (3)   In addition to vacation days, sick days and other days
provided by the policies for payment of police and firefighters for the city,
each firefighter working a 56-hour week shall receive an additional 72 hours
of floating holiday time to be used the same as vacation days in each
calendar year. As of their date of hire, firefighter recruits working a
40-hour week shall receive 24 hours of floating holiday time to be used the
same as vacation days.  Once a recruit is placed on a 24-hour shift, his or
her remaining floating holiday time will be converted to the time given to a
firefighter working a 56- hour week.  (For example, a recruit with a
remaining 16 hours (two days) of floating holiday time would have his or her
time converted to 48 hours (two days) of floating holiday time.)  Effective
January 1, 2009, one 24-hour float holiday or 24-hour vacation for 56-hour
suppression employees may be taken in increments of 2, 4, 6, 8,  12, or 24
hours at the discretion of the Battalion Chief.  Leave under this section
may not be taken if it results in overtime for the Department.



      (4)   The Fire Chief will have the option of “buying back”
holidays at the end of the year, in the event that staffing requirements
cannot be met. Such “buy back” shall be paid at the full-time
firefighter’s regular rate of pay.



      (5)   In the event a firefighter is scheduled to work during a
holiday, but is permitted, as part of a general staff reduction, to be off
work for all or part of the holiday, the firefighter shall have deducted from
his or her holiday time, and/or vacation time, the hours that he or she was
regularly scheduled, but did not work on the holiday, and the firefighter
shall be paid his or her regular rate of pay for the holiday on which he or
she was scheduled.



      (6)   The Board of Works will define designated “holidays”
on an annual basis.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
21-7-99, passed 7-26-99; Am. Ord. 4-1-00, passed 1-24-00; Am. Ord. 49-11-01,
passed 11-27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord. 51-11-02,
passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed
10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed
12-16-07; Am. Ord. 19-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed
11-25-08; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11;
Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am.
Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.441  HOURS WORKED COMPENSATION FOR POLICE.



   (A)   In a 14-day pay period when hours worked are greater than 80
but less than 86. A sworn officer that has worked more than 80 but less than
86 hours in a 14-day pay period may be compensated either with pay at the
base hourly pay rate or with an equivalent amount of time off.



   (B)   In a 14-day period when hours worked are in excess of 86. A
sworn officer that has worked more than 86 hours in a 14-day pay period shall
be compensated at the base hourly pay rate for hours worked up to 86 hours.
For the hours in excess of 86, the employee may elect to be paid either at
the officer's overtime hourly pay rate or in an equivalent amount of
compensatory time off as determined by the officer's annual compensatory
time-off agreement.



   (C)   Computation of hours worked. For the purpose of calculating
the number of hours worked in a pay period, paid benefit time off, which
includes vacation leave, floating holiday, jury duty, bereavement, holiday
hours, worker's compensation time and sick leave, shall not be deemed to be
included as hours worked in that pay period. See FLSA § 207(e)(2).



(Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord.
42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.45  COURT TIME FOR POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   A police officer or firefighter who is required to be in court during
his or her off-duty time shall receive either pay or compensation time off
for each court appearance hour with a two-hour minimum.  This pertains only
to court appearances related to the activities of the Police or Fire
Department.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11- 27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15,
passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed 10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed
6-11-19)



§ 35.46  CLOTHING ALLOWANCE FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   Firefighters shall be paid $600 per year after the first full year of
employment for clothing allowance.  This payment shall be administered by
approved Board of Works Policy.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord.
49-11-01, passed 11-27-01; Am. Ord. 47-10-02, passed 10-29-02; Am. Ord.
51-11-02, passed 11-26-02; Am. Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 12-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord.
70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord. 57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord.
9-2-11, passed 2-8-11)



§ 35.47  FIRE DEPARTMENT HEADQUARTER CAPTAIN COMPENSATION.



   Any captain or officer in charge (in the absence of the captain) at
Fire Station 1 shall be considered the Headquarter Captain and shall be
compensated as follows:



   (A)   Assuming the responsibilities as a Headquarter Captain for a
minimum of 12 shifts:  $50;



   (B)   Assuming the responsibilities as a Headquarter Captain for a
minimum of 30 shifts:  $100;



   (C)   Assuming the responsibilities as Headquarter Captain for a
minimum of 45 shifts:  $200;



   (D)   Assuming the responsibilities as Headquarter Captain for a
minimum of 90 shifts:  $250;



   (E)   All additional compensation due under this provision shall be
paid the first pay in January.  The Headquarter Captain's compensation shall
be re-evaluated annually in accordance with budgetary requirements.



(Ord. 11-3-93, passed 3-22-93; Am. Ord. 57-12-95, passed 12-12-95)



§ 35.48  FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE.



   The city’s policies regarding the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
of 1993, and its subsequent amendments, and additional leave are set forth in
and controlled by the city’s Civilian Employee Personnel Policy Handbook.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
19-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.49  WORKER’S COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The city provides a comprehensive worker’s compensation
insurance program at no cost to employees. This program covers any injury or
illness sustained in the course of employment that requires medical,
surgical, or hospital treatment. Subject to applicable legal requirements,
worker’s compensation insurance provides benefits after a short waiting
period. The city shall pay the employee’s regular salary for the first five
work days when such employee is absent due to a worker’s compensation
injury.  If absent for six or more work days, a portion of the regular
salary shall be provided via worker’s compensation insurance. Insurance
reimbursement is made directly to the employee for the first five work days
if an employee is absent for 21 work days.  Employees shall reimburse the
city the full amount of any worker’s compensation received for the first
five work days. While on worker’s compensation disability, employee
benefits shall accrue.



   (B)   An employee using worker’s compensation time to attend an
initial/follow-up appointment will be paid for this time at normal rate of
pay. Worker’s compensation time is not considered as hours worked for
purposes of calculating overtime compensation. The employee will be paid for
this time in the form of monetary compensation. These hours may not be banked
as compensatory time.



   (C)   It is the responsibility of the employee to report a
work-related injury or illness IMMEDIATELY to his or her direct supervisor,
complete the proper paperwork in a timely manner, and request that an
incident report be completed and submitted to the city’s worker’s
compensation carrier. No matter how minor an on-the-job injury or illness may
appear, it is important that it be reported immediately. This will enable an
eligible employee to qualify for coverage as quickly as possible.



   (D)   Neither the city nor the insurance carrier will be liable for
the payment of worker’s compensation benefits for off-duty injuries or
injuries that occur during an employee’s voluntary participation in any
off-duty recreational, social or athletic activity sponsored by the city.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.50  MILITARY LEAVE.



   The city’s policies regarding military leave and Indiana military
family leave are set forth in and controlled by the city’s Civilian
Employee Personnel Policy Handbook.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
19-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.51  BENEFITS CONTINUATION (COBRA).



   The city’s policies regarding benefit continuation (COBRA) are set
forth in and controlled by the city’s Civilian Employee Personnel Policy
Handbook.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.52  DEFERRED COMPENSATION.



   The city provides for employees to voluntarily participate in a
deferred compensation program. Specific details are available in the Human
Resources office.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.53  EMPLOYEE INSURANCE.



   The city offers life, dental, optical, and medical insurance programs
for employees in full-time positions. Each employee shall receive insurance
handbooks describing all benefits upon completion of his or her orientation
interview. Group insurance benefits will continue while an employee is on
disability leave; however, when in a non-pay status, employees will be
responsible for the timely payment of those insurance premiums that are
normally deducted from gross pay. Specific details regarding eligibility and
coverage are available in the Human Resources office.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 35.54  RETIRED EMPLOYEES/ELECTED OFFICIALS INSURANCE.



   The city’s policies regarding retired employees/elected officials
insurance are set forth in and controlled by City Ordinance 10-02-14 and its
subsequent amendments.



(Ord. 57-08-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 87-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord.
12-2-07, passed 2-16- 07; Am. Ord. 70-12-07, passed 12-16-07; Am. Ord.
19-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 58-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
57-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 9-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 08-01-14,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 11-02-15, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 42-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 25-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



VOLUNTEER RESERVE POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 35.60  CREATED.



   There is hereby created the Noblesville Volunteer Reserve Police
Department.



(Ord. 4-2-95, passed 3-16-95)



§ 35.61  SUPERVISION.



   The Volunteer Reserve Police Department shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Coordinator of the Volunteer Reserve Police Program who
shall be employed by appointment of the Mayor.



(Ord. 4-2-95, passed 3-16-95)



§ 35.62  ACTIVITIES.



   The Volunteer Reserve Police Department shall conduct such activities
as may be appropriate under the laws of the state and under the general
direction and supervision of the Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police
acting in coordination with the Coordinator of the Volunteer Reserve Police
Department shall determine the activities which, according to state law and
the policies and ordinances of the city, are appropriate and necessary to the
implementation of the objectives of the Department.



(Ord. 4-2-95, passed 3-16-95)



CHAPTER 36:  EMPLOYMENT POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   36.01   Holidays and holiday pay



   36.02   Sick leave



   36.03   Vacations



   36.04   Nepotism policy



   36.05   Conflict of interest



   36.06   Public employees' retirement fund (PERF)



   36.07   (Reserved)



   36.08   "125" plan



   36.09   Reimbursement to employees for use of personal automobiles



   36.10   Health and hospitalization premium for employees in reserve
forces



   36.11   Retiree insurance



   36.12   Personnel Policy handbook for civil employees



   36.13   Reimbursement of meal expenses for city employees




Family and Medical Leave Policy




   36.20   Title



   36.21   Duration of leave; application of policy



   36.22   Definitions



   36.23   Advance notice of leave



   36.24   Use of available compensatory time



   36.25   Intermittent leave



   36.26   Medical certification



   36.27   Insurance coverage



   36.28   Restoration to job or equivalent



   36.29   Outside employment prohibited



   36.30   Fitness for duty report



   36.31   Misrepresentation of leave or false statements



   36.32   Combined total leave of employed husband and wife limited



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY.



   Holidays and holiday pay for employees are set forth in the City of
Noblesville Civilian Employee Personnel Policy Handbook and are thenceforth
incorporated herein by reference.



(Ord. 45-10-18, passed 10-23-18)



§ 36.02  SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Accrual.  Full-time employees shall accrue sick leave hours
at the rate of six and three-quarters hours per month worked commencing with
the month following the first full month of employment.  Part-time,
temporary or seasonal employees shall not accrue sick leave.  Earned sick
leave days or time shall be accumulated from year to year, commencing with
the month of January, 1991, not to exceed 120 working days.  In case of
extended hospitalization and convalescence due to illness, the department
head involved or the appropriate board may exercise discretion in extending
sick leaves.



   (B)   Maximum accumulation and conversion.  Full-time employees may
accrue up to, but not to exceed, 120 sick days.



   (C)   Return to work following extended illness.  Absence from work
due to illness or accident of 60 calendar days or more duration is termed
"extended illness."  An employee absent from work due to illness or accident
will be guaranteed the right to return to the same job, provided he/she
returns to work within 120 calendar days from the last day worked.  Whenever
an employee is absent from work due to illness or accident and does not
return to work within 120 calendar days, the city will attempt to place
him/her in the same or similar job as soon as possible.  It is the
employee's responsibility to keep his/her supervisor informed of his/her
progress if he/she is absent from work due to illness or accident.  Whenever
an employee is returning from an extended illness he/she will be required to
receive written clearance from his/her physician and be accepted by the
department head.  It is necessary for all employees who have been absent an
extended period to follow this procedure so that their employment status may
be activated.



   (D)   In cases of sickness or accident where an employee is absent
for more than his/her accrued sick time, a sick leave of absence (non-paid)
in excess of the 120 days in division (C) above from the last date accrued
for sick benefits for up to six months may be granted and entered on the
employee's records, with a doctor's statement, at which time requests will be
subject to review.  The city will assume payment for the employee's
insurance premium for three months while on such sick leave.  After this
time, the city shall not be liable for the premium.  Such sick leave of
absence will not affect the employee's seniority job status.



   (E)   Malingering.  In cases of malingering, the supervisor may
designate such leave vacation, leave without pay, or, as grounds for
dismissal.  Sick leave days are not to be used as vacation time nor as
holiday extension.  They are for legitimate illness only.  Any abuse of the
use of sick leave or excessive absenteeism will result in dismissal or other
disciplinary action as deemed necessary by the department head or appropriate
board.  After being absent the first full day, a doctor's statement may be
required by the department head.  After being absent three full days, a
doctor's statement shall be required by the department head.  Sick leave pay
shall only be based upon bona fide illness.  During the regular working
hours of the employee, he/she shall remain at home, or at some other location
approved by their supervisor.  Visits to physician, pharmacy or some other
type of care facility are approved during these hours.  If a physician
orders some other type of rest or recuperation, the employee must notify
his/her supervisor.



   (F)   Accrued sick days status.  Employees will not be paid for
accumulated sick days upon termination, resignation, leave of absence or
retirement.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92)



§ 36.03  VACATIONS.



   (A)   Accrual.  Vacations for regular full-time employees of both
civil city and utility employees will be determined by the following schedule
according to their length of service.  The first calendar year will be
prorated at the rate of 6.75 hours per month.  Thereafter, vacation will be
given on January 1 of each calendar year as described below:



 

LENGTH OF SERVICE
 
VACATION


After completing 1 year
 
Prorated to end of calendar year


2nd, 3rd, 4th years
 
Two weeks (after one year)


5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th years
 
Three weeks


10th through 20th years
 
Four weeks


Over 20 years
 
Five weeks



 



   (B)   Vacations dates.  An employee may request the dates of
his/her individual vacation by April 1, of each year, but the final right to
allocate vacation still rests with the department involved in order to
preserve efficiency and provide the necessary service.  Employees with the
longest service shall have preference when arranging vacation.



   (C)   When vacation does not accrue.  No vacation shall accrue
while an employee is on an unpaid leave of absence.  No temporary employee
or part-time employee is eligible to accrue vacation.  Vacations may not be
taken in advance of having earned them and only current employment time shall
be used in computing vacation time.



   (D)   Maximum accrual.  Vacation time each year may not be accrued
beyond the maximum provided in the preceding table.  Vacations may not be
carried over from year to year.



   (E)   Holidays occurring during vacations.  If a holiday or
holidays occur during the period of time when an employee is on an authorized
vacation, the employee shall receive a make-up day or days of vacation.



   (F)   Terminations.  Any employee covered by this policy whose
employment with the city is terminated shall receive payment for the vacation
to which he/she is entitled, less any time off during the current year.



   (G)   Vacation time will only be taken in either four or eight hour
increments.



   (H)   Special cases and emergency situations not covered in this
section will be referred by the Department Head and Employee to the Board of
Works for deliberation.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92)



§ 36.04  NEPOTISM POLICY.



   (A)   General provisions.  It is contrary to the policy of the city
that any full-time, part-time or temporary employee to be employed in or
transferred  to  a position  which  establishes  supervisor/employee
relationship between two individuals who are related by blood or marriage. 
In the event of marriage between employees of the city, creating a
relationship which violates this policy, one of the persons affected must
transfer or in the case of refusal to transfer be terminated from that
location by the end of the fiscal year or within six months from the date the
relationship was established, whichever is a greater period, to a location
compatible with policy provisions.  The degrees of relationship included in
the above restrictions are as follows:



      (1)   By blood:  Parent; child; grandparent; grandchild;
brother; sister; uncle; aunt; nephew; niece; first cousin.



      (2)   By marriage:  Husband; wife; stepparent; stepchild;
father-in-law; mother-in-law; sister-in-law; half-sister; half-brother;
brother-in-law; uncle; aunt; nephew; niece; daughter-in-law; son-in-law or
step-grandchild.



   (B)  Notification of potential nepotism.  The Department shall bring
to the attention of the Department Head or governing body, before appointment
or transfer instances in which two members of the same unit are related as
mentioned above, and will demonstrate that immediate supervision is not
involved.  The governing body has determined nepotism shall not exist
anywhere within the chain of command.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92)



§ 36.05  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   (A)   A public servant who knowingly or intentionally has a
pecuniary interest in or derives a profit from a contract or purchase
connected with an action by the governmental entity served by the public
servant has a conflict of interest subject to disclosure.  A public servant
has a pecuniary interest in a contract or purchase if the contract or
purchase will result or is intended to result in an ascertainable increase in
the income or net worth of the public servant or a dependent of the public
servant.  “DEPENDENT” means any of the following:  the spouse of a
public servant; a child, stepchild, or adoptee (as defined in I.C. 31-3-4-1)
of a public servant who is unemancipated and less than 18 years of age; and
any individual more than one-half of whose support is provided during a year
by the public servant.  If an employee has a conflict of interest, he or she
shall disclose their conflict of interest on the prescribed form in the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office immediately.



   (B)   The following regulations apply to all public officials and
employees of the city.



      (1)   Officers or employees of the city shall neither solicit
nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from
consultants, potential consultants, or parties to subagreements, unless in
accordance with this division.



      (2)   The aforementioned prohibition does not include
gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value under $300 per day. Any
financial interest under $300 per day shall be considered not substantial in
accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations.



      (3)   This division conforms to the standards set forth in the
Code of Federal Regulations and by the Indiana Department of Transportation.



      (4)   A “CONSULTANT” is defined as an individual or firm
providing or seeking to provide engineering or design-related services as a
party, recipient or subrecipient to a contract with the city.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92; Am. Ord.
56-11-17, passed 11-21-17)



§ 36.06  PUBLIC EMPLOYEE'S RETIREMENT FUND (PERF).



   (A)     All employees and duly elected and appointed officials of
the city will be covered by a retirement program established and maintained
by the state except:



      (1)     Per Resolution No. 109-76, Sec. iii, all duly
appointed officials of the Board of Park Commissioners, Planning Commission,
Board of Zoning Appeals and Board of Public Works and Safety and
Redevelopment Authority.



      (2)     Per Indiana Code 5-10.3-7-2, Sec. 2, uniformed police
and firemen.



      (3)     Employees not considered full-time.  (Positions
requiring 2,080 or more hours per year are full-time.)



   (B)     The Public Employee's Retirement Fund (PERF) pays benefits
to cover employees or their survivor upon retirement, death, and in certain
cases of serious illness or injury.  An employee becomes eligible for
participation in PERF as follows:



      (1)     A new hire shall begin participation immediately.



   (C)   Full particulars regarding PERF are contained in a PERF
employee handbook given to each employee and additional questions should be
directed to the Payroll Department in the Clerk-Treasurer's office.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92; Am. Res.
RC-12-99, passed 9-27-99; Am. Res. RC-06-04, passed 2-10-04; Am. Res.
RC-13-04, passed 3-23-04; Am. Res. RC-39-04, passed 10-12-04)



§ 36.07  (RESERVED).



§ 36.08  "125" PLAN.



   Any employee of the city may voluntarily elect to participate in a
"125" Plan offered by the city.  Additional information may be obtained from
the Clerk-Treasurer's office.



(Ord. 46-7-90, passed 8-21-90; Am. Ord. 53-12-92, passed 12-28-92)



§ 36.09  REIMBURSEMENT TO EMPLOYEES FOR USE OF PERSONAL AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   When conducting office city business, the use of city vehicles
is the preferred means of transportation and should be adhered to whenever
possible. If a city vehicle is available and an employee chooses to use
personal transportation, mileage reimbursement will not be paid.



   (B)   Under certain circumstances, an employee of the City of
Noblesville may find it necessary to operate a personal vehicle for official
city business.



   (C)   To qualify for reimbursement, the use of a personal vehicle
for official city business must be approved by the Department Director. If
the employee requesting reimbursement is a Department Director, the use of a
personal vehicle for official city business must be approved by the Mayor or
Deputy Mayor.



   (D)   The authorized use of a personal vehicle shall be reimbursed
at the prevailing Standard Mileage Rate set by the Internal Revenue Service,
unless otherwise established under Section E.



   (E)   For the city administration to set a mileage reimbursement
rate at an amount different than established in Section D, the Controller
must at a regular meeting of the Board of Public Works and Safety, present an
alternate mileage reimbursement rate and policy for review and approval. Any
alternate mileage reimbursement rate and policy adopted under this section
expires at the end of the calendar year in which it is adopted.



(Ord. 48-11-18, passed 11-27-18)



§ 36.10  HEALTH AND HOSPITALIZATION PREMIUM FOR EMPLOYEES IN RESERVE FORCES.



   In the event any employee of the city currently serving in the reserve
forces of the United States is called to active duty, the city portion of the
health and hospitalization premium being paid for said employee shall
continue to be paid on the employee's behalf during the period that the
employee is on active duty with the United States Military.



(Ord. 07-02-91, passed 2-25-91)



§ 36.11  RETIREE INSURANCE.



   (A)   Retiree insurance.



      (1)   (a)   The city shall contribute 80% of the monthly
premium for employees and elected officials hired prior to January 1, 2018. 
The city shall contribute 50% of the monthly premium for employees and
elected officials hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2018.  The city's
premium contribution will be applied towards a family, employee plus one, or
single plan, for retirees who have 20 years of active full-time service (not
necessarily consecutive) with the city, or appointed employees and elected
officials who have served at least two four-year terms (not necessarily
consecutive), and/or a total of eight years until the eligible participant is
65 years of age.  Once an employee or elected official has met the above
criteria, he or she will be considered eligible to continue his or her
coverage under the city’s Health Insurance Plan.  His or her eligibility
will not change in the event of a position/job change.



         (b)   When the eligible participant becomes 65 years of
age, his or her covered spouse, if already on the plan, will be eligible to
continue his or her coverage through the city’s Health Insurance Plan until
the covered spouse becomes Medicare eligible.  In addition, covered
dependents, already on the plan, will be eligible to continue their coverage
through the city’s Health Insurance Plan until they cease to be considered
a dependent as outlined in the city’s Health Insurance Benefit Plan. 
Thereafter, the covered spouse and/or dependents on the plan would be offered
continued health coverage under COBRA, at no cost to the city.



         (c)   Appointed employees refer to individuals holding
the following job titles:



            1.   Deputy Mayor;



            2.   Administrative Manager - Mayor’s Office;



            3.   Communications Manager;



            4.   Human Resources Director;



            5.   Deputy Clerk;



            6.   Court Administrator;



            7.   Planning & Development Director;



            8.   Economic Development Director;



            9.   Controller;



            10.   City Engineer;



            11.   Fire Chief;



            12.   Police Chief;



            13.   IT Director;



            14.   Wastewater Utility Director;



            15.   Park & Recreation Director;



            16.   Street Commissioner; or



            17.   Board of Public Works Member.



      (2)   (a)   Regardless of hire date, the city will
contribute up to 80% of the family premium for a city employee or elected
official who is totally disabled or killed in the performance of his or her
assigned duties. The employee or elected official must meet Police and Fire
Pension Plans/Civilian PERF disability requirements in order to qualify for
the disability benefit. This coverage must be maintained continuously by the
employee or elected official, or his or her dependents, from the date of his
or her death or disability.



         (b)   In the event an employee or elected official is
killed in the performance of his or her assigned duties, his or her spouse,
if already on the plan, may continue his or her benefits until Medicare
eligible. Dependents of the employee or elected official killed in the
performance of his or her assigned duties may continue their coverage, if
already on the plan, until they cease to be considered dependents as outlined
in the city’s Health Insurance Summary Plan Description.



      (3)   In the event an eligible employee or elected official
dies and/or is killed after the completion of the requirements described in
division (A)(1) above, his or her spouse, if already on the plan, may
continue his or her benefits until Medicare eligible. Dependents of the
eligible employee or elected official who dies and/or is killed may continue
their coverage, if already on the plan, until they cease to be considered
dependents as outlined in the city’s Health Insurance Summary Plan
Description.



      (4)   The persons described in division (A)(1), (2) and (3)
above may continue vision and dental coverage, if already on the plan, in
addition to the medical insurance herein, by paying 20% of the cost of the
vision and dental benefit. The vision and dental coverage may be continued
after the covered participant and/or spouse reaches 65 years of age until
death. However, the vision and dental coverage may not be continued for
covered dependents on the plan beyond the period of time they are considered
dependents as outlined in the city’s Health Insurance Benefit Plan.



      (5)   Employees and elected officials, after the completion of
the eligibility requirements as described in division (A)(1) above, may
continue their life insurance coverage by paying 100% of the cost of the life
insurance benefit. The life insurance coverage may be continued after the
covered participant reaches 65 years of age until death.



      (6)   Only employees and elected officials and their eligible
dependents enrolled in the city’s medical, vision and/or dental insurance
package at the time of their retirement, death, or disability; and who
maintain coverage continuously from the date of their retirement, death, or
disability, are eligible for benefits under this section.  If an employee or
elected official is not enrolled in the city’s medical, vision and/or
dental insurance package, he or she must enroll during the open enrollment in
November of the year prior to retirement, death, or disability to be eligible
for this benefit.



      (7)   The Board of Public Works and Safety may grant the
benefit to employees and elected officials that do not meet the standards
presented in this section if they feel that the circumstances surrounding the
request warrant the granting of the benefit. Any request for special
consideration must be presented to the Board of Works in writing by the
employee or elected official, or his or her family, detailing the
circumstances surrounding the request prior to Board of Works recommendation
to the Council.



   (B)   Medicare supplement coverage for eligible retirees at age 65
and hired prior to January 1, 2018.  Employees and elected officials hired
or rehired on or after January 1, 2018, are not eligible.



      (1)   The city shall contribute%80% of the monthly premium 
for an employee or elected official, after the completion of the eligibility
requirements as described in division (A)(1) above, for a Medicare Supplement
Plan F with a Premier Plan Part D Prescription Plan.  This plan will be
selected by the city and the city shall contribute%80% towards the premiums
of such plan.  Spouse and dependents of the retiree are not eligible.



      (2)   It is the sole responsibility of the eligible employee
or elected official to contact the city’s designated agent and enroll in
the plan. The eligible employee or elected official is not eligible to enroll
for coverage at a later date if he or she fails to accept the city’s
coverage or does not enroll immediately after he or she is no longer eligible
for coverage under the city’s Health Insurance Plan due to reaching the age
of 65, or immediately after retirement if the retiree is age 65 or older. The
employee or elected official must accept continuation of the city’s
coverage at the time of retirement if he or she retires before the age of 65.
Failure to accept the continuation of coverage will result in his or her
request being denied at any future date. The issuance of coverage will be of
the sole discretion of the insurance carriers and the city in no way commits
to the coverage being approved.



      (3)   Each eligible employee or elected official shall meet,
either in person or by telephone conference, with the city’s designated
agent once a year during Medicare open enrollment or as required by the city.
If the eligible employee or elected official fails to meet this requirement
by the last day of Medicare open enrollment, the city will cease contributing
80% of the monthly premiums effective the start of the new Medicare plan
year, and the member will no longer be eligible for this city benefit.
Medicare Supplement billing statements will be sent directly to the
member’s home address on file.



      (4)   Eligible employees and elected officials on Medicare
plans are responsible for insuring the monthly billing statements from the
insurance carriers are received by the City of Noblesville for prompt
payment.  Refer to division (C)(3) below regarding premium payment
responsibilities.



      (5)   Eligible employees and elected officials do not have to
have been enrolled in the city’s health plan to be eligible for the
Medicare Supplement benefit.  However, the retiree must be in a full-time,
appointed, or elected position on or after January 1, 2007, to qualify. In
addition, a retiree who has maintained his or her participation in and is
enrolled in the city’s medical plan as of January 1, 2007, qualifies for
the Medicare Supplement benefit.



   (C)   Eligible employees and elected officials premium payments.



      (1)   The persons described in division (A)(1) and who elect
to continue their life insurance coverage must submit the annual premium
payment to the city by January 1 of each year. Life insurance premiums are
paid on a yearly basis. If payment is not received by January 30, a certified
letter will be sent to the member’s home address on file notifying the
member he or she has 15 calendar days to submit the annual premium payment.
If payment is not received by the date stated on the certified letter, the
life insurance policy will be terminated.



      (2)   The persons described in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), and
(A)(3) and who are enrolled in the city’s medical, dental, and/or vision
insurance package must submit premium payments to the city by the first of
every month for coverage for the following month. If payment is not received
by the thirtieth of the month in which it is due, a certified letter will be
sent to the member’s home address on file notifying the member that he or
she has 15 calendar days to submit payment. If payment is not received by the
date stated on the certified letter, retiree coverage will be terminated for
the member and all covered dependents. Once retiree coverage is terminated,
members/ dependents would be offered continued health coverage under COBRA,
at no cost to the city. This division does not apply to members who have
insurance premiums withheld from their Police and Fire Pension Fund.



      (3)   The persons described in division (B)(1) and who are
enrolled in Medicare Supplement plans must submit premium payments to the
city by the first of every month for coverage for the following month. If
payment is not received by the thirtieth of the month in which it is due, a
certified letter will be sent to the member’s home address on file
notifying the member that he or she has 15 calendar days to submit payment.
If payment is not received by the date stated on the certified letter, the
city will cease contributing 80% of the monthly premiums, and the member will
no longer be eligible for this city benefit. Medicare Supplement billing
statements will be sent directly to the member’s home address on file. This
division does not apply to those eligible members who have insurance premiums
withheld from their Police and Fire Pension Fund.



   (D)   This section shall be in full force and effect upon passage
and publication as required by law, on and after the later of January 10,
2000, or the latest revision date of October 24, 2017. This section shall be
applied to only employees that are employed with the city and elected
officials that are enrolled in the city’s medical, dental and vision
insurance package as of the effective date and forward, unless otherwise
indicated.



   (E)   All prior ordinances concerning health care benefits, or parts
thereof, inconsistent with any provisions of this section are hereby repealed
as of the effective date of the section.



(Ord. 45-12-99, passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord. 18-4-00, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord.
56-8-03, passed 8-26- 03; Am. Ord. 55-8-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
85-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 8-2-07, passed 2-16-07; Am. Ord. 17-4-08,
passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 10-02-14, passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 10-02-15, passed
2-10-15; Am. Ord. 41-10-17, passed 10-24-17)



§ 36.12  PERSONNEL POLICY HANDBOOK FOR CIVIL EMPLOYEES.



   The Personnel Policy Handbook, dated January 1, 2019, is hereby revised
and approved.



(Ord. 19-4-00, passed 4-24-00; Am. Ord. 57-8-03, passed 8-26-03; Am. Ord.
68-10-04, passed 11-9-04; Am. Ord. 56-8-05, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord.
86-10-06, passed 10-24-06; Am. Ord. 11-2-07, passed 2- 16-07; Am. Ord.
38-8-07, passed 8-14-07; Am. Ord. 69-12-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
18-4-08, passed 4-29-08; Am. Ord. 60-11-08, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord.
56-12-09, passed 12-15-09; Am. Ord. 8-2-11, passed 2-8-11; Am. Ord. 17-06-12,
passed 6-26-12; Am. Ord. 11-02-14, passed 2-25-14; Am. Ord. 40-10-17, passed
10-24-17; Am. Ord. 24-06-19, passed 6-11-19)



§ 36.13  REIMBURSEMENT OF MEAL EXPENSES FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   To obtain reimbursement for reimbursable meal expenses, an
employee must provide to the Clerk-Treasurer, as part of the claim for
reimbursement, either:



      (1)   An itemized bill from the restaurant or food
establishment, which clearly shows that no costs of alcoholic beverages is
included within said itemized bill; or



      (2)   An affidavit with an attached non-itemized receipt from
the food establishment.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as expanding or
reducing the reimbursable meal expenses to employees of the city.



(Ord. 46-10-01, passed 11-27-01)



FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY



§ 36.20  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be in supplement to the personnel benefits as set
forth in this chapter or ordinances of the city and shall be referred to as
the Family and Medical Leave Policy.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.21  DURATION OF LEAVE; APPLICATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   From and after the effective date stated hereafter, the city
shall allow up to 12 weeks of leave in a rolling 12-month period measured
backward from date leave began to an employee who requests the leave (except
that any leave used prior to August 5, 1993 shall not be included):



      (1)   To care for a newborn child or a child who is newly
placed for adoption or foster care;



      (2)   To care for a spouse, child, or parent who has a
"serious health condition"; or



      (3)   Because the employee has a "serious" health condition
that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of his/her job.



   (B)   The provisions of the policy shall not apply to any employee
of the city who has been employed for less than 12 months or who has worked
less than 1,250 hours during the preceding 12-month period.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.22  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CHILD."  A biological, adopted or foster child, a stepchild, a legal
ward, or a child of a person standing in loco parentis, who is under 18 years
of age or who is older than 18 years of age and incapable of self care
because of a physical or mental disability.



   "FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE."  Any leave taken pursuant to this policy
or for any of the reasons listed in § 36.21.



   "IN LOCO PARENTIS."  An individual who has day-to-day responsibility
to care for and financially support a child.



   "PARENT."  The biological parent of an employee or an individual who
stood in loco parentis to an employee when the employee was a child.



   "SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITION."



      (1)   Any illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental
condition that involves:



         (a)   Inpatient care;



         (b)   Continuing treatment by a health care provider for
a long term health condition that is incurable or so serious that, if not
treated would likely result in a period of incapacity of more than three
calendar days; or



         (c)   Any period of incapacity requiring absence from
regular daily activities for more than three calendar days and that also
involves continuing treatment by a health care provider.



      (2)   Voluntary cosmetic treatments are not generally
considered "SERIOUS HEALTH CONDITIONS" unless inpatient care is provided.



   "SPOUSE."  Defined in accordance with applicable state law, as amended
from time to time.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.23  ADVANCE NOTICE OF LEAVE.



   An employee who seeks to obtain leave pursuant to this policy shall
give his/her supervisor at least 30 calendar days notice of the leave if
possible, unless the need for leave cannot be anticipated, in which
notification must be given as soon as practicable.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.24  USE OF AVAILABLE COMPENSATORY TIME.



   Any available paid sick leave or vacation, or banked compensatory time,
will be applied against the FMLA entitlement.  The city shall require any
employee obtaining the benefits of this policy to first use accrued banked
compensatory time then sick leave and/or vacation time as part of the leave
provided for herein.  For example, if an employee has one week of sick time
and two weeks of vacation time, that can be applied toward the 12 weeks
leave, so then only nine weeks unpaid leave needs to be provided.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.25 INTERMITTENT LEAVE.



   An employee may take family and medical leave on an intermittent basis
or by reducing the number of hours worked if medically necessary and if the
leave is taken in order to care for a sick family member as defined above or
for the employee's own serious health condition.  Only upon the employer's
written approval may an employee take leave intermittently or by working a
reduced work week for the birth of a child or because of placement for
adoption or foster care.  An employee who requests intermittent leave may be
temporarily transferred to another position which would better accommodate
his or her absences, if the new position has comparable pay and benefits.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.26  MEDICAL CERTIFICATION.



   The city shall have the right to require a medical certification of the
necessity for the leave, whether it be a continuous or intermittent leave,
when an employee is on family or medical leave due to his/her serious health
condition or the serious health condition of parent, child or spouse.  The
city may require the employee to obtain additional medical certifications at
the city's expense.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.27  INSURANCE COVERAGE.



   While an employee is on leave as provided for in this policy, all
insurance coverage shall be maintained as if the employee were actively
employed (the employee would still be responsible for his/her portion of the
health premium and if the employee fails to make his/her contribution in a
timely manner, health insurance coverage will cease).  Insurance coverage
provided as required herein during the course of a leave is not to be counted
as COBRA coverage.  If the employee does not return to work for the city or
returns for less than 30 days, all benefit premiums paid by the employer and
eligible to be recovered by the employer as described in and allowed by the
Federal Act as amended from time to time, shall be recovered from the
employee.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.28  RESTORATION TO JOB OR EQUIVALENT.



   An employee granted leave pursuant to this policy, upon return, shall
be restored to the job he or she held when he or she left, or an equivalent
position with equivalent pay, benefits and terms of employment.  All
benefits shall accrue during the leave.  Upon reinstatement an employee who
has allowed his/her health insurance coverage to lapse will be entitled to
re-enroll.  Certain key employees (as defined by the Family and Medical
Leave Act) may be denied reinstatement if necessary to prevent substantial
and grievous economic injury to the city.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.29  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT PROHIBITED.



   During a leave of absence the employee must not secure employment
elsewhere if the employee is off under § 36.21(A)(3).



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 36.30  FITNESS FOR DUTY REPORT.



   An employee will be required to provide a fitness for duty report prior
to returning to work if the leave was due to his/her own serious health
condition.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.31  MISREPRESENTATION OF LEAVE OR FALSE STATEMENTS.



   If an employee receives and/or continues leave under the family Leave
Act through misrepresentation or false statements, his/her leave will
automatically be rescinded and the appropriate discipline taken as outlined
in the discipline procedure and schedule.



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 36.32  COMBINED TOTAL LEAVE OF EMPLOYED HUSBAND AND WIFE LIMITED.



   In situations where the husband and wife both work for the city and the
Family Leave Act is requested and approved, their combined total leave is
limited to 12 weeks for § 36.21(A)(1) and (2).



(Ord. 47-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



CHAPTER 37:  CITY POLICIES



Section



   37.01   Definitions



   37.02   Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings



   37.03   Reimbursement policy for travel and related expenses



   37.04   Public display on a downtown electronic monument sign



   37.05   Price preferences for local businesses



   37.06   Internal control standards and materiality threshold



   37.07   Public records requests; prohibited uses



 



   37.99   Penalty



               



Cross-reference:



   Investment policy, see § 38.04



§ 37.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "NOBLESVILLE MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS."  Those structures owned, leased or
otherwise occupied by the city, including, but not limited to, all areas
within said buildings or any additions thereto.



   "PERSON."  Any man, woman, or child, regardless of age.



   "SMOKE" or "SMOKING."  To ignite or cause to be ignited tobacco or
tobacco product or derivative, which includes but is not limited to tobacco,
or a derivative thereof, such that the product or derivative emits a gas or
cloud which is commonly understood to be smoke, which may be or is intended
to be inhaled by any person.



(Ord. 01-01-91, passed 1-29-91)



§ 37.02  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   No person shall have in his/her possession any lighted tobacco product,
tobacco derivative, including, but not limited to pipes, cigars, cigarettes
or other devices used for the smoking of tobacco or tobacco-like products,
which includes, but is not limited to, tobacco or a derivative thereof, while
within any public meeting rooms located within any Noblesville Municipal
Building.  The City Fire Chief may, by written order, designate one area in
each fire station where the possession of a lighted tobacco product may be
lawful, and appropriate signage may be installed advising occupants of such
structures of such locations.



(Ord. 01-01-91, passed 1-29-91; Ord. 25-06-91, passed 6-25-91)



§ 37.03  REIMBURSEMENT POLICY FOR TRAVEL AND RELATED EXPENSES.



   (A)   A travel policy for the City of Noblesville, Hamilton County,
Indiana, is hereby established.



   (B)   Reimbursement Policy for Travel and Related Expenses.



      (1)   Generally. Expenses described below which are incurred
by a city employee related to that employee's official city duties,
responsibilities, or actions while participating in or on behalf of official
city business shall be reimbursable.



      (2)   Expenses.



         (a)   The authorized use of an employee’s personal
vehicle for travel on official city business shall be reimbursed at the
current rate set under § 36.09 of the City Code of Ordinances.



         (b)   Parking fees or tolls incurred and paid while a
city employee is on official city business shall be reimbursable. However,
the same shall not include traffic and parking tickets issued by any police
department for an ordinance or state violation.



         (c)   Meals, lodging, and other reasonable expenses
necessary and relevant to travel outside the corporate limits of the city on
official business shall be reimbursable. Meal expenses shall be paid at a
maximum rate of $40.00 per day, including tips. Amounts over $40.00 would
need approval by Department Director or Mayor.



         (d)   An amount equivalent to coach air fares or fares
which are commonly understood to be coach rates, or any lower fare,
available, shall be reimbursed.



         (e)   Meeting expenses, seminar expenses, and such
related items incurred while on official city business, shall be
reimbursable, whether or not inside the city's corporate limits.



         (f)   Non-reimbursable expenses included, but are not
limited to, in-room movies, alcohol, bottle water, power drinks, tobacco
products, snacks, soft drinks and coffee unless bought with a meal, laundry
service, unless stay is over a week's length, saunas, massages, golf,
personal telephone calls, either long-distant or local, and any other
unrelated service or entertainment not directly serving a business purpose.



         (g)   Any expenses resulting from companion travel,
which companion is not on official city business, and which causes any
expense is over and above the expense reasonably incurred by the city
employee, shall not be reimbursable.



      (3)   Claim submission requirements.



         (a)   Any claim for reimbursement of travel or expenses
incurred while on official city business must be itemized and documented by
receipts. In the event receipts are unavailable, lost or destroyed, the
employee may obtain reimbursement by signing an affidavit that the expense
was incurred on behalf of city business.



         (b)   Prior to submission for reimbursement, a claim
must first be reviewed and authorized by the Director of the employee's
department to confirm that the claims submitted fall within the guidelines of
this section and are within the department's appropriated budget.



         (e)   Registration fees, hotel reservations and airline
fares connected with seminars, workshops, schools or other city-required
travel may be paid in advance if supported by a fully itemized claim approved
by the department Director. Any savings resulting from changes in schedule or
transportation shall be delivered to the office of the Clerk-Treasurer within
ten business days of travel completion accompanied by written documentation.



         (d)   Any expenses charged by an employee on their
personal charge cards will be reimbursed for the face value of the purchase.
Late or interest charges will not be reimbursed for any reason.



(Res. RB 35-03, passed 8-26-03; Am. Res. RB-16-13, passed 7-23-13; Am. Res.
32-15, passed 10-13-15; Am. Ord. 48-11-18, passed 11-27-18)



§ 37.04  PUBLIC DISPLAY ON A DOWNTOWN ELECTRONIC MONUMENT SIGN.



   (A)   The city agrees to accept promotional material from not-for-
profit and community organizations on a first-come, first-serve basis.



   (B)   The city retains the right to screen promotional material for
content that would reasonably be considered vulgar, sexually explicit, or
otherwise contrary to acceptable community values.



   (C)   The city hereby establishes an advertising rate of $25 per
month (30 days) or any part thereof.



   (D)   The deadline for submitting material for the sign shall be
Wednesday, 4:30 p.m. for appearance on the sign the following week.



   (E)   The city will determine when the requested message will be
displayed.



   (F)   Display will be posted within one week of requested posting.



   (G)   Monies collected from all parties shall go to reimburse the
city's cost of the sign installation, ongoing maintenance, software upgrades,
and operating expenses.



(Res. RB-48-08, passed 9-23-08)



§ 37.05  PRICE PREFERENCES FOR LOCAL BUSINESSES.



   In order to comply with the terms of I.C. 5-22-15-20.9, the Board of
Public Works and Safety hereby establishes  the following policy for
determining whether or not a bidder, quoter, or supplier is entitled to a
preference as set out in I.C. 5-22-15-20.9:



   (A)   Contract preference policy.



      (1)   The terms of this policy apply to any entity ("the
Claimant") which tenders a bid or quote to the city.



      (2)   In order to qualify for a local government preference
the claimant must include its claim for a local Indiana business preference
with the quote or bid and be clearly marked "Claim for Bid Preference".



      (3)   Included in the claim, the claimant must show its
principal place of business which should include the following documentation:



         (a)   Registration with the Indiana Secretary of State,
listing an affected county as the business's primary place of business.



         (b)   Registration of business with County Recorder,
listing an affected county as the business's primary place of business.



         (c)   Copies of federal and state IRS filing statements,
(redacting all financial and confidential information) evidencing an affected
county as the primary place of business.



      (4)   If the claim is based on the claimant's payroll, the
claimant must state that it pays a majority (51% or greater) of its total
company payroll to residents in an affected county. The claim shall include
total payroll for the entire business and the amount of payroll paid to
employees residing in the affected counties. The information must be stated
in total dollar values for the 12 months immediately preceding the bid date.



      (5)   If the claim is based on the number of employees in
affected counties, the claimant shall include information that the claimant
employs residents of affected counties as a majority (51% or greater) of the
total company employees, including the total number of employees of the
company, and the number of employees who are residents of an affected county
for the 12 months immediately preceding the bid date.



      (6)   If the claim is based on a "significant capital
investment" in the affected counties, the claimant must define its total
investment in real or depreciable personal property in the affected counties
and itemize the investment in such property in the three calendar years prior
to the claim. The total of the capital investment made in the past three
years must exceed 10% of the average gross income of the Claimant in the past
two calendar years.



      (7)   If the claim of preference is based upon a "substantial"
positive economic impact on the affected counties, the city shall use the
criteria set out in subsections (4), (5), and (6) above.



      (8)   If the bidder is a joint venture and is claiming local
preference, the city will evaluate the joint venture by combining each
business’s total payroll, payroll paid to residents of affected counties,
total number of employees, and total number of employees who are residents of
affected counties. Further, each entity participating in the joint venture
shall submit proof of the location of its principal place of business. The
city will determine whether the joint venture qualifies as a local Indiana
business, as defined herein, by evaluating the joint venture as one business,
not as separate businesses using the criteria set out in subsections (3),
(4), and (5). All members of the joint venture must provide information
described above. The total overall joint venture must qualify as a local
Indiana business to receive the local preference as defined above.



      (9)   The city may request copies of additional documents
necessary to support any allegations included in the claim for bid
preference. Failure to provide such information within 14 days of the request
will result in a denial of the claim for bid preference.



   (B)   Verification.  The claim for preferred shall be verified as
follows:



I,             , as           (officer)        , of     
(company)    , verify under the penalties of perjury that the facts set out
in the above claim for Price Preference are true.



Signature               



Printed               



   (C)   Applicability.  The policy set out above shall be included in
all bid packets for projects bid by any department of the City of Noblesville.



   (D)   Validity of bid.  Any contractor who attempts to claim a
preference under this agreement, and fails to comply with this section shall
have his bid considered with all other bids submitted for the project, but
shall be disqualified from the bidding preference included in I.C.
5-22-15-20.9(d).



(Res. RB-17-11, passed 8-23-11)



§ 37.06  INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS AND MATERIALITY THRESHOLD.



   The City of Noblesville policies regarding internal control standards
and materiality threshold, as set forth in the ordinance codified herein, are
hereby adopted by reference, the same as if set out in full herein.



(Ord. 35-06-16, passed 6-28-16)



§ 37.07  PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS; PROHIBITED USES.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 5-14-3-3(2)(e), any person who receives
information in an electronic format from the City of Noblesville in response
to a public records request may not use the information for commercial
purposes, including to sell, advertise, or solicit the purchase of
merchandise, goods, or services, or sell, loan, give away, or otherwise
deliver the information obtained by the request to any other person for these
purposes. Any person or entity who uses any information provided by the City
for a commercial purpose, as defined in this section, shall not be provided
any such data for a period of up to ten (10) years.



   (B)   Use of information received in connection with the preparation
or publication of news, for nonprofit activities, or for academic research is
not prohibited.



   (C)   Requests for non-color copies will cost $0.10 per page and
$0.25 per page for color copies.



   (D)   Documents that already exist in an electronic format will be
emailed upon request without charge.



   (E)   Requests for electronic copies that do not already exist in an
electronic format will cost the same as copies.



   (F)   Victims of crime or loss of property due to fire or
weather-related causes may obtain public information concerning the crime or
loss for their personal records free of charge.



   (G)   Information that is provided for a fee under other city
policies or ordinances is exempt from the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 44-10-18, passed 11-3-18; Am. Ord. 08-02-19, passed 2-12-19)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.



(Ord. 01-01-91, passed 1-29-91)



CHAPTER 38:  FINANCE AND REVENUE



Section




General Provisions




   38.01   Prepayment of certain expenses



   38.02   Fee on returned checks



   38.03   Procedures for use of petty cash funds, cash change funds



   38.04   Investment policy




Funds




   38.20   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund



   38.21   Cumulative Capital Development Fund



   38.22   Unemployment Compensation Fund



   38.23   Noble West Hazel Dell Account



   38.24   Exit Ten Fee Fund



   38.25   Contingency Fund



   38.26   Abandoned Vehicle Fund



   38.27   Rainy Day Fund



   38.28   Downtown Development Fund



   38.29   Economic Incentive Revolving Fund



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  PREPAYMENT OF CERTAIN EXPENSES.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to pre-pay the following lawful
expenses subject to the submission of a fully itemized claim to the
Clerk-Treasurer's office prior to the pre-payment and the submission of the
claim for review and allowance at the next regular meeting of the Common
Council following the pre-approved payment of the expense:



   (A)   Property or services purchased or leased from the United
States government, its agencies, or its political subdivisions.



   (B)   License or permit fees.



   (C)   Insurance premiums.



   (D)   Utility payments or utility connection charges.



   (E)   General grant programs where advance funding is not prohibited
and the contracting party posts sufficient security to cover the amount
advanced.



   (F)   Leases or rental agreements.



   (G)   Bond or coupon agreements



   (H)   Payroll.



   (I)   State, federal or county taxes.



(Ord. 32-8-92, passed 9-14-92)



§ 38.02  FEE ON RETURNED CHECKS.



   All departments of the city, including the Clerk-Treasurer's office,
are authorized to impose a $15 charge for any and all returned checks
resulting from insufficient funds in the account upon which they are drawn.



(Ord. 26-7-94, passed 7-25-94)



§ 38.03  PROCEDURES FOR USE OF PETTY CASH FUNDS, CASH CHANGE FUNDS.



   (A)   The City Council hereby appoints and authorizes the City
Controller to set or adjust the cash change and petty cash fund amounts for
city departments as appropriate at any time, and in compliance with I.C.
36-1-8-2 and I.C. 36-1-8-3, but not to exceed $2,500 for any one fund or
individual departmental fund.



      (1)   Cash change fund.



         (a)   A cash change fund shall be used only to make
change and to receive cash payments on behalf of the city.



         (b)   To establish a fund, a claim must be filed by the
fund custodian, requesting the cash change fund, including a statement
regarding the necessity for the fund.



         (c)   The fund must be established by a warrant drawn on
an appropriate city fund payable to the officer or employee designated as
custodian of the fund and may so be done without an appropriation.



         (d)   All city employees receiving cash for the city
shall provide a receipt to the person making payment and retain a duplicate
of that receipt in the cash change drawer.



         (e)   At all times, the amount in the cash change drawer
of any department shall equal the amount authorized by the City Controller
plus the total of the duplicate receipts contained in the cash change drawer.



         (f)   A cash change fund shall be returned to the
appropriate city fund whenever there is a change of custodian of the fund or
if the fund is no longer needed.



      (2)   Petty cash fund.



         (a)   A petty cash fund shall be used only to pay small
or emergency items of operating expense.



         (b)   To establish a fund a claim must be filed by the
fund custodian, requesting the petty cash fund, including a statement
regarding the necessity for the fund.



         (c)   The fund must be established by a warrant drawn on
an appropriate city fund payable to the officer or employee designated as
custodian of the fund and may so be done without an appropriation.



         (d)   The custodian of a petty cash fund shall
periodically submit a voucher to the City Controller, with all original
receipts totaling the cash expended attached, so that the fund can be
reimbursed. Reimbursement payments must be approved and made in the same
manner as required for other expenditures and, therefore, may be paid only
from appropriated funds.



         (e)   At all times, the total cash in the petty cash
fund plus the amount of unreimbursed receipts shall equal the amount
authorized for that fund.



         (f)   A petty cash fund shall be returned to the
appropriate city fund whenever there is a change of custodian of the fund or
if the fund is no longer needed.



   (B)   The City Controller, representatives of the State Board of
Accounts, or their designees, may at any time audit the cash change and petty
cash fund accounts of any department of the city.



(Ord. 33-8-96, passed 8-26-96; Am. Ord. 47-11-97, passed 11-24-97; Am. Ord.
4-1-01, passed 1-23-01; Am. Ord. 26-06-19, passed 7-9-19)



§ 38.04  INVESTMENT POLICY.



   (A)   The City of Noblesville investment policy, as set forth in
Resolution RC-15-17, is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full
herein.



   (B)   This policy expires on March 1, 2020. The expiration date may
be extended only by an official action of the city, at a public meeting, in
accordance with IC 5-13-9-7. Any investments held on the expiration date of
this policy may be maintained until maturity without violation.



(Res. RC-15-17, passed 6-27-17)



FUNDS



§ 38.20  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is created a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund  for
the purpose of receiving cigarette tax distributions for the state and such
other funds as may be appropriate under the laws of the state.



   (B)   The funds accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Improvement
Fund so created, shall be expended only for those purposes permitted by IC
6-7-1-31.1.



   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and upon
its adoption in accordance with the law.  This section is intended to
constitute or re-constitute the Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund pursuant
to the provisions of IC 6-7-1-31.1 as most recently amended by Public Law
1-1990, Section 83.



(Ord. 4-14-92, passed 4-27-92)



§ 38.21  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is established a Cumulative Capital Development Fund.



   (B)   An ad valorem property tax levy will be imposed and the
revenue generated from the levy will be retained in the Cumulative Capital
Development Fund.



   (C)   The tax rate may not exceed the maximum allowable rate
established by state law under I.C. 36-9-15.5. The tax rate is established at
$0.0500 per $100 assessed value for assessments in 2019 and thereafter.



   (D)   The revenue accumulated in the Cumulative Capital Development
Fund may be used for all permissible uses as established by the following
state statutes:



   I.C. 8-16-3      Cumulative Bridge Fund



   I.C. 8-22-3-25    Airport Cumulative Building Fund



   I.C. 14-33-14      Conservancy District Cumulative Maintenance
Fund



   I.C. 14-33-21      Cumulative Improvement Fund



   I.C. 36-8-14      Cumulative Fire Fund



   I.C. 36-9-4      Cumulative Transportation Fund



   I.C. 36-9-16      Municipal Cumulative Building or Sinking Fund
and Capital Improvement Fund



   I.C. 36-9-16.5   Municipal Cumulative Street Fund



   I.C. 36-9-16      Municipal Cumulative Building and Capital
Improvement Fund



   I.C. 36-9-17      Municipal General Improvement Fund



   I.C. 36-9-26      Cumulative Building Fund for Municipal Sewers



   I.C. 36-9-27-100   Cumulative Drainage Fund



   I.C. 36-10-3-21   Park Cumulative Building Fund



   I.C. 36-10-4-36   Park Cumulative Building and Sinking Fund



   (E)   Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, funds
accumulated in the City Cumulative Capital Development fund may be spent for
purposes other than the purposes stated in division (D) of this section, if
the purpose is to protect the public health, welfare and safety in an
emergency situation which demands immediate action. Money may be spent under
the authority of this section only after the Mayor issues a declaration that
the public health, welfare or safety is in immediate danger that requires the
expenditure of money in the fund.



   (F)   This fund takes effect upon the approval of the Department of
Local Government Finance, (DLGF).



(Ord. 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 22-07-12, passed 7-24-12; Am. Ord. 08-03-13, passed
5-28-13; Am. Ord. 03-02-18, passed 3-13-18; Am. Ord. 11-02-19, passed 3-12-19)



§ 38.22  UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established the city Unemployment Compensation
Fund, hereinafter referred to as the Fund.



   (B)   The Common Council shall from time to time appropriate into
the Fund such amounts as the Council believes in their discretion would be
resonable to provide a balance to pay any payments due from the city to the
Indiana Department of Workforce Development pursuant to the election filed by
the city.



   (C)   The Fund shall not revert at the end of the year, and all
amounts remaining in the fund at end of the year shall continue to accumulate
from year to year.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall pay all amounts due and owning to
the Indiana Department of Workforce Development pursuant to the election from
the Fund.



(Ord. 59-11-96, passed 12-9-96)



§ 38.23  NOBLE WEST HAZEL DELL ACCOUNT.



   (A)   There is hereby created a special fund known as the Noble West
Hazel Dell Account.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause to be deposited in the fund,
all road impact fees collected from builders receiving improvement location
permits within the property.



   (C)   Upon substantial completion of the project, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall pay an initial payment to Noble West or its designee of
all amounts in the fund.



   (D)   After the initial payment, the Clerk-Treasurer shall pay the
amounts in the fund to Noble West or their designee quarterly until the full
amount due and owing to Noble West under the agreement is paid.



   (E)   Upon reimbursement to Noble West or their designee of all
amounts due and owing under the agreement, any remaining amounts in the fund
shall be transferred into the appropriate road impact fee area sub-account to
be used for the purposes set out in the road impact fee ordinances of the
city and the fund shall be terminated.



(Ord. 70-10-03, passed 10-14-03)



§ 38.24  EXIT TEN FEE FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Exit Ten Fee Fund.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall create as many sub-accounts within
the fund as is appropriate, but at a minimum shall establish the following
accounts:



      (1)   Exit Ten Road Impact Fee Account;



      (2)   Exit Ten (E. Bennette Reconstruction) Drainage Fee
Account;



      (3)   Exit Ten Interceptor Fund Account;



      (4)   Exit Ten Ticket Tax Account;



      (5)   Exit Ten Interest Earnings Account.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall cause all amounts in the fund to be
segregated in a separate interest bearing account and the earnings shall be
paid into the Exit Ten Interest Earnings Account, and all amounts in the
fund, including amounts in the Exit Ten Earnings Account, shall be used only
for the purposes of paying lease rental payments with respect to the bonds
and/or reimbursement obligations relating to the bonds (as defined in the
agreement) and for no other purposes.



   (D)   On or before January 1, 2009, and the date of each subsequent
lease rental payment for the bonds, the Clerk-Treasurer shall first determine
the amount of tax increment (meaning tax increment revenues as described in
I.C. 36-7-14-39.3) held or to be received by the Noblesville Redevelopment
Commission available for payment of the next lease rental payment and shall
pay into the Sinking Fund maintained for the bonds the lessor of:



      (1)   The amount in the fund; or



      (2)   The difference between the next semi-annual lease rental
payment on the bonds and the amount of tax increment held by the Noblesville
Redevelopment Commission and available for payment of such lease rental
payment.



   (E)   This section shall remain in full force and effect until all
of the bonds have been repaid and all reimbursement obligations relating to
the bonds (as defined in the agreement) have been paid in full.  However, at
such time as all reimbursement obligations relating to the bonds (as defined
and described in the agreement) have been paid and the tax increment
collected within the Noblesville Corporate Campus East Economic Development
Area for the last two consecutive semi-annual tax periods, exceeds 124% of
the maximum annual lease rental payment on the bonds, the Common Council of
the city may amend this section to use road impact fees and sewer fees for
such additional purposes as may be permitted for such fees.



(Ord. 59-8-03, passed 8-26-03; Am. Ord. 69-10-04, passed 11-23-05)



§ 38.25  CONTINGENCY FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created the Contingency Fund.



   (B)   The Common Council may appropriate and transfer to the Fund
such amounts as the Common Council from time to time may deem reasonable. 
These appropriations or transfers may be made from any unencumbered or
unappropriated account or fund, which is not otherwise restricted by law.



   (C)   With the passage of this section, the Fund shall be initially
funded by a transfer of $300,000 funded from the COIT account.



   (D)   The Fund shall be systematically funded each year by the
unused and unencumbered balances in other city funds or monies that are
received by the city.  The monies transferred by the city during any fiscal
year shall not exceed 10% of the city's budget for the fiscal year.



   (E)   The Fund shall only be expended upon appropriation by the
Common Council.  The Fund shall only be used for emergencies as determined
by the City Council.



(Ord. 66-11-07, passed 11-11-07)



§ 38.26  ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby created a fund entitled, “the Abandoned
Vehicle Fund”, as required by I.C. 9-22-1-30.



   (B)   Upon receipt of any proceeds derived from the use of the
city’s abandoned vehicle ordinance, such as the sale of abandoned vehicles
or vehicle parts and fines recovered from the enforcement of the abandoned
vehicle ordinance, the proceeds shall be deposited into the Abandoned Vehicle
Fund.



   (C)   The costs incurred by the city agency administering the
abandoned vehicle ordinance, such as the costs of removal, storage and
disposal of the abandoned vehicle, shall be paid from the Abandoned Vehicle
Fund.



   (D)   As required by I.C. 9-22-1-27, the city’s Common Council
shall annually appropriate sufficient money to the fund to carry out the
city’s abandoned vehicle ordinance.



   (E)   The balance remaining in the Abandoned Vehicle Fund at the end
of any calendar year shall not revert to the city’s General Fund but shall
remain within the Abandoned Vehicle Fund.



   (F)   The money within the Abandoned Vehicle Fund shall be used for
all purposes allowed by I.C. 9-22-1 et seq., including but not limited to the
following purposes:



      (1)   Removal of abandoned vehicles;



      (2)   Towing of abandoned vehicles;



      (3)   Storage of abandoned vehicles pending reclamation or
public sale;



      (4)   All costs related to the disposal of the abandoned
vehicle or vehicle parts including advertising of the sale, payment to an
auctioneer, costs of the public auction, costs related to disposal at an
automobile scrapyard or automotive salvage recycler;



      (5)   Notification of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the
possession and towing of the abandoned vehicle and, if necessary, the
disposal of the abandoned vehicle and title clearing related tasks;



      (6)   Photographing of the abandoned vehicle and preparing of
reports concerning the vehicle;



      (7)   Costs incurred in dealing with a lien holder’s
interest in the abandoned vehicle; and



      (8)   Payment of titling fees and certification assessed under
I.C. 9-29-4 and I.C. 9-17.



(Ord. 16-5-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 38.27  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established the City of Noblesville Rainy Day
Fund.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-8-5.1, all unused or unencumbered
balances in any fund or account of the city may be transferred to the Rainy
Day fund if authorized by the Common Council.



   (C)   Any amounts in the Rainy Day Fund may be appropriated by the
Common Council for such purposes as authorized by state statute and approved
by the Council through the appropriation process as authorized by I.C.
36-1-8-5.1(c).



(Ord. 43-07-16, passed 7-12-16)



§ 38.28  DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Downtown Development Fund.



   (B)   The Downtown Development Fund is a dedicated fund. 
Unexpended cash balances in the Fund will remain in the Fund and not revert
to the General Fund at year end.



   (C)   Cash balances in the Downtown Development Fund may be used
only for the betterment of the Downtown District.



   (D)   Any cash balances in the Downtown Development Fund must be
appropriated by the Common Council through the appropriation process, as
authorized by IC 36-1-8-5.1(c), to be available for use.



   (E)   Each calendar year, the first $500,000 of revenue received
from the city’s allocation of the county local income tax shall be
deposited into the Downtown Development Fund.



   (F)   With approval from the Mayor, the Common Council may transfer
cash balances from the General Fund, or any other city fund with an
unrestricted excess cash balance, to the Downtown Development Fund.



   (G)   With a declaration of fiscal necessity, the Mayor may ask the
Common Council to transfer cash balances from the Downtown Development Fund
to the General Fund or any other civil city operating fund as needed.



   (H)   The Downtown Development Fund may accept private donations,
but such donations may not be restricted by the benefactor to a specific use,
purpose, or project.



(Ord. 59-12-17, passed 12-19-17)



§ 38.29  ECONOMIC INCENTIVE REVOLVING FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established the Economic Incentive Revolving
Fund in Chapter 38 of the city code.



   (B)   The Economic Incentive Revolving Fund is a special purpose
fund. Unexpended cash balances in the fund will remain in the fund and not
revert to the General Fund at year end.



   (C)   Cash balances in the Economic Incentive Revolving Fund may be
used only for providing liquidity in circumstances when the City must cover
expenses associated with a development agreement, approved by the Common
Council, until the permanent funding source for those expenses is generating
sufficient cash.



   (D)   The Economic Incentive Revolving Fund may receive
reimbursement payments from other City funds as provided for in a development
agreement.



   (E)   Cash balances in the Economic Incentive Revolving Fund are
continuously appropriated by the Common Council for the purposes of the fund.



   (F)   No revenue of the Civil City, from taxes or fees, may be
deposited initially into the Economic Incentive Revolving Fund. The fund must
be capitalized by cash transfers from other funds.



   (G)   With approval from the Mayor, the Common Council may transfer
cash balances from the General Fund or any other City fund which has an
unrestricted excess cash balance to the Economic Incentive Revolving Fund.



   (H)   With a declaration of fiscal necessity, the Mayor may ask the
Common Council to transfer cash balances from the Economic Incentive
Revolving Fund to the General Fund or any other Civil City operating fund as
needed.



(Ord. 27-08-18, passed 9-11-18)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SEWER SYSTEM



      51.   SEWAGE DISPOSAL; RATES



      52.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



      53.   INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS



CHAPTER 50:  SEWER SYSTEM



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Discharge to natural, private outlet prohibited; exception



   50.03   Private wastewater disposal



   50.04   Prohibited substances



   50.05   Damaging sewer works equipment prohibited



   50.06   City inspection of properties



   50.07   Termination of water service to delinquent users




Sanitary Sewer Extensions




   50.20   Purpose and authority



   50.21   Preliminary matters



   50.22   Petition



   50.23   Board of Public Works and Safety approval



   50.24   Common Council approval



   50.25   Design



   50.26   Project confirmation



   50.27   Construction



   50.28   Project completion



   50.29   Sewer connections and costs



   50.30   Independent audit



   50.31   Barrett Law master plan



   50.32   Violations



 



   50.99   Penalty



   Appendix:   Exhibits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   "B.O.D."  (Biochemical oxygen demand)  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in 5 days at 20°C., expressed in milligrams per liter.



   "BUILDING DRAIN."  That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning 5 feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.



   "BUILDING SEWER."  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.



   "COMBINED SEWER."  A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.



   "EASEMENT."  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.



   "FLOATABLE OIL." Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater in the sewers or by treatment in an
approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of
floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.



   "GARBAGE." The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTES." The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.



   "NATURAL OUTLET." Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
groundwater.



   "pH."  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogenion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogenions, in grams, per
liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a
hydrogenion concentration of 10-7.



   "PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE." The wastes from the preparation, cooling
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.



   "PUBLIC SEWER." A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or
public utility.



   "SANITARY SEWER." A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions
together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.



   "SEWAGE." The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater," as defined below.



   "SEWER." A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.



   "SLUG." Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the
collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.



   "STORM DRAIN." (Sometimes termed "storm sewer".) A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any
source.



   "SUPERINTENDENT." The utility director of wastewater facilities, and/or
of wastewater treatment works, and/or of water pollution control of the city,
or its authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   "SUSPENDED SOLIDS." Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable
residue.



   "UNPOLLUTED WATER." Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   "WASTEWATER." The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of 
source,  it  may  be  a combination of the liquid and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that
may be present.



   "WASTEWATER FACILITIES." The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.



   "WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS." An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"water pollution control plant."



   "WATERCOURSE." A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95)



§ 50.02  DISCHARGE TO NATURAL, PRIVATE OUTLET PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city,
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided
in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage wastewater.



   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the city and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined
sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within 90 days after the date of written notice to do so, provided that the
public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line.  The property owner
shall be responsible for any and all maintenance of the lateral from the
point of connection to the sewer main. 



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95)



§ 50.03  PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available
under the provisions of § 50.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to
a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this
section.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater
disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the
Hamilton County Health Department.



   (C)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the
Department of Environmental Management of the State of Indiana.



   (D)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the
Superintendent to meet all requirements of this chapter.



   (E)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city.  In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.



   (F)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.



   (G)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.



   (H)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No.
9.  All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and vertified
by proper testing.  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.



   (I)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.  The connection and testing shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.



   (J)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights to protect the public from
hazard.  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed
in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
city. 



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95)



§ 50.04  PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
through direct or indirect connection to any sanitary sewer any storm water,
ground water, rain water, street drainage, sub-surface drainage, or roof
runoff.



      (2)   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through direct or indirect connection to any sanitary sewer any
unpolluted waters, including but not limited to, cooling water, process
water, or blowdown from cooling waters or evaporative coolers unless
authorization is issued by the superintendent.



         (b)   If authorization is granted for the discharge of
such water into a sanitary sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user
charges and fees, and shall meet such conditions required by the
superintendent.



   (B)   (1)   The installation of new combined sewers is
prohibited.  For any new building or building site modifications, the
inflow-clean water connection to a combined sewer shall be made separate and
distinct from the sanitary waste connection to facilitate disconnection of
the former if a separate storm sewer or separate sanitary sewer subsequently
becomes available.



      (2)   Stormwater other than that exempted under division (A)
of this section, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers
or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory
agencies.  Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined
sewer or natural outlet.



   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas;



      (2)   Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;



      (3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 11.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works;



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



   (D)   The following described substances, materials, waters or waste
shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or
quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment
process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a
nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his
opinion as to the acceptability, the Superintendent will give consideration
to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant
and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer
which shall not be violated without approval of the Superintendent are as
follows:



      (1)   Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(65° C.).



      (2)   Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter
of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil
origin.



      (3)   Wastewater containing floatable oils, fat or grease.



      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see
definitions in §§ 50.01).  Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary
sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering
establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the
preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the
premises or when served by caterers.



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any
such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing
substances exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent.



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



      (8)   Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which
constitute a "slug" as defined herein.



      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



      (10)   Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other
water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a
condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.



   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in (D) of this section, and which in
the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of (K) of this section.



   When considering the above alternatives, the Superintendent shall give
consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. 
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.



   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of  the Superintendent,  they are  necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as
specified in division (D)(3) above or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.  In the
maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and
shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject
to review by the Superintendent.  Any removal and hauling of the collected
materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently
licensed waste disposal firms.



   (G)   Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.



   (H)   When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.  Such structure, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Superintendent.  The structure shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



   (I)   The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to
provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter.  These
requirements may include:



      (1)   Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a
specified time period.



      (2)   Chemical analyses of wastewaters.



      (3)   Information on raw materials, processes and products
affecting wastewater volume and quality.



      (4)   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge,
oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control.



      (5)   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing
sewer and pretreatment facility location.



      (6)   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.



      (7)   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of
materials through spills to the municipal sewer.



   (J)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health
Association, sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the
Superintendent.



   (K)   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment.



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord. 31-07-14, passed 7-15-14)



§ 50.05  DAMAGING SEWER WORKS EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities.  Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord. 59-12-95, passed 12-11-95)



§ 50.06  CITY INSPECTION OF PROPERTIES.



   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all  properties  for the  purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community
system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are
authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater
collection system. The industry may withhold information considered
confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public
of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.



   (C)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) above, the Superintendent or duly authorized
employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the
company against a loss or damage to its property by the city employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the
company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 50.05(H).



   (D)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the
city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspectional observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73; Am. Ord. 64B-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
59-12-95, passed 12-11-95)



§ 50.07  TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE TO DELINQUENT USERS.




   (A)   Termination of service procedures.





      (1)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-9-25, the City of Noblesville, by
and through its Common Council, may order the termination of water service to
a sewer service address on account of nonpayment of a delinquent account,
which is not less than 30 days delinquent. When so ordered, the water utility
shall terminate such service in accordance with the terms of their agreement
with the City.





      (2)   The fee for terminating services shall be a minimum fee
of $45, the amount charged to the City by the appropriate water utility for
disconnect and reconnection fees. The fee for terminating commercial and
industrial services shall be determined in an agreement between the city and
the water company. These delinquent fees shall be assessed against the
customer and added to the sewer delinquent bill.





      (3)   The city may not terminate water service under this
section, if the Hamilton County Health Department has found and certified to
the city that the termination of water service will endanger the health of
the user and others in the municipality.





      (4)   (a)   Prior to the termination of water service
because of sewer user fee delinquency, the city must first give notice of
such delinquency and impending termination at least 30 calendar days prior to
the proposed termination, by first class mail addressed to the user to whom
the service is billed, which notice shall contain the following:





            1.   The delinquent amount due, together with any
penalty and fees;





            2.   The date of the notice of termination;





            3.   The date on and after which termination shall
be made, which shall be at least ten calendar days from the date of the
notice of termination;





            4.   Notice that water service may be disconnected
if,  prior  to the earliest possible date of termination given  in  the
notice, the user does not pay the delinquency together with any penalty and
fees, or disputes the amount, or makes other provisions for payment pursuant
to this section.





            5.   A procedure, as provided in subsection
(A)(4)(b) for resolving a disputed bill.





         (b)   The Administrative Clerk of the Wastewater Utility
shall act as an account review officer (ARO) to review and resolve disputes.
Before the earliest possible date of termination of water service as
specified in the notice, a user may request a hearing before the ARO to
dispute the correctness of all or part of the amount(s) shown in accordance
with the provisions of this section. A user shall not be entitled to dispute
the correctness of all or part of an amount(s) if all or part of the
amount(s) was the subject of a previous dispute under this section.





      (5)   The procedure for a hearing on a user dispute shall be
as follows:





         (a)   Before the earliest possible date of termination
as specified on the notice of termination, the user shall notify the ARO in
writing, the he (she) requests a hearing to dispute the correctness of all or
part of the amounts shown on the notice of termination, stating as completely
as possible the basis for the dispute.





         (b)   An informal hearing before the ARO shall be held
within 15 days of the ARO's receipt of the user's written request for a
hearing on a disputed bill.





         (c)   At the hearing, the user shall be entitled to
present all evidence that is, in the ARO's view, relevant and material to the
dispute.





         (d)   Based on the evidence presented at the hearing,
the ARO, within the days of the completion of the hearing, shall issue a
written decision formally resolving the dispute.





      (6)   The ARO shall be authorized to resolve any disputed
sewage bill and shall be authorized to order their termination of water
service under appropriate circumstances. Upon approval by the ARO, the user
may enter into an agreement to amortize the unpaid balance of his/her account
over a reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months. No termination
shall be effected for any user complying with any such amortization
agreement, provided the user also keeps current his/her account for sewer
service as charges accrue in each subsequent billing period. If a user fails
to comply with an amortization agreement, the ARO may terminate water service
provided written notice is given to the user at least 48 hours prior to such
termination and the notice includes conditions the user is required to meet
to avoid termination.





      (7)   Utilization of this hearing procedure shall not relieve
a  user  of  the  obligation to timely and  completely  pay  all 
other undisputed water and sewage bills or charges. Failure to timely and
completely pay all such undisputed amounts shall subject the user the
termination of service in accordance with the provisions of this division.





      (8)   Until the date of the ARO's decision, the city shall not
terminate water service of the user. If the ARO determines that the customer
must pay some or all of disputed amount(s), the department, or ARO in his
written decision, shall notify the user of the following:





         (a)   The amount to be paid;





         (b)   The date on or after which services will be
terminated; and





         (c)   Notice that unless the city receives complete
payment of the amount shown prior to the earliest possible date of
termination given in the notice, water service shall be terminated.





         (d)   If the customer is unsatisfied with the resolution
of the issue by the ARO, the customer may seek an additional appeal within
ten days in writing to a board composed of the Director of Wastewater
Utility, the Clerk-Treasurer and a member of the Board of Public Works and
Safety designated by the Board and the ruling of the Board shall be final.





      (9)   A “user” for the purpose of this section is defined
as:





         (a)   A person who requests, either orally or in
writing, water and/or sewage service from the city or water utilities;





         (b)   A person in whose name water and/or sewage service
is billed for the rendering of said service.





   (B)   Termination of services not exclusive remedy.  The remedy
provided herein for the collection of delinquent sewer user charges or
benefits shall not be construed to abridge or in manner interfere with the
right and power of the city to enforce a collection thereof by any other
action or as otherwise provided by statute.





   (C)   Procedure.





      (1)   As used in this section, the term “final account”
shall have the following meaning:  A closed account for which sewer service
is not longer being provided to the customer at that service location.





      (2)   The city shall prepare a semi-annual schedule of sewer
user final accounts which it has determined to be uncollectible. The schedule
shall consist of the following:





         (a)   For bills becoming due prior to July 1, 1998, a
certified  list  of  all  sewer  user  final  accounts  for  which 
the outstanding fees and penalties together are $25 or less and which are at
least 120 days delinquent and which the department had determined to be
uncollectible;





         (b)   For bills becoming due after July 1, 1998, a
certified list of all sewer user final accounts for which the fees and
penalties together are $25 or less and which are at least 120 days delinquent
and which are not subject to liens under I.C. 36-9-23-31 or 36-9-25-11 and
which the City has determined to be uncollectible;





         (c)   A statement setting forth the efforts that have
been made to collect such accounts and a statement that all such efforts have
been unsuccessful;





         (d)   A statement, including the reasons therefore, that
the city believes it is economically not feasible to pursue collection
measures on such accounts.





      (3)   The semi-annual schedule shall be submitted to the
Common Council, which by resolution may declare accounts listed in the
schedule as uncollectible and may authorize the city to cease further
collection procedures and expense the amounts outstanding on the accounts as
bad debts.





      (4)   The semi-annual schedule shall be prepared by the city
and approved by the resolution of the Board of Works prior to being forwarded
to the Common Council for final approval. A sewer user account may be deemed
uncollectible only if approved by the Council and the Board.





   (D)   This section shall take effect immediately upon its passage,
signing and publication in accordance with the requirements of law.





   (E)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall enter into
agreements with all utilities providing water service to the citizens of the
city in conformance with the terms of this chapter.




(Ord. 11-3-98, passed 4-27-98)



SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS



§ 50.20  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect, maintain, and
enhance public health, safety and general welfare by establishing a method of
extending sanitary sewers into existing unsewered neighborhoods within the
Noblesville Wastewater Utility service area and outside the corporate
boundary of the city.



   (B)   The city is responsible for planning sewer extensions,
maintaining the collection system, and operating the wastewater treatment
facility for the Wastewater Utility service area. The extension of sanitary
sewers into existing neighborhoods within the Wastewater Utility service area
will reduce health and environmental problems caused by failing septic
systems.



   (C)   All sanitary sewer extensions must conform to city standards
according to the Planning Commission requirements and the Unified Development
Code, and shall conform to the Wastewater Utility Standards for construction
of sanitary sewers.



   (D)   I.C. 36-9-39 allows a municipality to construct sewers in an
existing neighborhood and provides a payment mechanism to allow those
benefited by the construction to pay for the improvements over a 10-year
period. This statute is commonly referred to as the Barrett Law.



   (E)   The method of sanitary sewer extension set forth in this
subchapter is intended to be a standard policy and guideline. Variances from
these policies and guidelines may be considered by the Board of Public Works
and Safety upon written application to the Board citing unusual conditions,
justifying changes based upon sound engineering practices. Proposed variances
shall have been reviewed by any applicable agency of jurisdiction, the
Planning and Development Department, and/or the Technical Advisory Committee,
as appropriate, before consideration by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.21  PRELIMINARY MATTERS,



   (A)   The Barrett Law Statute, I.C. 36-9-36, allows municipalities
to construct sanitary sewers, street lighting, sidewalks and storm sewers. In
each case, those benefited pay their share of the improvements over a 10-year
period, or the cost may be paid up front.



   (B)   To begin a Barrett Law Sewer project, the neighborhood may
request the Wastewater Utility to conduct an informational meeting. The
utility, or its engineer, will explain the Barrett Law process, annexation,
conceptual design, preliminary costs and other neighborhood needs.



   (C)   If the neighborhood wishes to proceed, the Board of Public
Works and Safety will request the Health Department conduct a survey of the
condition of the septic systems.



   (D)   The County Sanitarian may request the Board of Public Works
and Safety initiate a Barrett Law sanitary sewer project in a neighborhood
due to failing septic systems creating a health hazard.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.22  PETITION.



   (A)   Property owners in favor of the project shall sign and submit
a petition consenting to annexation, and requesting improvements be designed
and constructed, to the Board of Public Works and Safety. The petition form
is shown in Appendix Exhibit A. A minimum of 60% of the property owners in
the project area must sign the petition prior to submittal to the Board.



   (B)   The consent to annexation form shall be as provided in
Appendix Exhibit B.



   (C)   A property owners' guideline to Barrett Law Sewers has been
developed.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.23  BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY APPROVAL.



   (A)   At the Board of Public Works and Safety's requests, the
Department of Planning and Development shall complete a fiscal study to
determine the impact of annexing the neighborhood requesting sanitary sewer
service.



   (B)   The Board shall hold a public hearing. All affected property
owners shall be notified by mail. Any affected property owner may speak at
the public hearing. The public notice format shall be as provided in Appendix
Exhibit C.



   (C)   The Board shall consider:



      (1)   The petition presented by the property owners in the
neighborhood;



      (2)   The Health Department's report on septic system
condition;



      (3)   Any comments from the public; and



      (4)   The health and environmental benefits vs. the projected
cost.



   (D)   Guidelines for the administration of the Barrett Law Program
and determination of benefit and cost have been developed.



   (E)   After the Board considers the health and environmental
benefits and the cost of the project, they will pass a recommendation to the
Common Council to pass or deny the ordinance to provide sanitary sewer
service and annexation for the project area. The recommendation and proposed
Ordinance for sewer availability and annexation for Barrett Law Sewer
construction  shall be as provided in  Appendix Exhibit D.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.24  COMMON COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Common Council shall schedule a public hearing upon
presentation of the Board of Public Works and Safety's recommendation on the
pending sewer construction ordinance.



   (B)   The Common Council shall hear comments from the Engineer,
Health Department and any person affected by the project.



   (C)   The Common Council shall approve or deny the ordinance request.



   (D)   If the Common Council approves the ordinance to provide sewer
service, annexation will become effective 60 days after publication in the
newspaper. Design of the sewer project will proceed immediately.



   (E)   If the Common Council denies the ordinance to provide sanitary
sewer service, the project cannot proceed for at least one calendar year.



   (F)   If the Common Council determines other improvements such as
street lighting, sidewalks or drainage improvements must be made at the same
time to bring the neighborhood infrastructure up to current city standards,
the Common Council shall provide 50% of the funding for the additional
improvements.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.25  DESIGN.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall award a contract
for design of the sewer system.



   (B)   The Engineer shall prepare plans, specifications, preliminary
assessment roll and opinion of probable cost for the project.



   (C)   The Engineer shall hold informational meetings with the
property owners to determine other necessary improvements, locate laterals,
schedule plumbing inspection and discuss access and construction related
issues.



   (D)   The Engineer shall present the final design, preliminary
assessment roll and cost to the Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.26  PROJECT CONFIRMATION.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall consider the
project cost vs. the health and environmental benefits and determine if the
benefits exceed the cost.



   (B)   If the benefits exceed the cost, the Board shall pass a
resolution (form shown in Appendix Exhibit E) and schedule a public hearing.



   (C)   All property owners affected by the project shall be notified
of the public hearing.



   (D)   The Board shall conduct the public hearing and listen to
comments from all who wish to speak.



   (E)   If, after considering public comment as well as the health and
environmental benefits and the cost of the project, the Board determines the
special benefit to the property equals the estimated cost, they shall confirm
the resolution and the project shall move forward into construction.



   (F)   If the Board determines the special benefit is less than the
cost, the resolution shall be rescinded and the project may not proceed for
at least one year. If the Board finds the municipality is benefited in an
amount to cover the deficiency in cost to benefit, the project resolution
shall be confirmed and the project shall move forward into construction after
the Common Council approves the necessary funding.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.27  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The project is advertised for bids according to city and state
purchasing laws and ordinances.



   (B)   After bids are received and evaluated, the Board of Public
Works and Safety shall award a contract for construction.



   (C)   The contractor shall proceed with construction after receipt
of a notice to proceed from the Board of Public Works and Safety. The
Engineer shall conduct informational meetings with property owners as needed
and shall inspect the work of the contractor.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.28  PROJECT COMPLETION.



   (A)   The Engineer shall prepare the primary assessment roll for the
Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board shall schedule a final public hearing.



   (C)   All affected property owners shall be notified of the final
public hearing by mail.



   (D)   The Board shall conduct the final public hearing. The Board
shall hear all comments from affected property owners.



   (E)   The Board shall accept or modify the assessment roll.



   (F)   The Board shall accept the construction as complete.



   (G)   The Board shall send notices to each property owner to connect
to the sewer.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.29  SEWER CONNECTIONS AND COSTS.



   (A)   The property owner shall connect to the sanitary sewer and
abandon their septic system within 90 days after the Board of Public Works
and Safety issues a connection notice.



   (B)   The city shall waive the connection fee, and availability fee
if the property owner connects to the sewer within the 90-day period.



   (C)   The city shall waive the street and park impact fees upon
annexation of the project area into the city.



   (D)   The property owner has the following payment options:



      (1)   Payment of the entire assessment at the completion of
construction;



      (2)   payment of the assessment over a 10-year period,
including interest as determined by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (E)   The Wastewater Utility shall send invoices to collect the
principal and interest due from each property owner on a monthly basis.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.30  INDEPENDENT AUDIT.



   (A)   The Board of Pubic Works and Safety shall have an independent
audit made on the Barrett Law Funds once each fiscal year.



   (B)   The results of the audit shall be reported to the Common
Council.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.31  BARRETT LAW MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall maintain a general
engineering agreement to assist and advise the Wastewater Utility and the
Board on Barrett Law Sewer matters.



   (B)   The Board shall develop a Barrett Law Master Plan including
preliminary sewer design and opinion of probable cost for each unsewered,
platted subdivision in the Wastewater Service District. The Barrett Law
Master Plan shall be updated on an annual basis.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.32  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   If a property owner does not connect to the sewer within 90
days of receipt of connection notice:



      (1)   The connection fee and availability fee shall not be
waived.



      (2)   The Wastewater Utility shall begin charging the property
owner the minimum monthly sewer use amount.



   (B)   If a property owner becomes delinquent in the payment of their
Barrett Law assessment, the Wastewater Utility shall notify the property
owner and place a lien on the property. If the debt remains unpaid, the city
shall sell the property at a tax sale.



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter
except § 50.05 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof, and the offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations, provided that
with respect to violations of § 50.02(D) the notice shall be by certified
mail and shall allow at least 90 days for the connection required by that
section.



   (B)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in (A) above shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100 for each violation. 
Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.



   (C)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the
city by reason of such violation. 



(Ord. 1005, passed 8-2-73)



APPENDIX:  EXHIBITS



EXHIBIT A. BARRETT LAW SEWER PETITION




BARRETT LAW IMPROVEMENT PETITION




   The petition for Barrett Law Improvements must be filled out completely.



   Sixty percent of the property owners affected by the Barrett Law
Improvement must sign the petition in order for the project to move forward.



   The undersigned understand annexation by the City of Noblesville will
be required per § 51.24 of this code.



   The undersigned understand the cost for the improvements will be
assessed against each lot in the affected area and that the cost may be paid
up front or may be paid over ten years with interest.



   This Petition requests the City of Noblesville to design and construct
or improve Sanitary Sewers for the area bounded by or including the following
streets:



   No .   Signature   Name       Address   Phone No.
                                                  
                                             



   1                                             
                                               



   2                                             
                                               



   3                                             
                                               



   4                                             
                                               



   5                                             
                                               



   6                                             
                                               



   7                                             
                                               



   8                                             
                                               



   9                                             
                                               



   10                                             
                                               



   Petition Submitted By:(name)                    
   Telephone No:                  



EXHIBIT B. REQUEST FOR BARRETT LAW SEWERS AND CONSENT TO ANNEXATION FORM




REQUEST FOR BARRETT LAW SEWERS AND CONSENT TO ANNEXATION




                        do hereby request sanitary sewers be
constructed through the Barrett Law Statute to benefit the real estate
described below and consent to annexation by the City of Noblesville,
Indiana, of the following described real estate located in Noblesville
Township, in Hamilton County, in the State of Indiana, to wit:



   See Attached Exhibit "A"



   Commonly referred to as Tax Parcel Number:                  



   The undersigned agree to waive any right that they, their heirs, or
assigns may have to remonstrate or protest annexation of the above- described
real estate by the City of Noblesville, Indiana. This Consent shall not be
binding upon the undersigned unless or until a sanitary sewer is constructed
under the Barrett Law statute (I.C. 36-9-39) to serve the above-described
real estate. This request and waiver shall be recorded and is given in
consideration for the right to connect one (1) sewer lateral to the City of
Noblesville, Indiana, sanitary sewer system without payment of the applicable
tap-on and availability charge for one (1) equivalent dwelling unit.



   Witness my hand the       day of             ,        .



By:                                   By:           
              Printed:                         
   Printed:                     



Title:                               Title:           
               



STATE OF INDIANA



            SS:



COUNTY OF HAMILTON



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared                                    and        
                                and                
                 



and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing Consent to Annexation as
his/her voluntary act and deed for the purposes therein expressed.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this   day of,        ,    . 



                             County of Residence:        
                                 



Notary Public



                             Commission Expires:       
                                 



Printed



EXHIBIT C. PUBLIC NOTICE




PUBLIC NOTICE





FROM





PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY BOARD





197 W. WASHINGTON STREET





NOBLESVILLE, IN 46060





TO





PROPERTY OWNERS AND OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES




Notice is hereby given that pursuant to I.C. 36-9-39-4 et seq., the Board of
Public Works and Safety of the City of Noblesville, Hamilton County, Indiana
on the       day of          ,     adopted Public Improvement
Resolution (PIR)      , by which Resolution said Board deems it necessary
to order the construction of a sanitary sewer in the vicinity of 
         .



Description of area served:               



Said Board of Public Works and Safety has fixed           ,       
at        a.m./p.m. in Room   of the           building located at
              as the date, time and place when it will publicly hear
all interested persons, including those whose property is or will be affected
by the proposed improvement, on the question as to whether the special
benefits that will accrue to the properties to be assessed will be equal to
the estimated cost of the improvement, and any other matter pertaining to
said proposed improvement. After such hearing, said Board will determine
whether the special benefits accruing the property liable to assessment are
equal to the estimated cost of the improvement.



For special accommodations needed by disabled individuals planning to attend,
please call             or TDD         at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the meeting.



By order of the Board of Public Works and Safety.



                               Attest:              
                 



Donald T. Anthis, Director   Board Secretary



Noblesville Wastewater Utility



Newspaper:                                            
                                     



Publish twice:                                         
                                     



                                                   
     



For Hearing on:                                         
                         



EXHIBIT D. BARRETT LAW SEWER PROJECT ORDINANCE




SEWER AVAILABILITY AND ANNEXATION FOR





BARRETT LAW SEWER PROJECT





ORDINANCE No.                 




   A PETITION has been submitted for Barrett Law sewer construction in the
area commonly known as                       subdivision including
the following streets:



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                                 



   WHEREAS At least 60 percent of the property owners signed the petition
requesting Barrett Law Sanitary Sewers and consenting to annexation; and



   WHEREAS      of      property owners have consented to voluntary
annexation; and



   WHEREAS The Department of Planning and Development has completed a
fiscal study regarding the impact of annexing the project area and determined
that annexation is favorable to the City; and



   WHEREAS The County Department of Health has conducted a septic system
evaluation in the project area and finds the need exists to construct
sanitary sewers and abandon septic systems for health and environmental
reasons; and



   WHEREAS The Board of Public Works and Safety has reviewed the
preliminary design and opinion of probable cost for the sanitary sewers; and



   WHEREAS The Board of Public Works and Safety conducted a public meeting
where all property owners affected by this project where invited to attend
and speak; and



   WHEREAS The Board of Public Works and Safety finds the special benefit
accrued to each property in the project area exceeds the cost to each
property.



   THEREFORE The Board of Public Works and Safety recommends to the Common
Council of the City of Noblesville, Indiana, adoption of this Ordinance No. 
        to provide sewer service to these properties, and to consider
voluntarily annexation for        properties and involuntarily annexation
for            properties.



Submitted this      day of          ,    .



   AYE      Board of Public Works and Safety    NAY



                          Mayor, Dennis R. Redick      
                   



                          Larry Stork, Member       
                     



                          C. Murphy White, Member      
                   



EFFECTIVE DATE



Adopted this          day of       ,    by the Common Council of
the City of Noblesville, Hamilton County, Indiana.



   ALL OF WHICH IS SO ORDAINED this      day of          ,    .



Ordinance No.               



COMMON COUNCIL, CITY OF NOBLESVILLE



      AYE         NAY



                         Jay McCoskey               
                                   



                         Alan Hinds               
                                   



                         Dale Snelling             
                                     



      Jack Martin                                 
               



                         Laurie Hurst               
                                    



                         Rex Dillinger             
                                     



                         Jim Snyder               
                                   



   APPROVED and signed by the Mayor of the City of Noblesville, Hamilton
County, Indiana, this        day of          ,2000.



                                            
                     



                     Dennis R. Redick



                     City of Noblesville, Indiana



Attest:                                             



      Janet S. Jaros



      Clerk-Treasurer



      City of Noblesville, Indiana



EXHIBIT E. BARRETT LAW SEWER PROJECT RESOLUTION



PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT RESOLUTION FOR MUNICIPAL SEWERS



PIR-                                             



Resolved by the Board of Public Works and Safety of the City of Noblesville,
Hamilton County, Indiana, that the construction of a municipal sewer,
intended for the local use by the property holders whose properties abut
thereon, is hereby ordered for the Area in the vicinity of           
              ;



Description of area served:                                 
           



Said sewer, with its appurtenances, shall be constructed in accordance with
applicable law and the profile and specification now on file in the Office of
the Noblesville Wastewater Utility. The cost of these improvements shall be
apportioned against and paid by the property owners whose properties abut
thereon, and upon the City, if City is benefited by the improvements, all in
accordance to the method and manner provided for in I.C. 36-9-39.
Assessments, if deferred, are to be paid in ten equal annual installments,
with interest at the rate of        percent (  %) per annum. Bonds may
be issued to the contractor in payment of such works, unless the property
owners pay assessments before bonds are issued, with no responsibility to the
City for any sums due from property owners for the work, or for the
collection of same, or for payment of any bonds or certificates issued to
said contractor in payment of such work, except for monies as shall have been
actually received by the City from assessments for such improve- ments, or
such monies as the City is by the above statute required to pay. The City may
elect to fund the cost of the project through bonds. If the City so elects,
the City will bear the responsibility of collecting the assessments from
property owners, if said collection is determined beneficial to both the City
and the property owners.



Adopted this                day of          ,    .



               Board of Public Works and Safety



               Noblesville, Hamilton County, Indiana



                                              
             



               Dennis R. Redick, Mayor



                                              
             



               Larry Stork, Member



                                              
             



               C. Murphy White, Member



                         



                Secretary



(Ord. 31-6-00, passed 6-26-00)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWAGE DISPOSAL; RATES



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Establishment of user classes



   51.03   Rate schedule



   51.04   Allowances and meter requirements



   51.05   Basis of charges



   51.06   Billing procedures; delinquent charges



   51.07   Studies of rates and charges



   51.08   Enforcement of regulations



   51.09   Special rate contracts



   51.10   Initial connection charge



   51.11   Effective date




Developers and New Users




   51.15   Definitions



   51.16   Availability costs



   51.17   Individual connections



   51.18   Manner of payment



   51.19   Off-site trunk sewerage



   51.20   Ownership of system



   51.21   On-site sewers; inspection costs and approval



   51.22   Developed areas



   51.23   Allocation of receipts



   51.24   Annexation remonstrance restriction



   51.25   Permit required for connections



   51.26   Amendments



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BOARD."  The Board of Works of the city, or any duly-authorized
officials acting in its behalf.



   "B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand)."  Shall have the same meaning as
defined in the sewer use ordinance.



   "CITY."  The City of Noblesville, Indiana, acting by and through the
Common Council.



   "DEBT SERVICE COSTS."  The average annual principal and interest
payments on all revenue bonds or other long-term capital debt.



   "EXCESSIVE STRENGTH SURCHARGE."  An additional charge which is billed
to users for treating sewage wastes with an average strength in excess of
normal domestic sewage.



   "INDUSTRIAL WASTES."  The wastewater discharges from industrial,
trade, or business processes as distinct from employee wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



   "NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE." 



      (1)   For the purpose of determining surcharges, wastewater or
sewage having an average daily concentration as follows:



         (a)   B.O.D. not more than 300 mg/1.



         (b)   S.S. not more than 350 mg/1.



      (2)   As defined by origin, wastewaters from segregated
domestic or sanitary conveniences as distinct from wastes from industrial
processes.



   "NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) PERMIT." Shall
have the same meaning as defined in the sewer use ordinance.



   "OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS."  Includes all costs, direct and
indirect, necessary to provide adequate wastewater collection, transport, and
treatment on a continuing basis, and produce discharges to receiving waters
that conform with all related federal, state, and local requirements.  These
costs include replacement.



   "OTHER SERVICE CHARGES."  Tap charges, connection charges, area
charges, and other identifiable charges other than user charges, debt service
charges, and excessive strength surcharges.



   "PERSON."  Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency, or other entity.



   "REPLACEMENT COSTS."  The expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance
for which the works were designed and constructed.



   "S.S. (suspended solids)."  Shall have the same meaning as defined in
the sewer use ordinance.



   "SEWAGE."  Shall have the same meaning as defined in the sewer use
ordinance.



   "SEWER USE ORDINANCE."  A separate and companion enactment to§ §
51.01 through 51.11, which regulates the connection to and use of public and
private sewers.



   "USER CHARGE."  A charge levied on users of the wastewater treatment
works for the cost of operation and maintenance of the works pursuant to
Section 204(b) of PL 92-500.



   "USER CLASS."  The division of wastewater treatment customers by
source, function, waste characteristics, and process or discharge
similarities (i.e., residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and
governmental in the user charge system).



      (1)   "RESIDENTIAL USER."  A user of the treatment works
whose premises or building is used primarily as a residence for one or more
persons, including all dwelling units, and the like.



      (2)   "COMMERCIAL USER."  Any establishment involved in a
commercial enterprise, business, or service which, based on a determination
by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.



      (3)   "INSTITUTIONAL USER."  Any establishment involved in a
social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a
determination by the city, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.



      (4)   "GOVERNMENTAL USER."  Any federal, state, or local
governmental user of the wastewater treatment works.



      (5)   "INDUSTRIAL USER."  Any manufacturing or processing
facility that discharges industrial waste to a wastewater treatment works.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF USER CLASSES.



   (A)   Every person whose premises are served by the sewage works
shall be charged for the services provided.  These charges are established
for each user class, as defined, in order that the sewage works shall
recover, from each user and user class, revenue which is proportional to its
use of the treatment works in terms of volume and load.  User charges are
levied to defray the cost of operation and maintenance (including
replacement) of the treatment works.  User charge rates shall be uniform in
magnitude within a user class.



   (B)   User charges are subject to the rules and regulations adopted
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Replacement costs,
which are recovered through the system of user charges, shall be based upon
the expected useful life of the sewage works equipment.



   (C)   The various classes of users of the treatment works for
purposes of this chapter shall be as follows:



      (1)   Residential.



      (2)   Commercial.



      (3)   Governmental.



      (4)   Institutional.



      (5)   Industrial.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.03  RATE SCHEDULE.



   This section shall impose a monthly fee for the use and the services
rendered by the sewage works.  Rates and charges shall be collected from the
owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate or building that is
connected with the city sewage system or otherwise discharges sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids,



either directly or indirectly, into the sewage system of the city.  Such
rates and charges include user charges, debt service costs, excessive
strength surcharges and other service charges, which rates and charges shall
be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in an amount determinable as
follows:



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a flat, monthly fee for
each single-family residence and residential duplexes with separate meters
(“residential parcels”), beginning on the following dates:



 

Beginning July 1, 2017
 
Beginning July 1, 2018
 
Beginning July 1, 2019


$39.00
 
$40.36
 
$41.78



 



      (2)   Any owner-occupant who is eligible for, and has filed:



         (a)   A claim for an over age 65 deduction for property
taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-9;



         (b)   A claim for a blind and disabled deduction for
property taxes under I.C. 6-1.1-12-11; or



         (c)   A claim for a disabled veteran or surviving spouse
deduction for property taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-13;



is eligible for a $10 per month credit from the above amounts. A residential
parcel may receive only one credit, even though the owner-occupant may be
eligible under more than one statute.



         (d)   Any claims for the above credit filed prior to the
date of Ord. 14-05-17 shall continue to be in effect as long as the rate
payer meets the criteria above.



         (e)   Future claims must be filed with the Hamilton
County Auditor.  The property owner shall not be eligible for the credit
until the first billing cycle after the claim is filed.  Any owner-occupant
who has filed a claim, but does not receive the credit on the wastewater
bill, must file a file-marked copy of the owner’s affidavit requesting one
of the above deductions.



      (3)   The wastewater utility shall annually transfer an amount
equal to the total amount of the credits (“credit amount”) granted by
division (A)(2) into the operation and maintenance fund. The credit amount
shall be paid from a credit account funded by interest earnings from utility
funds.



   (B)   The schedule of rates for all other users of the city’s
sewage works shall be determined as follows:



      The sewage rates and charges shall be based on the quantity of
water used on or in the property or premises subject to such rates and
charges, as the same is measured by the water meter there in use, plus a base
charge based on the size of the water meter installed. For the purpose of
billing and collecting the charges for the sewage service, the water meters
shall be read monthly or based on the average monthly usage for the preceding
seven months ending in May based on actual readings. These readings shall be
averaged and the users shall be billed monthly (or a period equaling a
month). All new customers of the wastewater utility shall have service
commenced at the monthly rate based on meter size plus the family residential
rate. Upon receiving at least three readings, the new customer’s rate shall
be adjusted accordingly.



   (C)   (1)   The rates for used of the sewage works not included
in division (A) above are as follows:



 



 
Monthly Base Rate


Meter Size
 

Beginning
July 1, 2017

 

Beginning
July 1, 2018

 

Beginning
July 1, 2019





5/8-3/4 inch
 

$13.80

 

$14.28

 

$14.78



1 inch
 

$30.76

 

$31.84

 

$32.95



1-1/2 inch
 

$68.22

 

$70.60

 

$73.08



2 inch
 

$115.65

 

$119.70

 

$123.89



3 inch
 

$262.87

 

$272.07

 

$281.59



4 inch
 

$455.39

 

$471.33

 

$487.82



6 inch
 

$1,032.76

 

$1,068.91

 

$1,106.32



PLUS a monthly flow charge (per 1,000 gallons)
 

$4.26

 

$4.41

 

$4.57





 



      (2)   Unmetered non-residential parcels shall be charged a
rate to be determined by the city on an individual basis by applying the
above metered rates to estimated usage and meter size.



   (D)   There is established a surcharge rate for certain excessive
strength surcharges based on effluent strength as follows:



 



 

Monthly Per Pound




Excessive Strength Surcharges
(Based on Effluent Strength)

 

Beginning
July 1, 2017

 

Beginning
July 1, 2018

 

Beginning
July 1, 2019



B.O.D. in excess of 300 mg/l
 

$0.07

 

$0.07

 

$0.07



S.S. in excess of 350 mg/l
 

$0.06

 

$0.06

 

$0.06



Phosphorus in excess of 15 mg/l
 

$0.51

 

$0.51

 

$0.51




 



   (E)   Upon receiving notice that the water meter has become active
from any of the water companies currently serving customers in the city,
billing shall commence immediately. In the event a new customer uses the
sewer system prior to notification to the utility, the utility may bill the
new user retroactively, based upon either: the date a certificate of
occupancy is issued for a new building or residence; or, for existing
buildings, the date of transfer of the real estate, based on the deed
recorded in the Office of the Hamilton County Recorder.



   (F)   For the service rendered to the city, the city shall be
subject to the same rates and charges hereinabove provided, or to charges and
rates established in harmony therewith.



   (G)   In order to recover the cost of monitoring industrial wastes,
the city shall charge the user the actual costs of monitoring, but no less
than $25 per sampling event.  This charge will be reviewed on the same basis
as all other rates and charges in this section.



   (H)   No adjustment to the monthly rate charged to non-residential
parcels shall be applied retroactively for more than three monthly billing
cycles. Any appeal for an adjustment to the monthly rate more than three
months prior to the request for an adjustment is deemed waived.



(Ord. 1589, passed - - -; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
43-12-91, passed 12-30-91; Am. Ord. 4-17-92, passed 5-26-92; Am. Ord. 8-2-01,
passed 2-27-01; Am. Ord. 37-8-07, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 47-9-08, passed
9-23-08; Am. Ord. 04-02-13, passed 2-26-13; Am. Ord. 14-05-17, passed 5-23-17)



§ 51.04  ALLOWANCES AND METER REQUIREMENTS.



   The quantity of water discharged into the sewage system and obtained
from sources other than the utility that serves the city shall be determined
by the city in such manner as the city shall reasonably elect, and the sewage
service shall be billed at the above appropriate rates; except, as is
hereinafter provided in this section, the city may make proper allowances in
determining the sewage bill for quantities of water shown on the records to
be consumed, but which are also shown to the satisfaction of the city that
such quantities do not enter the sewage system.



   (A)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into
the city's sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is not a user of
water supplied by the water utility serving the city, and the water used
thereon or therein is not measured by a water meter, or is measured by a
water meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount of water used shall
be otherwise measured or determined by the city.  In order to ascertain the
rate or charge provided in this chapter, the owner or other interested party
shall, at his expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric
measuring devices, or any adequate and approved method of measurement
acceptable to the city for the determining of sewage discharge.



   (B)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into
the city's sewage system, either directly or indirectly, is a user of water
supplied by the water utility serving the city, and in addition, is a user of
water from another resource which is not measured by a water meter or is
measured by a meter not acceptable to the city, then the amount of water used
shall be otherwise measured or determined by the city.  In order to
ascertain the rates or charges, the owner or other interested party shall, at
his expense, install and maintain meters, weirs, volumetric measuring
devices, or any adequate and approved method of measurement acceptable to the
city for the determination of sewage discharge.



   (C)   In the event two or more residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings discharging sanitary sewage, water, or other liquids
into the city's sewage system, either directly or indirectly, are users of
water and the quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, then in
each such case, for billing purposes, the quantity of water used shall be
averaged for each user, and the base charge and the flow rates and charges
shall apply to each of the number of residential lots, parcels of real
estate, or buildings served through the single water meter.



   (D)   In the event a lot, parcel of real estate, or building
discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water, or other liquids into
the city's sewage system, either directly or indirectly, and uses water in
excess of 10,000 gallons per month, and it can be shown to the satisfaction
of the city that a portion of water as measured by the water meter or meters
does not and cannot enter the sanitary sewage system, then the owner or other
interested party shall, at his expense, install and maintain meters, weirs,
volumetric measuring devices, or any adequate and approved method of
measurement acceptable to the city for the determination of sewage discharge.



   (E)   Where a metered water supply is used for fire protection as
well as for other uses not entering the sewer system, the city may, in its
discretion, make adjustments in the user charge as may be equitable.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.05  BASIS OF CHARGES.



   (A)   In order that the rates and charges may be justly and
equitably adjusted to the service rendered to users, the city shall base its
charges not only on the volume, but also on the strength and character of the
stronger-than-normal domestic sewage, and shall require the user to determine
the strength and content of all sewage and wastes discharged, either directly
or indirectly into the sewage system, in such manner and by such method as
the city may deem practicable in the light of the conditions and attending
circumstances of the case, in order to determine the proper charge.  The
user shall furnish a sampling point, as defined in the sewer use ordinance,
available to the city at all times.



   (B)   Normal sewage domestic waste strength should not exceed a
biochemical oxygen demand of 300 milligrams per liter of fluid or suspended
solids in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of fluid or phosphorous in
excess of 15 milligrams per liter of fluid.  Additional charges for treating
stronger-than-normal domestic waste shall be made on the following basis:



      (1)   Rate surcharge based upon suspended solids.  There
shall be an additional charge of $.06 per pound of suspended solids for
suspended solids received in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      (2)   Rate surcharge based upon B.O.D.  There shall be an
additional charge of $.07 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand for B.O.D.
received in excess of 300 milligrams per liter of fluid.



      (3)   Rate surcharge based upon phosphorous.  There shall be
an additional charge of $.51 per pound of phosphorous oxygen demand for
B.O.D. received in excess of 15 milligrams per liter of fluid.



   (C)   The determination of suspended solids and five-day biochemical
oxygen demand contained in the waste shall be in accordance with the current
edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage, and
Industrial Wastes," as written by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.06  BILLING PROCEDURES; DELINQUENT CHARGES.



   (A)   Rates and charges shall be prepared, billed, and collected by
the city in the manner provided by law and ordinance.



   (B)   Beginning July 1, 2013, the rates and charges for all
residential rental properties shall be charged to the owner of the real
estate as shown by the land records maintained by the Hamilton County
Auditor. The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant of non-residential
properties served by the sewage works, if requested in writing by the owner.
Such billing of rental properties shall in no way relieve the owner from
liability in the event payment is not made as herein required, nor does such
billing restrict the city from any collection procedures, including filing of
liens. The owners of properties, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants,
shall have the right to examine the collection records of the city for the
purpose of determining whether bills have been paid by such tenant or
tenants, provided that such examination shall be made at the office of the
Wastewater Department during the hours that such office is open for business.



   (C)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties
served, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the city for the purpose of determining
whether bills have been paid by the tenant or tenants, provided that the
examination shall be made at the office at which the records are kept and
during the hours that the office is open for business.



   (D)   As is provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when
due are hereby declared to be delinquent, and a penalty of 15% of the amount
of the rates or charges shall thereupon attach thereto. The time at which the
rates or charges shall be paid is now fixed at 15 days after the date of
mailing of the bill.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
47-9-08, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 04-02-13, passed 2-26-13)



§ 51.07  STUDIES OF RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   In order to assure the rates and charges for sewage services
are properly allocated pursuant to statute, and that said charges may remain
sufficient to adequately fund the necessary replacement costs and other
revenue and reserve requirements, the city shall periodically cause a study
to be made concerning the rates charged by the city.  Such study shall
include, but not be limited to, an analysis of the costs associated with the
treatment of excessive strength effluents from industrial users, volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics attributed to the various users or user
classes, the financial position of the sewage works and the sufficiency of
its revenue to provide adequate funds for the operation and maintenance,
replacements, debt service requirements and capital improvements to the waste
treatment systems.



   (B)   These studies shall be conducted by officers or employees of
the city or by a firm of certified public accountants, or a firm of
consulting engineers which firms shall have experience in such studies, or by
such combination of officers, employees, certified public accountants or
engineers as the city shall determine to be best under the circumstances.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89; Am. Ord.
47-9-08, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 04-02-13, passed 2-26-13)



§ 51.08  ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city shall make and enforce such by-laws and regulations
as may be deemed necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management
of the city's sewage system, pumping stations, and sewage treatment works,
for the construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewage
treatment works, for the construction and use of house sewers and connection
to the sewerage system, and for the regulation, collection, rebating, and
refunding of such rates and charges.  No free service shall be provided to
any user of the wastewater treatment facility.



   (B)   The city is hereby authorized to prohibit dumping of wastes
into the city's sewage system which, in its discretion, are deemed harmful to
the operation of the sewage treatment works of the city; or to require
methods affecting pretreatment of wastes to comply with the pretreatment
standards included in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit issued to the sewage works.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.09  SPECIAL RATE CONTRACTS.



   The Board of Works is hereby authorized to enter into special rate
contracts with users of the sewage works where clearly definable costs to the
sewage works can be determined, and the special rates shall be based on those
costs.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.10  INITIAL CONNECTION CHARGE.



   In order to accumulate funds for the future expansion of the wastewater
treatment facilities, each property owner at the time of initial connection
shall pay a charge equal to $2,160 per equivalent single-family dwelling
unit.  For multi-dwelling units and nonresidential users, the equivalence to
a single-family dwelling unit shall be determined by the city.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 64A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



§ 51.11  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The rates and charges as herein set forth shall become effective on the
first full billing period occurring after the adoption of §§ 51.01 through
51.11.



(Ord. 1589, passed  -  -  ; Am. Ord. 54A-8-89, passed 8-28-89)



   DEVELOPERS AND NEW USERS



§ 51.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "INTERCEPTOR COSTS."  Sewer costs external to a development.



   "LOCAL SEWER COSTS."  Sewer costs within a development being served.



   "OVERSIZING COSTS."  As outlined in § 51.16(D), will be considered
interceptor costs and shall qualify for refunding.



   "OWNER OF REAL ESTATE."  An individual, firm, company, partnership,
cooperation, governmental units, or charitable and other non-profit
organization holding legal title to real estate.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.16  AVAILABILITY COSTS.



   No connection to any city-owned trunk sanitary sewer shall be allowed
until a permit is obtained and payment or satisfactory surety for payment as
a contribution to aid in construction has been made into the City Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund, and the Plant Expansion Fund pursuant to
this section. No sewer collection facilities will be extended by the city
unless and until such area requesting extension is annexed to the city or the
owners of the real estate within the area have agreed not to remonstrate
against such annexation in the future.



   (A)   There are hereby established, as of the effective date of this
section for all new users of the City Sewer Works, availability and
connection fees of $2,715 per Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU). For purposes of
this section, one EDU shall be defined as the average use of 310 gallons of
wastewater flow per day over one calendar year. The assigned number of EDUs
for various land uses are listed in Exhibit A which is attached to Ordinance
21-5-04. Exhibit A, as acquired from Table 11-1 of Title 327 of the State of
Indiana Water Pollution Control Board, shall be used to determine the number
of EDUs for all users, unless the Board of Public Works and Safety determines
to the contrary.



   (B)   Additional funds contributed.  The above availability costs
shall be strictly non-refundable.  If by prior agreement, in order to extend
the trunk sewerage system, additional funds are necessary to extend the sewer
to the owners of real estate, such additional funds, advanced or contributed
by said owners of real estate for the extensions and/or oversizing to meet
the requirements of the city, are refundable, without interest.  However,
such refunds may be made only from funds deposited at a future date by owners
of real estate benefited under such terms and conditions as the city shall,
from time to time, set forth.  In no event will any of the city sewerage
revenues be used, committed, or encumbered to repay any such funds advanced
or contributed, nor will the city's General Fund be used, committed or
encumbered to repay any such funds advanced or contributed.  It is expressly
declared that such repayment, if any, will be made under the provisions of
and will be repaid only from funds deposited in the Interceptor Improvement
and Betterment Fund on the basis of first in, first out.  No provision of
this subchapter shall be construed as a guarantee by the city that the owners
of real estate advancing funds will be fully reimbursed therefor.



   (C)   Accounts.



      (1)   Two separate accounts will be established from the
availability costs assessed.  In one account will be deposited 10% of the
assessed availability costs until the accumulated amount totals $30,000 for
use by the city for emergency and special sewer cases as determined necessary
by the Board of Public Works and Safety.  When this account is depleted in
part or in whole, 10% of subsequent availability costs assessments shall
again accumulate to the total of $30,000.



      (2)   The second account will be established from 90% of the
availability costs assessed and 100% of the availability costs after the
emergency and special sewer cases account has accumulated $30,000.  Only
this second account shall be used for reimbursement, refunds, or repayment to
owners of real estate for extensions and/or oversizing to meet requirements
of the city and for which a prior written agreement was negotiated.



   (D)   Oversizing.  Refunding of costs for oversizing to meet city
specifications shall be made only for the portion of the oversizing which
lies within the real estate owner's development as requested in writing by
the Board of Public Works and Safety.  In the event the availability cost
does not provide sufficient funds to extend and/or oversize the trunk sewer,
as needed, no such sewer extension into the development, or oversizing, will
be considered by the Board of Public Works and Safety unless the owners of
real estate desire to advance and pay the excess costs of the project.  In
the event oversizing of sewage lift stations and other applicable
appurtenance and/or oversizing and extensions of trunk sewers constructed
within their development by owners of real estate are necessary to deliver
sewage from other areas to the trunk sewer, or from one trunk to another,
such oversizing and/or extension costs may be deemed to be part of the trunk
sewer costs and not part of the on-site local sewer costs, and as such, would
be considered for refund under provisions of division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Repayment method.  Repayment, reimbursement, or refund for
oversizing or extension costs must be requested by the real estate owner at
the time of application for sewerage extensions and/or signing of final
plats.  The amount of eligible repayment will be negotiated prior to signing
of final plats and/or at the time of filing applications for sewerage
extensions.  The negotiated amount will be for construction labor and
materials only and will be based on city standard costs as updated annually
from receipt of not less than two bid quotations.



   (F)   The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to
any rehabilitation, change of use or improvement to an existing building
located within the CCBD of Noblesville as the district is hereafter defined,
except as specifically limited or restricted herein.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88; Am. Ord. 45-11-92, passed 11-23-92; Am. Ord.
72-12-00, passed 12-26-00; Am. Ord. 21-6-02, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord.
20-5-04, passed 6-15-04)



§ 51.17  INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Where an individual connection is sought for acreage or
developed areas inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, the
following sewer users, listed by type of occupancy, shall pay a connection
cost based on an average user factor of one.  The average or equivalent user
connection cost for a single-family residence is hereby initially fixed and
established at $1,865.  The units listed below will presently pay for a
connection cost based on the multiplication of the listed decimal times
$1,865.  The equivalent user cost of $1,865 as well as the connection costs
listed below may, from time  to  time,  be  updated and changed by the
city.  Funds collected, including inspection costs, shall be deposited into
the City Plant Expansion and Improvement Fund.  Funds collected shall be
used for the expansion and improvements of nonconveyance facilities.



   (B)   Connection of users not list below or of unique character will
be negotiated with the Board of Public Works and Safety.  For the purpose of
reviewing the unit contribution, the usage of a single-family residence will
be considered as 9,300 gallons per month.  Users listed above shall also be
billed a monthly rate in accordance with current sewer use charges.



   (C)   Connection charges.



 


TYPE OF USER

 

PER UNIT EQUIVALENT





Single-Family residences and  condominiums
 

$1.00



Multi-family residences
 





One bedroom

 

.64




Two bedrooms

 

.96




Three or more bedrooms

 

1.00



Assembly Halls, lodges, veterans organizations
 

.006 per seat



Barber and beauty shops
 

.60 per chair



Bars and cocktail lounges
 

.10 per seat



Bowling alleys
 

.32 per lane



Churches
 

.008 per seat



Day care centers
 

.03 per child and staff member



Drive-in/drive-thru restaurants
 

.40 per car space



Drive-in theaters
 

.02 per space



Hospitals
 

.50 per bed



Institutions other than hospitals
 

.40 per bed



Laundromats
 

1.00 per washing machine



Mobile home parks
 

.75 per space



Motels and Hotels
 

.32 per room



Nursing homes
 

.30 per bed



Offices
 
.50 per 1,00 square  feet of building area


Restaurants
 

.10 per seat



Retail space
 
1.00 per 1,000 square feet of building area


With fountain space add
 

.10 per seat



Rooming houses
 

.30 per renter



Schools
 

.03 per pupil



With cafeteria and showers
 

.05 per pupil



Service stations
 

.70 per island



Theaters
 

.01 per seat



Manufacturing facilities
 
Based on industrial process used city shall estimate usage in terms of its
equivalence to a single-family dwelling unit.


Unique facilities
 
Negotiated with Board of Public Works and Safety.


Change in character or use
 
Per above table as by addition or remodel applicable




 



   (D)   The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to
any rehabilitation, change of use or improvement to an existing building
located within the CCBD of Noblesville as the district is hereafter defined,
except as specifically limited or restricted herein.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88; Am. Ord. 59-7-89, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord.
45-11-92, passed 11-23-92)



§ 51.18  MANNER OF PAYMENT.



   (A)   Payment of the availability and connection costs shall be made
at the following times and in the following manner:



      (1)   At signing of record plat or detail plan approval, or
conditional use approval, the sum of $1,050 per each equivalent dwelling
unit, which shall be allocated to the Interceptor Improvement and Betterment
Fund. Said payment shall be paid into the following accounts of the
Interceptor Improvement and Betterment Fund:



         (a)   Emergency Account.  $150 shall be paid into the
Emergency Account until the accumulated amount in the Emergency Account
reaches $300,000. The Emergency Account is to be used by the city for
emergency and special sewer cases as recommended by the Utility Director and
as authorized by the Mayor. The amount in the Emergency Account shall
continue to be collected until the account reaches $300,000, at which time
any further amounts collected under this division shall be transferred to the
Wastewater Department Interceptor Acount.



         (b)   The Interceptor Expansion Account. $500 shall be
paid into the Interceptor Expansion Account. This account shall be used to
provide reimbursements to developers who oversize and/or extend sewers
pursuant to the Master Plan set out in division (E) of this section.
Contracts under this fund shall be negotiated by the City Engineer and
approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Any developer meeting the
terms of division (E) shall receive, as a credit, up to $500 per EDU on land
developed or owned by the developer as a credit for payment to the
Interceptor Expansion Account. The balance of credits shall be paid in cash
as set out in division (E). The payments under this fund shall be made only
from funds available and shall be paid to the developer in order of approval
of the reimbursement agreements approved by the Board of Public Works and
Safety. The City Engineer shall approve all cash payments from this account.



         (c)   Storm Water Fund.  This account shall consist of
$100 per EDU payable upon receipt from the final payment of the Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund.  This account shall be managed by the
Utility Director and used to pay the costs of the design, construction,
planning, and expenses necessary for the collection, distribution,
purification, diversion or storage of storm water within the city, or the
area served by the utility, including, but not limited to, separation of
combined sewer projects.



         (d)   The Wastewater Department Interceptor Account. 
$300 shall be paid into the Wastewater Department Interceptor Account. This
account shall be used by either the Utility Director or City Engineer to pay
the costs of improvements and extensions of the interceptor sewers, including
engineering fees, professional fees, construction costs, costs of maintenance
of records and documents and such other costs as are ordinary and necessary
in the construction and expansion of the interceptor sewer system.



      (2)   At the issuance of the building permit, the balance of
$1,665 per EDU shall be paid which shall be distributed into the following
funds or accounts.



         (a)   Plant Expansion Fund.  $1,100 per EDU shall be
paid into the Plant Expansion Fund. This fund shall be managed by the Utility
Director for the purpose of Wastewater Treatment Plant maintenance and/or
capital improvements, and may be used to pay the costs of the expansion of
the city's sewage treatment planting, including engineering costs,
professional expenses, and construction expenses, as well as any debt service
or lease rental costs to finance the above expenses.



         (b)   The Wastewater Department Interceptor Account. 
$250 shall be paid into the Wastewater Department Interceptor Account
established in division (A)(1)(d) above.



         (c)   Storm Water Fund.  This account shall consist of
$275 per EDU, payable upon receipt from the final payment of the Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund. This account shall be managed by the Utility
Director and used to pay the costs of the design, construction, planning, and
expenses necessary for the collection, distribution, purification, diversion
or storage of storm water within the City, or the area served by the utility,
including, but not limited to, separation of combined sewer projects.



         (d)   Engineering Inspection Services Account.  $40 per
EDU shall be paid to the Engineering Administrative Services Account.  This
account shall be used by the City Engineer to pay for the operation and
maintenance of the department's database and acquisition of computer software
and hardware, as associated to the administrative and accounting services
attributed to the collection of availability and connection fees.



      (3)   All availability and connection costs shall be due and
payable upon application for a building permit for any new user if the lot or
land of the new user was not assessed an initial connection fee under either
(A)(1) above, or a prior ordinance of the city requiring partial payment of a
connection fee at the time of plat approval.



   (B)   All interest from the Plant Expansion Fund shall remain in the
fund and used for the purposes set out herein. All interest from the
Interceptor Improvement and Betterment Fund shall be placed in the Plant
Expansion Fund.



   (C)   The costs to be paid from the above funds and accounts shall
expressly include construction costs, legal costs, engineering costs,
construction inspection costs, project administrative costs and easement
acquisition costs as shall be administered and defined by the Board of Public
Works and Safety. Projects which may be funded from the Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund shall include new trunk and interceptor
sewers, improvements to existing trunk or interceptor sewers and such sewage
collection improvements projects as determined by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (D)   Easements, as are required by the Board of Public Works and
Safety for the extension of sewers across the land of a developer, shall be
prepared and dedicated without cost by the owner of the real estate. Other
easements may be acquired pursuant to law.



   (E)   Credits and Reimbursements.  Any owner of real estate, which
either (a) including an extension of an interceptor sewer defined in the City
Interceptor Improvement Master Plan (hereinafter referred to as "the Master
Plan"); or (b) is served, or should be served, by an interceptor sewer to
provide extensions of the city sewer system to other real estate; shall be
required to extend the interceptors through their property, under the terms
and conditions set out in this division. For purposes of this division, the
following definitions apply:



      (1)   “INTERCEPTOR COSTS.”  Sewer costs external to a
develop- ment, including the costs of oversizing, or extending an interceptor
through a development, which costs would not be incurred if the interceptor
was only being constructed or extended to serve present development.



      (2)   “LOCAL SEWER COSTS.”  Sewer costs incurred because
of the development being served.



      (3)   “OVERSIZING COSTS.”  Shall be the difference
between the interceptor costs and the local sewer costs, including
oversizing, construction of lift stations, and other costs which would not be
necessary but for the developers project, but are only costs of construction
constructed in order to benefit real estate off-site of the property owned by
persons other than the developer.



   (F)   The developer may recover his oversizing costs by entering
into an  Agreement for  Offsite Extensions of  Sewer Mains and Related
Facilities in a form  substantially similar to  Exhibit B which is attached
to Ordinance 20-5-04 (hereinafter referred to as the "Reimbursement
Agreement"). The Reimbursement Agreement shall be negotiated by the City
Engineer and approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety, prior to
secondary plat approval of the developer. The amount of oversizing costs due
the developer shall be paid through credits and reimbursements as set out
herein. The developer, or his or her designee, shall receive credits for his
or her liability to the Interceptor Expansion Account of the Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund as set out in division (A)(1)(b) at the rate
of $500 per EDU. To the extent that the credits would not be sufficient to
reimburse the developer for his or her oversizing costs, which may include up
to 10% of the design cost of the oversized sewer. The developer shall be
entitled to reimbursement of said costs without interest. Those funds shall
be paid solely from the Interceptor Improvement Account set out herein and
shall be paid to the developer from the funds in that account based on
availability and prioritized based upon the dates which the developer's
Reimbursement Agreement is approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (G)   Extension of interceptor sewers shall be in accordance with
the latest Master Plan, developed and approved by the city, and interceptor
sewers designed by registered professional and state licensed engineers
retained or approved by the city. Plans and specifications for specific
interceptor sewers shall be submitted to, and receive approval from the city
and all applicable regulatory agencies prior to actual start of construction
(a copy of all such approvals shall be filed with the city within ten days
after receipt of approval). In no event will any of the city sewer revenues
be used, committed or encumbered to repay any such funds advanced or
contributed, nor will the city's General Fund be used, committed or
encumbered to repay any such funds advanced or contributed, other than
expressly agreed, pursuant to division (E), above. Such repayment, if any,
will be made under the provisions of and will be repaid only from funds
deposited in the Interceptor Improvement Account of the Interceptor
Improvement and Betterment Fund. No provision of this section shall be
construed as a guarantee by the city that the owners of real estate advancing
funds will be fully reimbursed therefor. The amount of credits and
reimbursements will be based on construction costs for labor and materials
only, and will be based on city standard costs as updated annually from
receipt of no less than two bid quotations. Design fees, easement expenses,
legal expenses, interest, or any costs other than the labor and materials for
the oversizing costs shall not exceed 10% of the design costs of the
oversized sewer, unless expressly agreed by the Board of Public Works and
Safety in writing.



   (H)   The connection fees paid at the time of plat approval shall be
strictly non-refundable.



   (I)   All plans for interceptor sewers and appurtenances thereto, to
be installed outside the area being developed by the applicant (i.e. off-site
sewers) shall be designed and prepared by engineers retained or approved by
the city. All easements shall be made out to the city, and shall be obtained
by and, if necessary, paid for by the owners of real estate, and shall be
obtained prior to engineering design of the project. Easements shall be in a
form approved by the city. The owners of real estate applying for interceptor
sewer service shall deposit with the city adequate funds to pay for
appurtenant non-construction costs prior to the city proceeding with
preparation of plans and specifications. If the project does not proceed to
completion after project costs are established, monies so deposited by the
owners of real estate shall be non-refundable and will be used to pay
incurred expenses. If funds are in excess of expenses, the excess will be
returned to the owners of real estate making the deposit or their successors.
If the project progresses to completion, the deposit will be credited to the
total project cost.



   (J)   All extensions to the city sewerage systems shall be dedicated
to and must be accepted by the city before connection, and once connected,
shall become and remain thereafter the sole property of the city without
further dedication thereof. The owners of real estate making such dedication
shall post at the time of dedication, three years maintenance equal to 15% of
the project cost, in a form acceptable to the city. Owners of real estate
shall agree and furnish affidavit that they have paid in full contractor or
contractors, material, men and laborers, in cash, the full cost of said
extension or extensions.



   (K)   The owners of real estate obtaining a permit of sewerage
extensions shall submit plans for on-site sewers, including trunk sewers to
be constructed within the development, to the city for review and approval
prior to start of construction. During construction of said on-site sewers,
the owners of real estate shall pay the expense of an inspector to assure
that the construction of the facilities are in compliance with current
standards and specifications established by the city. Upon completion of
construction, the owners of real estate shall provide certified record
construction drawings to the city within 30 days. If certified record
construction drawings are not provided, as above required, the city may
prepare these at the expense of said owners of real estate. No potential
reimbursable expenses of oversizing and/or off-site interceptor construction
will be allowed until record drawings are provided and approved. The city
will provide the inspector or may approve, in writing, an inspector
designated by the owners of real estate. The owners of real estate will pay
the inspection costs, costs for televising required prior to the approval of
the secondary plat and costs for televising required six months prior to the
expiration of the maintenance bond to the city, to be deposited into the
Engineering Inspection Services Account. The inspection costs shall be based
on an hourly rate approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety annually.



   (L)   Individual Connections in Developed Areas.  If individual
applicants for sewage service in already-developed acreage and/or platted
subdivisions wish to be served requiring construction of a new trunk sewer or
local sewers, they shall obtain a permit and deposit adequate funds with the
city to pay engineering and appurtenant costs prior to authorization of such
design by the city and receipt of bids for construction. If the project does
not proceed to completion after project costs are established, the money so
deposited by individual applicants shall be non-refundable and will be used
to pay incurred expenses. If monies are in excess of expenses, said excess
will be returned to the individual making the deposit. If the project is
completed, the deposits of individual applicants shall be credited to said
individuals' costs. If a connection is made to any trunk or local sewer
without obtaining a permit and paying required availability, connection and
local sewer costs, such act shall constitute a violation of this section, and
the individual or owners of real estate making such connection will be
subject to a fine of $100 per day for each day the connection was unlawfully
installed, and will be required to remove the connection until the
requirements of this section are complied with. Each day such unlawful
connection exists may be considered a separate offense.



   (M)   This section and the costs and charges set out herein may be
amended from time to time by the Common Council when conditions exist that
indicate to the Common Council that charges herein are not equitable for the
customers of the municipal sewage system or for the subdividers, developers,
or owners of property connection to such sewage system.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed - -88; Am. Ord. 59-7-89, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord.
2-1-94, passed 1-24-94; Am. Ord. 60-12-95, passed 12-11-95; Am. Ord.
72-12-00, passed 12-26-00; Am. Ord. 21-6-02, passed 8-13-02; Am. Ord.
20-5-04, passed 6-15-04)



§ 51.19  OFF-SITE TRUNK SEWERAGE.



   (A)   All plans for trunk sewerage and appurtenances thereto, to be
installed outside the area being developed by the applicant (such as 
off-site sewers) to be constructed by the applicant, shall be designed and
prepared by engineers retained or approved by the city.  All easements shall
be made out to the city, and shall be obtained by and, if necessary, paid for
by the owners of real estate, and shall be obtained prior to engineering
design of the project.  Easements shall be in a form approved by the city.



   (B)   The owners of real estate applying for trunk sewer service
shall deposit, with the city, adequate funds to pay for appurtenant
nonconstruction costs prior to the city proceeding with preparation of plans
and specifications.  If the project does not proceed to completion after
project costs are established, moneys so deposited by the owners of real
estate shall be nonrefundable and will be used to pay incurred expenses.  If
funds are in excess of expenses, the excess will be returned to the owners of
real estate making the deposit or their successors.  If the project
progresses to completion, the deposit will be credited to the total project
cost.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.20  OWNERSHIP OF SYSTEM.



   (A)   All extensions to the city sewerage systems shall be dedicated
to and must be accepted by the city before connection, and once connected,
shall become and remain thereafter the sole property of the city without
further dedication thereof.



   (B)   The owners of real estate making such dedication shall post at
the time of dedication, three years maintenance equal to 10% of the project
cost in a form acceptable to the city.



   (C)   Owners of real estate shall agree and furnish affidavit that
they have paid in full contractor or contractors, material, men, and laborers
in cash the full cost of said extension or extensions.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.21  ON-SITE SEWERS; INSPECTION COSTS AND APPROVAL.



   The owners of real estate obtaining a permit of sewerage extensions
shall submit plans for on-site sewers, including trunk sewers to be
constructed within the development, to the city for review and approval prior
to start of construction.  During construction of said on-site sewers, the
owners of real estate shall pay the expense of an inspector to assure that
the construction of the facilities are in compliance with current standards
and specifications established by the city.  Upon completion of
construction, the owners of real estate shall provide certified record
construction drawings to the city within 30 days.  If certified record
construction drawings are not provided, as above required, the city may
prepare these at the expense of said owners of real estate.  No potential
reimbursable expenses of oversizing and/or off-site interceptor construction
will be allowed until record drawings are provided and approved.  The city
will provide the inspector or may approve, in writing, some person designated
by the owners of real estate.  In any case, the owners of real estate will
pay the cost thereof to the city who, in turn, will pay the inspector.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.22 DEVELOPED AREAS.



   (A)   Individual connections in developed areas.  If individual
applicants for sewage service in already-developed acreage and/or platted
subdivisions wish to be served requiring construction of a new trunk sewer or
local sewers, they shall obtain a permit and deposit adequate funds, with the
city, to pay engineering and appurtenant costs prior to authorization of such
design by the city and receipt of bids for construction.  If the project
does not proceed to completion after project costs are established, the money
so deposited by individual applicants shall be nonrefundable and will be used
to pay incurred expenses.  If moneys are in excess of expenses, said excess
will be returned to the individual making the deposit.  If the project is
completed, the deposits of individual applicants shall be credited to said
individuals' costs as outlined in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Individual connections cost (developed areas).  If
already-developed acreage and/or platted subdivisions are to be served by an
interceptor and/or trunk sewer and local sewers, in addition to the
connection costs designated in § 51.17, there shall be paid by each owner of
real estate to be served an amount which shall be computed as follows:



      (1)   Availability cost.  $350 per equivalent dwelling unit,
which amount is not refundable, plus if applicable, divisions (B)(2) and (3)
of this section.



      (2)   Local sewer costs.  Each lot shall pay a prorated share
of the project costs computed on the basis of dividing the project cost by
the number of sewer connections desirous of service.  Project costs shall
include construction costs, determined by public bids and nonconstruction
costs.  Nonconstruction costs shall include but not necessarily be limited
to legal costs, preparation of assessment rolls, and project administrative
costs.



      (3)   Reimbursement.  Repayment for future connections made
to the local sewer may be reimbursed on the basis of the "Fifteen Year Law"
(IC 36-9-39-1) and following as may be contracted with the city through its
Board of Public Works and Safety.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.23  ALLOCATION OF RECEIPTS.



   (A)   The availability costs provided in §§ 51.16, 51.18, and
51.22 shall be collected by the City Engineer and deposited to the
Interceptor Improvement and Betterment Fund.



   (B)   The individual connection charges provided in §§ 51.17 and
51.18 shall be collected by the City Engineer and deposited as follows:



      (1)   To operating funds for inspection costs:  $25



      (2)   To the City Engineer for administrative costs the amount
of $25



      (3)   To Plant Expansion and Improvement Fund: Remainder, or



      (4)   As may be directed by the city through its Board of
Public Works and Safety payment may be credited against such obligations as
are due.



   (C)   The local sewer costs provided in § 51.22 (B)(2) shall be
collected by the city and deposited in separate project accounts established
for each project.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.24  ANNEXATION REMONSTRANCE RESTRICTION.



   All persons or corporations, their or its survivors, heirs, or assigns
who shall connect to any sewer main built pursuant to this subchapter shall
agree in writing prior to said connection, to waive their or its rights to
remonstrate against annexation by the city.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.25  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall make a connection to any trunk or local sewer without
obtaining a permit and paying the required availability, connection, and
local sewer costs.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.26  AMENDMENTS.



   This subchapter and the costs and charges set out in this subchapter
may be amended from time to time by the Common Council when conditions exist
that indicate to the Common Council that charges herein are not equitable for
the customers of the municipal sewage system or for the subdividers,
developers, or owners of property connection to such sewage system.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates § 51.25 and the individual or owners of real estate
making such connection will be subject to a fine of $100 per day for each day
the connection was unlawfully installed, and will be required to remove the
connection until the requirements of §§ 51.15 through 51.26 are complied
with.  Each day such unlawful connection exists may be considered a separate
offense.



(Ord. 1-7-88, passed  -  -88)



CHAPTER 52:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section




Illicit Discharge and Connection





   52.01   Purpose and intent





   52.02   Definitions





   52.03   Applicability





   52.04   Responsibility for administration





   52.05   Severability





   52.06   Ultimate responsibility





   52.07   Discharge prohibitions





   52.08   Suspension of MS4 access





   52.09   Industrial or construction activity discharges





   52.10   Monitoring of discharges; access to facilities





   52.11   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices





   52.12   Watercourse protection





   52.13   Notification of spills





   52.14   Enforcement; notice of violation





   52.15   Appeal of notice of violation





   52.16   Enforcement measures after appeal





   52.17   Cost of abatement of the violation





   52.18   Injunctive relief





Stormwater Runoff Associated with Construction and Post-Construction
Activities





   52.30   Introduction and purpose





   52.31   Definitions





   52.32   Applicability





   52.33   Submittals, review and approval





   52.34   Stormwater pollution prevention plan





   52.35   Design requirements





   52.36   Inspection





   52.37   Enforcement










   52.99   Penalty




ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION



§ 52.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Noblesville ("the city")
through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage
system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit. The objectives of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by
stormwater discharges by any user.



   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the city's
separate storm sewer system.



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).” Structural or nonstructural
practices, or a combination of practices, designed to act as effective,
practicable means of minimizing the impacts of development and human
activities on water quality. Traditional structural BMPs, including extended
detention dry ponds, wet ponds, infiltration trenches, and sand filtration
systems, are now common elements of most new development projects. Structural
BMPs rely heavily on gravitational settling and/or the infiltration of
soluble nutrients through a porous medium for pollutant removal.
Nonstructural BMPs, which may be used independently or in conjunction with
structural BMPs, rely on a much wider breadth of mechanisms to prevent or
control NPS pollution. Nonstructural BMPs range from programs that increase
public awareness to prevent pollution, to the implementation of
control-oriented techniques (such as bioretention and stormwater wetlands)
that utilize vegetation to enhance pollutant removal and restore the
infiltrative capacity of the landscape.



   “CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA).” The Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   “CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.” Activities subject to NPDES construction
permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of
one acre or more, as defined in the Indiana Annotated Code (IAC) by 327 IAC
15-5-1:12 (Rule 5). Such activities include but are not limited to clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   “HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.” Any material, including any substance,
waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   “ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.” Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an Illicit Discharge to enter the Storm
Drainage System including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any
non-Stormwater discharge including sewage, process Wastewater, and wash water
to enter the Storm Drainage System and any connections to the Storm Drainage
System from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency or, Any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the Storm Drainage System which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



   “ILLICIT DISCHARGE.” Any direct or indirect non-stormwater
discharge to the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 52.07 of
this subchapter.



   “INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.” Activities subject to NPDES Industrial
Permits as defined by 327 IAC 15-6-1:12 (Rule 6).



   “MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP).” MEP is the statutory standard
that establishes the level of pollutant reductions that operators of
regulated MS4s must achieve. The CWA requires that NPDES permits for
discharges from MS4s "shall require controls to reduce the discharge of
pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management practices,
control techniques and system, design and engineering methods." This standard
applies to all MS4s regulated under the Phase I and Phase II (Rule 13)
Stormwater Rules. Compliance with the conditions of Rule 13 and the series of
steps associated with implementation of the required six minimum control
measures will satisfy the MEP standard. Compliance with the six minimum
control measures requires the development and implementation of BMPs.
Implementation of the BMPs includes not only the actions necessary to
initiate and continue the use of specific control measures, but also the
enforcement actions, as applicable, to ensure that the implementation of the
control measures occurs.



   “MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).”  A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains), which are owned or operated by a state, city, town, county, tribe,
district, association, or other public body or a designated and approved
management agency under Section 208 of the Clean Water Act that discharges
into waters of the United States (40 CFR 122.26(b)(8).



   “NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.”  A permit issued by the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an
individual, a group, or on a general area-wide basis.



   “NOBLESVILLE WASTEWATER UTILITY.”  Employees or designees of the
Director of Noblesville Wastewater Utility designated to enforce and
administer this subchapter.



   “NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.” Any discharge to the storm drainage
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   “NOTICE OF INTENT.” Notice of intent letter or NOI means a written
notification indicating a person's intention to comply with the terms of a
specified general permit rule in lieu of applying for an individual NPDES
permit and includes information as required under 327 IAC 15-3 and the
applicable general permit rule.



   “PERMIT HOLDER.”  Any person, partnership, corporation, or
landowner who holds, or has been issued an NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit.



   “PERSON.” Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or as the owner's agent.



   “POLLUTANT.” Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   “PREMISES.” Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   “RECEIVING WATERS.” Rivers, streams, lakes, or any body of water
into which wastewater is discharged.



   “STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.” Publicly-owned permit holder by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.



   "STORMWATER." Water resulting from rain, melting or melted snow, hail,
or sleet.



   “STORMWATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEMS.” All storm sewer pipes, ditches,
catch basins, and other structures including retention and detention
facilities.



   “STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).” A document which
describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges into
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.



   “WASTEWATER.” Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   “WATERCOURSE.”  A conduit through which water flows, a natural
body of running water flowing on or under the earth or a natural or
artificial channel through which water flows.



   “WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.” A term used in federal regulations
that defines all water bodies regulated as waters of the U.S. It includes:



      (1)   All waters which may be susceptible to use in interstate
or foreign commerce;



      (2)   All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;



      (3)   All other waters, such as intrastate lakes, rivers,
streams (including intermittent streams), mud flats, sandflats, wetlands,
sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the
use, degradation, or destruction of which could affect interstate or foreign
commerce including any such waters;



      (4)   All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters
of the United States;



      (5)   Tributaries of waters identified in this section;



      (6)   The territorial seas; and



      (7)   Wetlands adjacent to waters.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.03 APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all landowners, permit holders,
developers, or other entities in possession of real estate located within the
city which either:



   (A)   Directly discharges into a regulated drain established by the
Hamilton County Drainage Board, pursuant to I.C. 36-9-27;



   (B)   Directly discharges into a street drain located within the
city.



   (C)   Directly discharges into White River, Stony Creek, Cicero
Creek, Sand Creek, Morse Reservoir and Hinkle Creek.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Noblesville Wastewater Utility shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter within its jurisdiction. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be
delegated in writing by the Director of the Noblesville Wastewater Utility to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
this agency.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.05 SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this subchapter or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this subchapter.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.06 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
subchapter intended to comply with the NPDES permit issued to the city.
However, nothing herein shall be construed to ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the
waters of the United States.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.07 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of Illicit Discharges.  No person shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drainage system or
watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of
applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The following
discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this
subchapter:



      (1)   Water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground
water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, sump pumps, air conditioning
condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less
than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source
not containing pollutants.



      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.



      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of
the test.



      (4)   Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drainage system.



   (B)   Prohibition of Illicit Connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of Illicit connections to the storm drainage system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.08 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Suspension Due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations.
The Noblesville Wastewater Utility may, without prior notice, suspend MS4
discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment to the health or welfare of persons, to
the MS4, or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with
a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency
may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4, to the waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension Due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. In the event of suspension, the
violator may petition the Board of Public Works and Safety for a
reconsideration and hearing.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.09 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Noblesville Wastewater Utility prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.10 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES; ACCESS TO FACILITIES.



   (A)   The Noblesville Wastewater Utility shall be permitted to enter
and inspect the premises of a permit holder subject to regulation under this
subchapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
subchapter. If a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to
representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.



   (B)   Facility operators shall allow the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept
under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the
performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



   (C)   The Noblesville Wastewater Utility shall have the right to
install and maintain on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary
in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.



   (D)   The Noblesville Wastewater Utility may require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the operator at the written or oral request of the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
borne by the operator.



   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this subchapter. A person who is the operator of a
facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with
industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized
enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this subchapter.



   (G)   If the Noblesville Wastewater Utility has been refused access
to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or
she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this subchapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to
verify compliance with this subchapter or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then
the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from
any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.11 REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   Noblesville Wastewater Utility will adopt requirements identifying Best
Management Practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or
industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of
these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for
a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illegal
discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.12 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning or occupying property through which a watercourse
passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the
property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other substances
that would pollute or contaminate the flow of water. In addition, the owner
or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or
adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.13 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in Illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage
system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event
of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch
services. In the event of a release of an illicit discharge, said person
shall immediately notify the authorized enforcement agency. If the discharge
of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.14 ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever the Noblesville Wastewater Utility finds that a
person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this
subchapter, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written
notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require
without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall
cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and



      (5)   Payment of remediation costs; and



      (6)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.15 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of violation to the Director of the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility.



   (B)   The notice of appeal must be received within seven days from
the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
authorized enforcement officer shall take place within 15 days from the date
of receipt of the notice of appeal. In the event the landowner disagrees with
the determination of the Director of the Noblesville Wastewater Utility, the
landowner may appeal a decision of the Director of the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility to the Board of Public Works and Safety of the city.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.16 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If any violation of this subchapter has not been corrected as set forth
in a notice of violation, within 15 days of said notice, or the exhaustion of
any appeal, the Noblesville Wastewater Utility, or any municipality, may, but
is not required to, take all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or
restore the property. The costs of abatement, or restoration, shall be
assessed against the owner of the property and may be filed as a lien against
the property in the amount of the assessment, or reduced to a judgment lien.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.17 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 15 days after the Noblesville Wastewater Utility taking action
to abate a violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost
of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a
written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten days. If
the amount due is not paid within 30 days of the decision of the Director of
the Noblesville Wastewater Utility or by the expiration of the time in which
to file an appeal, the city may file a civil action to collect said costs,
plus interest and reasonable attorney's fees.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.18 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   In addition to any remedy set out herein, the city acting through the
Board of Public Works and Safety, may seek injunctive relief to enjoin
violations of this subchapter.



(Ord. 23-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



STORMWATER RUNOFF ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION AND POST-CONSTRUCTION
ACTIVITIES



§ 52.30 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches and the
dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction
cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic
habitat. Following the completion of construction activities, dust, dirt, and
erosion will continue to affect the stormwater facilities and receiving
streams unless post-construction practices are put in place during the
construction and maintained in perpetuity.



   (B)   As a result, the purpose of this subchapter is to safeguard
persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the environment in the City
of Noblesville ("the city"). This subchapter will also promote the public
welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction,
use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or
breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth in the city.



   (C)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds
within this jurisdiction. This subchapter seeks to meet that purpose through
the following objectives:



      (1)   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any
development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and streambank erosion and
maintain the integrity of stream channels;



      (2)   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused
by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;



      (3)   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff
which flows from any specific site during and following development to not
exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent
practicable;



      (4)   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion
and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly
maintained and pose no threat to public safety.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.31 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “AGRICULTURAL LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.”  Tillage, planting,
cultivation, or harvesting operations for the production of agricultural or
nursery vegetative crops. The term also includes pasture renovation and
establishment, the construction of agricultural conservation practices, and
the installation and maintenance of agricultural drainage tiles. For the
purposes of this subchapter, the term does not include land disturbing
activities for the construction of agricultural-related facilities such as
barns, buildings to house livestock, roads associated with infrastructure,
other infrastructure, agricultural waste lagoons and facilities that process
residential, workshop, or human wastes, and lakes, pond, and wetlands; and
other infrastructure.



   “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP's).”Structural or nonstructural
practices, or a combination of practices, designed to act as effective,
practicable means of minimizing the impacts of development and human
activities on water quality. Traditional structural BMPs, including extended
detention dry ponds, wet ponds, infiltration trenches, and sand filtration
systems, are now common elements of most new development projects. Structural
BMPs rely heavily on gravitational settling and/or the infiltration of
soluble nutrients through a porous medium for pollutant removal.
Nonstructural BMPs, which may be used independently or in conjunction with
structural BMPs, rely on a much wider breadth of mechanisms to prevent or
control NPS pollution. Nonstructural BMPs range from programs that increase
public awareness to prevent pollution, to the implementation of
control-oriented techniques (such as bioretention and stormwater wetlands)
that utilize vegetation to enhance pollutant removal and restore the
infiltrative capacity of the landscape.



   “CLEARING.”Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   “CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.”  Land disturbing activities and land
disturbing activities associated with the construction of infrastructure and
structures. This term does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or
minor landscaping projects.



   “CONSTRUCTION PLAN.”  A representation of a project site and all
activities associated with the project. The plan includes the location of the
project site, buildings and other infrastructure, grading activities,
schedules for implementation, and other pertinent information related to the
project site. A stormwater pollution prevention plan is a part of the
construction plan.



   “CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR.”An individual or company hired the
project site owner, or by an individual lot owner or individual lot operator
to perform services on or connected to the project site or individual lot.



   “DEVELOPER.”  Any person financially responsible for construction
activity; or an owner of property who sells or leases, or offers for sale or
lease, any lots in a subdivision.



   “EROSION.”The detachment and movement of soil, sediment, or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.



   “EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURE.” A practice, or a
combination of practices, to control erosion and resulting sedimentation.



   “EROSION CONTROL.”A measure that prevents erosion.



   “GRADING.” The cutting and filling of the land surface to a desired
slope or elevation.



   “LAND DISTURBANCE OR LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY.” Any manmade change
of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover that exposes the
underlying soil, excavating, filling, transporting, and grading.



   “MEASURABLE STORM EVENT.” A precipitation event that results in a
total measured precipitation accumulation equal to, or greater than, one-half
inch of rainfall.



   “NOBLESVILLE WASTEWATER UTILITY.” Employees or designees of the
Director of the Noblesville Wastewater Utility designated to enforce this
subchapter.



   “PROJECT SITE.” The entire area on which construction activity is
to be performed.



   “PROJECT SITE OWNER.”The person required to submit the NOI letter
per Rule 5 and required to comply with the terms of this subchapter and Rule
5, including a developer; or a person who has financial and operational
control of construction activities and project plans and specifications,
including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications.



   “SEDIMENT.” Solid material (both mineral and organic) that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its place of origin
by air, water, gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface.



   “SEDIMENT CONTROL.” Measures that prevent sediment from leaving the
project site.



   “SOIL.” The unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the
surface of the earth that serves as the natural medium for the growth of
plants.



   “SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT OR SWCD.”A political
subdivision established under IC 14-32.



   “STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).”A plan developed to
minimize the impact of stormwater pollution resulting from construction and
post-construction activities. The plan indicates the specific measures and
sequencing to be used to control sediment, soil erosion and other
construction site wastes during and after construction.



   “STORMWATER QUALITY MEASURE.”A practice, or a combination of
practices, to control or minimize pollutants associated with stormwater
run-off.



   “SUBDIVISION.”Any land that is divided or proposed to be divided
into lots, whether contiguous or subject to zoning requirements, for the
purpose of sale or lease as part of a larger common plan of development or
sale.



   “TECHNICAL REVIEW AND COMMENT FORM.”A form issued by the
Noblesville Wastewater Utility stating that the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan is adequate or stating revisions needed in the SWPPP.



   “TRAINED INDIVIDUAL.”An individual who is trained and experienced
in the principles of stormwater quality, including erosion and sediment
control as may be demonstrated by state registration, professional
certification, experience, or completion of coursework that enable the
individual to make judgments regarding stormwater control or treatment and
monitoring.



   “WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv).”The storage needed to capture and
treat 90% of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv)
will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.



   “WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.”A term used in federal regulations
that defines all water bodies regulated as waters of the U.S. It includes:



      (1)   All waters which may be susceptible to use in interstate
or foreign commerce;



      (2)   All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;



      (3)   All other waters, such as intrastate lakes, rivers,
streams (including intermittent streams), mud flats, sandflats, wetlands,
sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds, the
use, degradation, or destruction of which could affect interstate or foreign
commerce including any such waters;



      (4)   All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters
of the United States;



      (5)   Tributaries of waters identified in this section;



      (6)   The territorial seas; and



      (7)   Wetlands adjacent to waters.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.32 APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The requirements under this subchapter are in compliance with
327 IAC 15-5 (Rule 5) and apply to all persons meeting the requirements of
327 IAC 15-5-2. In general, this subchapter requires the control of polluted
run-off from construction sites with a land disturbance greater than or equal
to one acre, or disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will
ultimately disturb one or more acres of land.



   (B)   The requirements under this rule do not apply to persons who
are involved in agricultural land disturbing activities or forest harvesting
activities.



   (C)   The requirements under this rule do not apply to the following
activities, provided other applicable permits contain provisions requiring
immediate implementation of soil erosion control measures:



      (1)   Landfills that have been issued a certification of
closure under 329 IAC 10;



      (2)   Coal mining activities permitted under IC 14-34;



      (3)   Municipal solid waste landfills that are accepting waste
pursuant to a permit issued by the department under 329 IAC 10 that contains
equivalent stormwater requirements, including the expansion of landfill
boundaries and construction of new cells either within or outside the
original solid waste permit boundary.



   (D)   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, stormwater
pollution prevention plans shall be developed in accordance with the current
Noblesville standards and specifications to ensure that established water
quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site
and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and
regional watershed plans.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.33 SUBMITTALS, REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   A technical review and comment form stating that the "Plan is
Adequate" and an improvement location permit shall be obtained prior to the
initiation of any land disturbing activities.



   (B)   A complete stormwater pollution prevention plan and erosion
and sediment control plan shall be submitted in triplicate to the Noblesville
Wastewater Utility.



   (C)   At the time of submittal, the date and time will be recorded.



   (D)   Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the project site, and of any consulting firm retained
by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact
at such firm and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, included in the
schedule of fees of the city.



   (E)   Each application shall include a statement that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall
be in accordance with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The
Noblesville Wastewater Utility will review each application for a Rule 5
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this regulation.
Within 28 days after receiving an application, the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility shall, in writing:



      (1)   Approve the erosion and sediment control plan and SWPPP
and provide a technical review and comment form stating that the "Plan is
Adequate" and issue an improvement location permit;



      (2)   Approve the erosion and sediment control plan and SWPPP
subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the technical
review and comment form stating that the "Plan is Adequate" and issue an
improvement location permit; or



      (3)   Provide a technical review and comment form stating that
the "Plan is Deficient" and indicating the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission.



   (F)   Failure of the Noblesville Wastewater Utility to act on an
original or revised application within 28 days of receipt shall authorize the
applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time
is extended by agreement between the applicant and the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



   (G)   The sufficiency of the construction plans shall be based upon
Rule 5 regulations and the design criteria described in the current
Noblesville Standards And Specifications.



   (H)   After receiving a technical review and comment form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate", if revisions to the construction plans require a
change in measures appropriate to control the quality or quantity of
stormwater runoff, then revised plans must be submitted to the Noblesville
Wastewater Utility.



   (I)   The applicant will be required to file with the city, a
performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an
amount deemed sufficient by the city to cover all costs of improvements,
landscaping maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the
city, and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure to
repair of improvements installed on the project site.



   (J)   After receiving a technical review and comment form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate" from the Noblesville Wastewater Utility, and at
least 48 hours prior to the start of construction, the following shall be
submitted to the Indiana Department of Environmental Management and
Noblesville Wastewater Utility:



      (1)   Notice of intent form (required by 327 IAC 15-5);



      (2)   A copy of the technical review and comment form stating
that the "Plan is Adequate"; and



      (3)   Proof of Publication required by 327 IAC 15-5-5(9).



   (K)   The project site owner must submit a notice of termination
(NOT) letter to IDEM and transmit a copy of the NOT letter to the Noblesville
Wastewater Utility when all land disturbing activities have been completed,
the entire project site has been stabilized and all temporary erosion and
sediment control measures have been removed.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.34 STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN.



   The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) including erosion and
sediment control measures shall meet the requirements contained in Rule 5,
the Noblesville Standards Manual, and the Indiana Storm Water Quality Manual.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.35 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Erosion and sediment control measures shall be designed and
installed in accordance with Rule 5, the Noblesville Standards Manual, and
the Indiana Storm Water Quality Manual. Unless judged by the Noblesville
Wastewater Utility to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all
sites:



      (1)   All site designs shall establish stormwater management
practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated
with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These
practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and
to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking
lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide
treatment for both water quality and quantity.



      (2)   All stormwater runoff generated from new development
shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or waters of the United States without adequate treatment. Where such
discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional
values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the jurisdictional
stormwater authority. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any
less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) or the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



      (3)   Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained,
by promoting infiltration through the use of structural and non-structural
methods.



      (4)   For new development, structural Best Management
Practices (BMPs) shall be designed to remove 80% of the average annual post
development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a BMP
complies with this performance standard if it is:



         (a)   Sized to capture the prescribed water quality
volume (Wqv);



         (b)   Designed according to the specific performance
criteria outlined in the local stormwater design manual;



         (c)   Constructed properly; and



         (d)   Maintained regularly.



   (B)   A list of pre-approved post-construction BMPs along with
procedures to be followed for approval of innovative BMPs or BMPs not in the
pre-approved list are provided in the Noblesville Standards and
Specifications.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.36 INSPECTION.



   (A)   A self-monitoring program is required during construction. A
trained individual shall prepare and maintain a written evaluation of the
project site by the end of the next business day following each measurable
storm event and at a minimum, one time per week.



   (B)   The evaluation must address the maintenance of existing
stormwater quality measures to ensure they are functioning properly; and
identify additional measures necessary to remain in compliance with all
applicable statutes and rules.



   (C)   Written evaluation reports must include the following:



      (1)   The name of the individual performing the evaluation;



      (2)   The date of the evaluation;



      (3)   Problems identified at the project site; and



      (4)   Details of corrective actions recommended and completed.



   (D)   All evaluation reports for the project site must be made
available to the inspecting authority within 48 hours of a request.



   (E)   All persons engaging in construction activities on a project
site must comply with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, this
subchapter, Rule 5 and the Noblesville Standards and Specifications.



   (F)   The Noblesville Wastewater Utility will perform inspections
and provide recommendations to evaluate the installation, implementation and
maintenance of control measures and management practices at any project site
involved in construction activities. Construction project sites will be
prioritized based on the nature and extent of the construction activity,
topography and the characteristics of soils and receiving water quality



   (G)   If after a recommendation is provided to the project site
owner, corrective action is not taken, the Noblesville Wastewater Utility
will pursue enforcement according to § 52.37 of this subchapter.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.37 ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Written Notification. In the event the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility, the designated entity's planning department, or other regulatory
agency determines the project is not in compliance with this subchapter, Rule
5 or the Noblesville Drainage Standards and Specifications, the project site
owner will be issued a written notification form. The written notification
may be in the form of a warning letter of noncompliance or violation notice.



   (B)   Penalties.  Any site owner who has not corrected a deficiency
within five days after written notification shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in § 52.99(B).



   (C)   Stop-Work Order (Revocation of Permit).  In the event that
any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this subchapter
violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a
manner as to materially aversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the Director of the Noblesville Wastewater
Utility may suspend or revoke the site development permit.



   (D)   Restitution. Any agency charged with enforcement of this
subchapter, under division (A) above, may after a five-day notice, enter a
construction site in order to construct, repair or replace any erosion
control device to reduce or remediate storm water runoff from the site. The
enforcement agency may recover the direct cost of such remediation
activities, in addition to the penalties assessed above in this section.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



§ 52.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty for §§ 52.01 through 52.18.  In addition to any of
the remedies in §§ 52.01 through 52.18, the violation of any terms of those
sections shall be deemed a Class B infraction, and a court of competent
jurisdiction, in addition to any other remedies contained herein, may impose
a fine in the amount of $1,000 for each violation. Each day of a violation
may be considered a separate violation.



   (B)   Penalty for §§ 52.30 through 52.37.  Any site owner who has
not corrected a deficiency within five days after written notification as set
forth in § 52.37, shall be guilty of a Class B infraction and may be fined
not more than $1,000 for each violation. For purposes of this chapter each
day shall be deemed a separate violation and subject to above penalty.



(Ord. 24-4-05, passed 4-26-05)



 



CHAPTER 53:  INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS   



Section



General Provisions



   53.001   Purpose and policy



   53.002   Administration



   53.003   Abbreviations



   53.004   Definitions



General Sewer Use Requirements



   53.015   Prohibited discharge standards



   53.016   Federal categorical pretreatment standards



   53.017   State pretreatment requirements



   53.018   Local limits



   53.019   Dilution



   53.020   Right of revision



   53.021   Right of refusal



Pretreatment of Wastewater



   53.035   Pretreatment facilities



   53.036   Additional pretreatment measures



   53.037   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



Reporting Requirements



   53.050   Baseline monitoring reports



   53.051   Compliance schedule progress reports



   53.052   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   53.053   Periodic compliance reports



   53.054   Reports of changed conditions



   53.055   Reports of potential problems



   53.056   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting



   53.057   Analytical requirements



   53.058   Sample collection



   53.059   Timing



   53.060   Record keeping



Compliance Monitoring



   53.075   Right of entry; inspection and sampling



   53.076   Search warrants



Confidential Information



   53.090   Confidential Information



Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance



   53.105   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



Administrative Enforcement Remedies



   53.120   Informal notice



   53.121   Notice of violation (NOV)



   53.122   Administrative order



   53.123   Show cause hearing



   53.124   Compliance schedule; order



   53.125   Cease and desist orders



   53.126   Administrative fines



   53.127   Termination of service



   53.128   Cost recovery



Supplemental Enforcement Action



   53.140   Liability insurance



   53.141   Public nuisances



Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations



   53.155   Upset



   53.156   Prohibited discharge standards



   53.157   Bypass



Wastewater Treatment Rates Industrial/Commercial



   53.170   Metered water supply



   53.171   Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions



Surcharge Costs



   53.185   Surcharge costs



Miscellaneous Provisions



   53.200   Pretreatment charges and fees



 



   53.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City of Noblesville Utilities
Department (Wastewater) and enables the Utility to comply with all applicable
State and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code
§§ 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters,
or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;



      (3)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the POTW;



      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and



      (6)   To enable the Utility to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit conditions, sludge use
and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the
POTW is subject.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW. The chapter
provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Utility Director, of the
Noblesville Utilities Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The Director may delegate any powers granted to
or duties imposed upon the Utility Director to other Utility or City of
Noblesville personnel.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:



   BOD   - Biochemical Oxygen Demand



   CFR   - Code of Federal Regulations



   COD   - Chemical Oxygen Demand



   EPA   - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency



   gpd   - gallons per day



   IDEM   - Indiana Department of Environmental Management



   mg/l   - milligrams per liter



   NPDES   - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



   POTW   - Publicly Owned Treatment Works



   RCRA   - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



   SIC   - Standard Industrial Classification



   TSS   - Total Suspended Solids



   USC   - United States Code



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.004  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.



   “ACT” or “THE ACT.”  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   “APPROVAL AUTHORITY.”  The approval authority for the City of
Noblesville Utilities Department is IDEM.



   “BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).”  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as
a concentration (e.g., mg/L) as defined in the current edition of “Standard
Methods.”



   “COLOR.”  The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%)
transmittance is equivalent to zero (0.0) optical density.



   “ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA).”  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Region 5 Water Management
Division Director, or other duly authorized official of the agency.



   “GRAB SAMPLE.”  A sample taken on a one-time basis without
consideration for flow or time.



   “INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.”  The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any grab sample or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling
event.



   “INTERFERENCE.”  A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, does one of the following:



      (1)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes,
or its selected sludge use or disposal methods;



      (2)   Causes a violation of any requirements of the POTW’s
NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation; or



      (3)   Prevents the use of the POTW’s sewage sludge or its
sludge disposal method selected in compliance with the following statutory
provisions, regulations, or permits issued thereunder or more stringent state
or local regulations “



         (a)   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
1345).



         (b)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C.
6901), including:



            1.   Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and



            2.   The rules contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA (42 U.S.C. 6941).



         (c)   The Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401).



         (d)   The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601).



   “MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE UNIT.”  The maximum concentration (or
loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at anytime, determined from
the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent or
the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.



   “MEDICAL WASTE.”  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   “NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.”  Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.



   “PASS THROUGH.”  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of any requirement of the Utility’s NPDES permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   “PERSON.”  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.



   “pH.”  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units of 0-14.



   “POLLUTANT.”  Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



   “POLLUTION PREVENTION.”



      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) of this definition,
any equipment and technology modifications, process or procedure
modifications, reformulation or redesign or products, substitution of raw
materials, improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory
control, or any other practice that:



         (a)   Reduces the amount of a pollutant entering a waste
stream or released to the environment, including fugitive emissions, before
recycling, treatment or disposal; and



         (b)   Reduces the hazards to public health and the
environment associated with the release of the pollutant.



      (2)   Pollution prevention does not include any practice that
alters the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics or the volume of
a pollutant through a process or activity that is not integral to add
necessary for the production of a product or the providing of a service.



   “PRETREATMENT.”  Pretreatment is the reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties before or instead of discharging the pollutants to the
sewerage system.



   “PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR REQUIREMENT.”  A pretreatment standard
or requirement will mean any substantive or procedural requirement of this
chapter, a categorical pretreatment standard, or a wastewater discharge
permit.



   “PROCESS WASTEWATER.”  Any water that during manufacturing or
processing comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product,
or waste product.



   “PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.” 
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 53.011.



   “PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW).”  A “treatment works”,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the
city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the
industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the
treatment works.



   “SEPTIC TANK WASTE.”  Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   “SEWAGE.”  Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).



   “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.”



      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the Utility on the basis
that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Utility may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.



   “SLUG LOAD” or “SLUG.”  Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 53.032.



   “STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE.”  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



   “STORM WATER.”  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



   “SUSPENDED SOLIDS.”  Solids in wastewater as defined by the
“total suspended solids test” in the current edition of “Standard
Methods.”



   “TIME COMPOSITE SAMPLE.”  A sample resulting from the combination
of individual samples of equal volume taken at equal intervals of time,
without consideration of the volume or rate of flow.



   “UPSET.”  An incident at a user’s facility that: is exceptional,
unintentional, and temporary; is caused by factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user; and results in non-routine discharges to the sewerage
system.



   “USER” or “INDUSTRIAL USER.”  A source of indirect discharge.



   “UTILITY.”  The Utility of Noblesville, Indiana, or the Wastewater
Utility of Noblesville, Indiana, or Utilities Department.



   “UTILITY DIRECTOR.”  The person designated by the city to
supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.



   “WASTEWATER.”  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



   “WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT.”  That portion of
the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



   “WASTE MINIMIZATION.”  A reduction of the amount or toxicity of
pollutants requiring disposal, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Pollution Prevention;



      (2)   Using a waste from one process as an ingredient in the
same or another process;



      (3)   Processing a waste to recover resources; and



      (4)   Treating the waste to reduce its mass, volume, or
toxicity.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 53.015 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW.



   (B)   Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 11.5,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Fats, oils and grease (FOG) and solid or viscous
substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer
collection system or POTW resulting in interference;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD,
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW; or any wastewater treatment or sludge
process, which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals;



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater which has a temperature higher than 104°F or 40°C;



      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, used motor
vehicle anti-freeze, motor oil, brake fluid, transmission fluid, hydraulic
fluid, oil-based paint, paint thinners or products of mineral oil origin, in
amounts that will cause interference or pass through; but in no case greater
than 25 mg/L;



      (7)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors, or fumes within the sewer collection system or POTW in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;



      (8)   Trucked or hauled pollutants;



      (9)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (10)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, which consequently imparts color to the treatment
plant’s effluent, thereby violating the Utilities wastewater discharge
permit;



      (11)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable IDEM or Federal regulations and
only after written notification of the Utility Director;



      (12)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, any and all subsurface drainage including sump pump
discharges, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact
cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by
the Utility Director;



      (13)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (14)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by
the Utility Director or IDEM in a discharge permit;



      (15)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;



      (16)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (17)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 10% or any single reading over 25% of the lower explosive limit.



   (C)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12; Am. Ord. 31-07-14, passed 7-15-14)  Penalty,
see § 53.999



§ 53.016  FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The national categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter
I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.017  STATE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Indiana Industrial State Pretreatment Standards (327 IAC 5-16 through
327 IAC 5-21) are incorporated into this chapter.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.018  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. [The following pollutant limits were
developed by the Noblesville Utilities Department as a means to prevent the
introduction of pollutants into its treatment plant. Local discharge limits
are established on a case-by-case basis. Thus, the following table may be
further evaluated.] No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess
of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:



 

Pollutant
 
Maximum Monthly Average (mg/L)
 
Maximum for Any One Day (mg/L)




Arsenic
 

0.30

 

0.90



Cadmium
 

0.20

 

0.60



Chromium
 

2.0

 

6.0



Copper
 

2.0

 

6.0



Cyanide
 

1.0

 

1.9



Lead
 

1.0

 

3.0



Mercury
 

0.10

 

0.30



Molybdenum
 

0.10

 

0.30



Nickel
 

2.0

 

6.0



Selenium
 

0.50

 

1.5



Silver
 

1.5

 

4.5



Zinc
 

4.0

 

12.0



Oil and Grease
 

N/A

 

100





 



   (B)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” metal unless indicated otherwise. These analytical methods are
set forth in 40 CFR, Part 136 or reference cited in that regulation, or found
in U.S. EPA, Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, Test Methods for
Evaluating Solid Waste, SW-846.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.019  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.020  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The Utility reserves the right to establish more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.021  RIGHT OF REFUSAL.



   The Utility reserves the right to approve or deny any new or increased
discharges to the POTW.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 53.035  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 53.015 within the
time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Utility Director,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Utility Director for review. The review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the utility under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.036  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Utility Director may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



   (B)   The Utility Director may require any person discharging into
the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow.



   (C)   Oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when,
in the opinion of the Utility Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or
sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential
users. Grease interceptors are a mandatory requirement for any food service
facilities in the city. The interceptors are required to be an in-ground unit
with a minimum 1,000 gallon capacity; except where space does not allow, then
considerations could be made with requirements to have them cleaned more
often so as to function properly. All interception units shall be of type and
capacity approved by the Utility Director or City Engineering Dept. and shall
be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed,
by the user at their expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.037  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   At least once every two years, the Utility Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The Utility Director may require any user to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control
plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine
batch discharges;



   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;



   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Utility Director of
any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 53.055; and



   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 53.050  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the Utility Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Utility Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) of this section. A new source shall report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged and obtain a discharge permit from
IDEM.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information: the name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits: a list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations: a brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include
a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement: information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Utility Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance
with procedures set out in § 53.057.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 53.058.



      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule is to be used by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirements set out in § 53.051.



      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.051  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 53.050(B)(7) of this chapter:



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Utility
Director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Utility Director.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.052  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Utility Director a report containing the information described in §
53.050(B)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.053  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall once per year, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting year. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified. The yearly reporting
frequency may be modified to require more frequent reporting if deemed
necessary by the Utility Director.



   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (C)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Utility Director,
using the procedures prescribed in § 53.060, the results of this monitoring
shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.054  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user must notify the Utility Director of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.



   (A)   The Utility Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition.



   (B)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge
of any previously unreported pollutants.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.055  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential
problems for the POTW, the user shall within two hours of becoming aware of
the incident, telephone and notify the Utility of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the Utility Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.056  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Utility Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Utility Director within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.057  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.058  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   All significant industrial users with IDEM discharge permits
must sample in accordance with that permit.



   (B)   For other users of the wastewater system that are required or
requested by the Utility Director to provide samples the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques,
except as indicated in division (C) of this section. In the event flow
proportional sampling is infeasible, the Utility Director may authorize the
use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.



   (C)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.059  TIMING.



   Written reports or electronic CDs will be deemed to have been submitted
on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern. Electronic reporting will be deemed to
have been submitted on the date listed as received on the email.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.060  RECORD KEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the Utility, or where the user has been specifically notified of
a longer retention period by the Utility Director.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 53.075  RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The Utility Director or his or her authorized representative shall have
the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Utility Director
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties.



   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Utility Director will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.



   (B)   The Utility Director shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



   (C)   The Utility Director may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated quarterly to ensure their
accuracy.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Utility Director and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.



   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Utility Director access to
the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)  Penalty, see § 53.999



§ 53.076  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Utility Director has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program of the Utility designed to verify compliance with this
chapter or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Utility’s attorney may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Municipal Court, Superior Court or
Circuit Court, the Utility may seek a search and/or seizure warrant
describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The request
by the Utility shall specify what, if anything may be searched and/or seized
on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours
by the Director in the company of a uniformed police officer. In the event of
an extreme emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be
made without the issuance of a warrant.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



§ 53.090  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, and from
the Utility Director’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Utility
Director, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall
be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by
40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE



§ 53.105  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Utility Director shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The
term significant noncompliance shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a
six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product
of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other discharge violation that the Utility Director
believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;



   (D)   Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to the
public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Utility Director’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (F)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (G)   Any other violation(s) which the Utility Director determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 53.120  INFORMAL NOTICE.



   The Utility Director may issue an informal notice it will be either a
documented phone call, written warning, or a meeting notifying the IU of
minor incidences that have occurred and that need to be corrected. Repeat
performance of the same incidence or escalation of the incidence will result
in escalated enforcement action.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.121  NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NOV).



   When the Utility Director finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an IDEM discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Utility Director may serve upon that user a written Notice of Violation. This
Notice of Violation does not relieve the user from any penalties or notices
issued by IDEM. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation
of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, as well as increased sampling
of the parameter in violation within 30 days, shall be submitted by the IU to
the Utility Director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice
of Violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Utility Director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.122  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   The Utility Director may enter into administrative orders, assurances
of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. This will be the first formal response
to significant noncompliance (unless factors necessitate escalated
enforcement actions). The Director may require compliance schedules,
administrative fines, termination of service and show cause orders. In
addition, it specifies the name of the parties involved, statement of the
facts, the requirement to ensure compliance and the enforcement associated
with any future non-compliance and shall be judicially enforceable.



§ 53.123  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Utility Director may order a user which has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Utility
Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for
the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action,
and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 21 days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against,
or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.124  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE; ORDER.



   When the Utility Director finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an IDEM discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Utility Director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified scheduled
time. This will contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to compliance. Compliance
schedules also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. If the user does
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. A compliance schedule may
not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance schedule relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of
a compliance schedule shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. In addition, all compliance
schedules shall contain the following:



   (A)   Monitoring requirements with the location for monitoring;



   (B)   How the data will be used for evaluating compliance;



   (C)   Enforcement associated with non-compliance; and



   (D)   Closure date after which IU will be considered either
non-compliant with the established compliance schedule, or evaluated for
compliance.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.125  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   When the Utility Director finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, an IDEM discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the Utility Director may
issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the user to:



   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



   (B)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.126  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Utility Director finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an IDEM discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Utility Director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.
Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case
of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.



   (B)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month. A lien against
the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.



   (C)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request for the Utility Director to reconsider the fine along with full
payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the Utility Director may convene a hearing on the
matter. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together
with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The
Utility Director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement
actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. When assessing an
administrative fine the following factors are considered:



      (1)   Type and severity of the violation;



      (2)   Number of violations cited;



      (3)   Duration of noncompliance;



      (4)   Impact of the violation on the receiving water, sludge
quality, and POTW operation;



      (5)   Whether the violation threatened public health;



      (6)   The economic benefit or savings the industrial user
gained from the noncompliance;



      (7)   Compliance history of the industrial user; and



      (8)   Whether the industrial user is making a good faith
effort to comply.



   (D)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.127  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The Utility Director may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Utility Director may also immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Utility Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Utility
Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Utility Director that the period of
endangerment has passed.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Utility Director prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.128  COST RECOVERY.



   In addition to administrative fines imposed by the Director, the IU
shall be responsible for paying the following (but not limited to) costs
incurred by the city for the IU’s failure to comply:



   (A)   Cost of mileage and labor incurred in detecting and correcting
the violation;



   (B)   Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and
correcting the violation;



   (C)   Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or
associated with detecting and correcting the violation;



   (D)   Costs of any additional equipment acquired or expended by
city/town for detecting or correcting the violation;



   (E)   Repair and/or replacement of any part of the sewerage system
damaged by the violation;



   (F)   Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by
city/town as a result of the violation;



   (G)   Any and all expenses of outside professionals to include, but
not limited to, engineers, scientists, and/or legal counsel; and



   (H)   Other costs associated with the detection and correction of
the violations.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



§ 53.140  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The Utility Director may submit to IDEM recommendation to decline their
discharge permit for any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previously issued IDEM discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.



§ 53.141  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter, IDEM discharge permit
limits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the Utility Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Of Noblesville Code
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the Utility for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying the nuisance.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 53.155  UPSET.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, “UPSET” means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An “UPSET” does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (C) of this section are met.



   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Utility Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset [if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days]:



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (E)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.156  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
53.015(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §§ 53.015(B)(3)
through (17) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:



   (A)   The user’s IDEM NPDES issues permit limits exist for each
pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly
prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or



   (B)   The user does not require an IDEM NPDES permit, but the
discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the
user’s prior discharge when the Utility was regularly in compliance with
its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.157  BYPASS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   “BYPASS.” The intentional diversion of waste streams
from any portion of a user’s pretreatment facility.



      (2)   “SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.” Substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.



   (C)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the Utility Director, at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Utility Director
of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards
within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Utility
Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.



   (D)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Utility Director may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C) of this section.



      (2)   The Utility Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Utility Director determines
that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) of this
section.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES INDUSTRIAL/COMMERCIAL



§ 53.170  METERED WATER SUPPLY.



   User charges and fees shall be based upon the total amount of water
used from all users unless, in the opinion of the Director, significant
portions of water received are not discharged to a sanitary sewer. The total
amount of water used from public and private sources will be determined by
means of public meters or private meters, installed and maintained at the
expense of the user and approved by the Director.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.171  METERED WASTEWATER VOLUME AND METERED DIVERSIONS.



   For users where a significant portion of the water received from any
metered source in excess of 10,000 gallons per month and does not flow into
the sanitary sewer because of the principal activity of the user or removal
by other means, the user charges and fees may be applied against the volume
of water discharged from such premises into the community sewer. Written
notification and proof of the diversion of water must be provided by the user
if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees against
the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a meter
of a type and at a location approved by the Director and at the user’s
expense. Such meters that measure the amount of sewage discharge shall be
certified and calibrated for accuracy at least once per year at the expense
of the user and when deemed necessary by the Director.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



SURCHARGE COSTS



§ 53.185  SURCHARGE COSTS.



   (A)   (1)   Each user discharging wastewater into the sanitary
sewers shall be subject to a surcharge in addition to the regular sewage
service charge based on content of the waste based on the biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), suspended solids (SS) and phosphorous content of the wastes, if
the wastes have a concentration higher than 300 mg/L of BOD, 350 mg/L of SS
or 15 mg/L of phosphorous.



      (2)   Other pollutants may be included as deemed necessary.



   (B)   Sampling and testing for surcharges or use charges. The
discharged wastewater will be sampled during each sewage billing period for
minimum of a one-day period (24 continuous hours) by means of a composite
sample. An extended sampling period of up to one week (seven continuous days)
or reduction may be requested to enable the gathering of a sample
representative of a company’s wastewater. The extension or reduction of the
sampling period beyond the initial one-day sampling period maybe requested by
either the sewer user involved or the City of Noblesville. If an extended
sampling period is requested, the parameter values used to calculate the
surcharge will be the arithmetical average of the individual values. In the
event a company or industry has multiple discharges of wastewater, each
discharge shall be sampled according to quality. If significant process
changes are made to affect quality of any discharge, resampling may be
requested by either the sewer user involved or the city.



   (C)   These tests shall be made in accordance with the latest
editions of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water or by an approved
EPA method.



   (D)   Computation of surcharge.



      (1)   Biochemical Oxygen Demand (B.O.D.) in excess of 300 mg/L
$0.07 per pound of BOD.



      (2)   Suspended Solids (S.S.) in excess of 350 mg/L $0.06 per
pound of SS.



      (3)   Phosphorous in excess of 15 mg/L $0.51 per pound of
Phosphorous.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 53.200  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The city, acting by its Common Council, may adopt reasonable fees for
reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Utility’s
pretreatment program which may include:



   (A)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures
including the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;



   (B)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



   (C)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (D)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the Utility.



   (E)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to approve
an enforcement response plan, and such additional plans, policies, and
procedures, as it deems are necessary and proper to carry out the terms and
conditions of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



§ 53.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Utility Director finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, IDEM
discharge permit limits, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Utility Director may petition the appropriate
Court through the Utility’s Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Utility Director may
also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, IDEM discharge permit limits, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the Utility for a minimum civil penalty of at least $1,000 per day, per
violation, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), but no more than
$2,500 per day, per violation for a first violation nor more than $7,500 per
day, per violation for subsequent violations, in accordance with I.C.
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B). In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.



      (2)   The Utility Director may recover reasonable attorneys’
fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the Utility.



      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s
violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the
user, and any other factor as justice requires.



      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a barrier
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (C)   Criminal prosecution.



      (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter, IDEM discharge permit limits, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$5,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than three years,
or both.



      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
penalty of at least $1,000, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of
action for personal injury or property damage available under Indiana law.



      (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, IDEM discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $5,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more
than three years, or both.



      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $10,000 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than five years, or both.



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive; The Utility Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Utility’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Utility Director may take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Utility
Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.



   (E)   Judicial action. Judicial action will be taken when it is
deemed necessary to force the IU to correct the violation and comply with the
permit. Judicial action may consist of civil prosecution; criminal
prosecution; or an action for injunction, at the discretion of the POTW and
its counsel. As an alternative to judicial action, the POTW and IU may agree
to a voluntary zero discharge of industrial waste by the IU pending
correction of the violation.



(Ord. 10-04-12, passed 4-10-12)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC RULES



      72.   STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING



      73.   PEDESTRIANS



      74.   BICYCLES



      75.   VIOLATIONS



      76.   GOLF CARTS



      77.   (RESERVED)



      78.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Short title



   70.03   Application



   70.04   Effect of headings




Enforcement and Administration




   70.15   Duties of Traffic Committee



   70.16   Duties of Police Chief and police officers



   70.17   Emergency regulations



   70.18   Recommendations to be submitted by Traffic Committee



   70.19   Authority of police and fire officials



   70.20   Required obedience



   70.21   Certain nonmotorized traffic to obey traffic regulations



   70.22   Use of coasters, skateboard, roller skates, and the like
restricted



   70.23   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   70.24   Authorized emergency vehicles




Traffic-Control Devices




   70.35   Authority to install traffic-control devices



   70.36   Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices



   70.37   When official traffic-control devices required for
enforcement purposes



   70.38   Official traffic-control devices - presumption of legality



   70.39   Council to designate crosswalks and establish safety zones



   70.40   Traffic lanes




Procedure on Violation




   70.50   Notice of violation



   70.51   Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle operation violations, see §§ 75.01 - 75.05



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined
herein but are defined in the Indiana laws regulating the operation of
vehicles, and such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words
and phrases used herein, except when the context otherwise required.



   (B)   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   "COUNCIL."  The Common Council of the city.



   "LOADING ZONE."  A space reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles
during the loading or unloading of passengers or property.



   "OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD."  Whenever certain hours are named herein,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current
use in this city.



   "POLICE OFFICER."  Every officer of the municipal police department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.



   "TRAFFIC COMMITTEE."    The Traffic Committee shall consist of the
Police Chief, City Engineer, Street Commissioner, Plan Director and an
appointee of the Common Council from their membership.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 64-10-00, passed 11-14-00)



§ 70.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This title may be known and cited as the Noblesville Traffic Code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.03  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this title relating to the operation of vehicles
refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon streets and highways
except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.04  EFFECT OF HEADINGS.



   Subchapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or extent of
the provisions of any subchapter or section hereof.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION



§ 70.15  DUTIES OF TRAFFIC COMMITTEE.



   It shall be the general duty of the Traffic Committee:



   (A)   To determine the installation and proper timing and
maintenance of traffic-control devices;



   (B)   To conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to
advise remedial measures;



   (C)   To conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions;



   (D)   To plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways
of the city;



   (E)   To cooperate  with other city officials in the development of
ways and means to improve traffic conditions;



   (F)   To carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by
ordinances of this city.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.16  DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS.



   In addition to his other activities, it shall be the duty of the Police
Chief to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all state
vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city; to make arrests for
traffic violations; to investigate all traffic accidents and make reports on
a standard accident report form; to maintain a standard system of filing
accident records and records of all arrests and warnings; to direct other
officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways to improve traffic conditions; to file an annual report with
the Council concerning the number of traffic accidents, the number of moving
violations and parking violations, arrests, and other data on the traffic
activities of his office and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon
said office by this title.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.17  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   The Police Chief may authorize the temporary placing of official
traffic-control devices when required by an emergency. The Police Chief shall
notify the Council of his action as soon thereafter as is practicable in
writing.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.18  RECOMMENDATIONS TO BE SUBMITTED BY TRAFFIC COMMITTEE.



   Prior to enactment of a traffic sign or traffic device by the Board of
Public Works or adoption of an ordinance concerning traffic control by the
City Council, a report, study, investigation, and recommendation shall be
submitted by the Traffic Committee to the responsible body.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.19  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The Police Chief or police officers as are assigned by the
Police Chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or
signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
the Police Chief or police officers may direct traffic as conditions may
require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist police officials in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.20  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE.



   It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden
or fail to perform any act required in this traffic code, unless provided
otherwise under Indiana law.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 13-04-18, passed 5-15-18)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 70.21  CERTAIN NONMOTORIZED TRAFFIC T OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   Every person propelling any push cart upon a roadway shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by this title and by the rules of the road portion of the
state vehicle code, except those provisions which by their very nature can
have no application.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.22  USE OF COASTERS, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, AND THE LIKE
RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller skates, skateboards or riding in or by means of
any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar devise, shall go upon any roadway except
while crossing a street and when so crossing such person shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.23  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles
owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city,
district, or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this title or in the state vehicle
code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.24  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The driver of an authorizes emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected
violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire
alarm, may park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code.



   (B)   The foregoing provision shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to park or stand with due regard
for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provision protect the driver
from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.35  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Council shall have placed and maintained official traffic-control
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of  this city to
make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and maintain
such additional official traffic-control devices as the Council may deem
necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of
this city  or the state vehicle code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.36  MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, markings, and devices shall conform
to the latest edition of the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways prepared by the Indiana Department of
Highways (IDOH).  All signs, signals, and markings required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform to type and
location throughout the city. All traffic- control devices so erected and not
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this ordinance shall be
official traffic control devices.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.37  WHEN OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT
PURPOSES.



   No provision of this traffic code for which official traffic-control
devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place to the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. Whenever a particular section does not state that official
traffic-control devices are required, such section shall be effective even
though no devices are erected or in place.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.38  OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES - PRESUMPTION OF LEGALITY.



   (A)   Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic-code
such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.



   (B)   Any official traffic-control devices placed pursuant to the
provisions of this traffic doe and purporting to conform to the lawful
requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this traffic code, unless the contrary shall be established
by competent evidence.



   (C)   The location of all traffic-control devices shall be specified
in Chapter 78 as from time to time amended by resolution of the Council, duly
adopted.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.39  COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE CROSSWALKS AND ESTABLISH SAFETY ZONES.



   The Council is hereby authorized by resolution duly adopted:



   (A)   To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or
lines  upon  the  surface  of the roadway,  crosswalks at intersections
where in the opinion of the Council there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway, and at such other places as the Council may deem
necessary;



   (B)   To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at
such places as the Council may deem necessary for the protection of
pedestrians.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.40  TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Council is hereby authorized by resolution duly adopted to have
agents mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a
regular alignment of traffic is necessary.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



PROCEDURE ON VIOLATION



§ 70.50  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Whenever a person is charged with a violation of this traffic
code, he shall be given notice of such charge by an appropriate notice served
personally or placed in or upon a vehicle stopped or parked in violation of
any provision hereof.



   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Police Chief or his officers or
other duly constituted officer, any person charged with violating this
traffic code is about to leave the jurisdiction, such officer may institute
action forthwith before a court of law, Magistrate or Judge for the
collection of such fine and penalty.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.51  DISPOSITION OF TRAFFIC FINES AND FORFEITURES.



   All traffic fines and forfeitures collected by the Clerk/Treasurer
shall be deposited in the General Fund.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each violator of the restrictions and provisions of this
traffic code on stopping, standing, parking, and pedestrian offenses (except
handicapped parking violations), shall pay a fine and penalty to the City, in
the sum of $20 if paid within seven days of the date of the time of issuance,
unless provided otherwise under Indiana law. Additional fees shall be
assessed based upon the following fine schedule:



      (1)   (a)   All violations (except handicapped parking
violations):



            1.   Unpaid between eight and fourteen days of the
date of issuance: $30;



            2.   Unpaid between 15 and 21 days of the date of
issuance: $50;



            3.   Unpaid between 22 and 28 days of the date of
issuance: $70;



            4.   Unpaid between 29 and 35 days of the date of
issuance: $90; and



            5.   Unpaid after 36 days of the date of issuance:
$110.



         (b)   Violators who wish to appeal the issuance of the
notice of violation must file an appeal with the Noblesville City Court
within 15 days of the date of the issuance. An appeal shall preserve the
status quo amount of any fine (e.g., if a violator files an appeal on the
sixth day from the date the notice of violation was issued, then the fine,
after an unsuccessful appeal, shall be $20, in addition to imposed costs).
The appeal shall be docketed in the Noblesville City Court, and fines made
subject to the costs imposed for Class A infractions in addition to the fine
or fees imposed by the City Court. The City Court will promptly set a hearing
on the appeal.



      (2)   (a)   Handicapped parking violations: shall pay a
fine and penalty to the city in the sum of $50, if paid within seven days of
the date of issuance, unless provided otherwise under Indiana law. Additional
fees shall be assessed based upon the following fine schedule:



            1.   Unpaid between eight and fourteen days of the
date of issuance: $60;



            2.   Unpaid between 15 and 21 days of the date of
issuance: $80;



            3.   Unpaid between 22 and 28 days of the date of
issuance: $100;



            4.   Unpaid between 29 and 35 days of the date of
issuance: $125; and



            5.   Unpaid after 36 days of the date of issuance:
$150.



         (b)   Violators who wish to appeal the issuance of the
notice of violation must file an appeal with the Noblesville City Court
within fifteen (15) days of the date of the issuance. An appeal shall
preserve the status quo amount of any fine (e.g., if a violator files an
appeal on the sixth day from the date the notice of violation was issued,
then the fine, after an unsuccessful appeal, shall be $50, in addition to
imposed costs). The appeal shall be docketed in the Noblesville City Court
and made subject to the costs imposed for Class A infractions in addition to
the fee imposed by the City Court. The City Court will promptly set a hearing
on the appeal.



      (3)   Booting/towing.



         (a)   1.   For any vehicle having at least three
parking violations issued under this section, each of which have not been
appealed and remain unpaid 40 or more days after the date of issuance, the
City will issue a notice to the vehicle's owner that the vehicle is eligible
for a wheel boot until the outstanding parking violation amounts are paid.
The notice will also provide the registered owner with ten days to pay
outstanding amounts due. If the vehicle is found parked in a public place
after expiration of the ten day warning period, the vehicle is subject to
being restrained by having a wheel boot installed on the vehicle by employees
of the City, until such time as all outstanding fines and fees are paid in
full. In addition, there will be a $25 fee for the removal of the wheel boot.
It is the discretion of the Chief of Police to have motorcycles and/or any
other vehicles towed to safe storage in lieu of using the wheel boot. The
vehicle will be released only after payment of all outstanding fines, fees,
and any costs incurred for the towing and storage of the vehicle.



            2.   Violators or registered owners who wish to
appeal the imposition of fines and fees paid under this provision, may, after
paying all outstanding fines and fees (including the wheel boot removal fee,
towing fee, and storage fees, if any), file an appeal with the Noblesville
City Court seeking to challenge the fees related to towing, storage, or the
installation of the wheel boot only. Violators or registered owners are
unable to appeal the fines for the underlying parking violations under this
provision. Appeals must be filed within 15 days of submitting payment to the
City for fines and fees imposed under this provision. The appeal shall be
docketed in the Noblesville City Court and made subject to the costs imposed
for Class A infractions in addition to the fee imposed by the City Court. The
City Court will promptly set a hearing on the appeal.



         (b)   In the event that such fine has not been paid
within 90 days of the date of issuance and no timely appeal has been filed,
the violation may be docketed in the Noblesville City Court and prosecuted as
a Class A infraction. In such event, the violator shall be obligated to pay
any costs imposed by reason of the docketing in Noblesville City Court in
addition to the fine prescribed herein.



   (B)   Each violator of any other provision of this traffic code
shall pay a fine and penalty to the city, not to exceed $300 for each such
violation. Violators who wish to pay a fine or penalty must file an appeal
within 15 days of the date of the issuance of notice of the violation. The
appeal shall be docketed in the Noblesville City Court and made subject to
the costs imposed for Class A infractions in addition to the fee imposed by
the City Court. All unpaid violations may be docketed in the Noblesville City
Court and made subject to the costs imposed for Class A infractions in
addition to the fine imposed by the City Court.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 22-3-06, passed 3-14-06; Am. Ord.
13-04-18, passed 5-15-18)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section




Speed Regulations




   71.01   State speed laws applicable



   71.02   Speed limits on designated streets



   71.03   Speeds for trains



   71.04   emporary traffic control in construction zones



Turning Movements



   71.10   Authority to place restricted turn signs



   71.11   Limitations on turning around




One-way Streets and Alleys




   71.20   One-way streets and alleys




Stop and Yield Intersections




   71.30   Through streets, stop intersections, and yield intersections
designated




Other Driving Rules




   71.40   Driving through funeral or other procession



   71.41   Limitation on backing



   71.42   Clinging to vehicles



   71.43   Muffler requirement



   71.44   When permits required for parades and processions



   71.45   School zones



   71.46   Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud



   71.47   Motorized vehicles prohibited from using trails and sidewalks



Cross-reference:



   Vehicle operation violations, see §§ 75.01 - 75.05



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 71.01  STATE SPEED LAWS APPLICABLE.



   The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be
applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this traffic code, as
authorized by state law, hereby declares and determines upon the basis of
engineering and traffic investigations by the Traffic Committee that certain
speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain
areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this traffic code when
proper signs are in place.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 71.02  SPEED LIMITS ON DESIGNATED STREETS.



   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation by the
Traffic Committee, maximum speed limits are hereby determined and declared
reasonable and safe on the streets (or parts to streets), described in
Chapter 78, Schedule I, as from time to time amended by resolution of the
Council duly adopted, when signs are erected giving notice thereof.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 71.03  SPEEDS FOR TRAINS.



   It shall be unlawful for any railroad or railroad company or
corporation by its officers or agents to move, run or propel or cause to be
moved, run or propelled any railroad vehicle locomotive cars or train at a
greater rate of speed than ten miles per hour within the corporate limits of
the city.



(Ord. 39-6-90, passed 6-25-90)



§ 71.04  TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL IN CONSTRUCTION ZONES.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety, upon recommendation of
the City Engineer or Police Chief may, by motion, establish temporary reduced
speed limits within construction zones within the city.



   (B)   The Street Department upon consultation with the City Engineer
shall conspicuously post signs informing the public of the reduced speeds
within the construction zones.



   (C)   Any person who exceeds the posted speed limit within a
construction zone, shall be guilty of a Class B infraction and may be fined
up to $1,000.



(Ord. 28-6-08, passed 6-10-08)



TURNING MOVEMENTS



§ 71.10  AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   The Council is hereby authorized by resolution duly adopted to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections.
The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day
and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly
indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 71.11  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a zoned business district.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS



§ 71.20  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Upon those streets and parts of streets in those alleys described in
Chapter 78, Schedule II, as from time to time amended by resolution duly
adopted, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
proper signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained
at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS



§ 71.30  THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS, AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS
DESIGNATED.



   Those streets, parts of streets, stop intersections, and yield
intersections described in Chapter 78, Schedule III, as from time to time
amended by resolution duly adopted, are hereby declared to be through
streets, stop intersections, or yield intersections for the purpose of this
section.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



OTHER DRIVING RULES



§ 71.40  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such
vehicles are conspicuously designated. This provision shall not apply at
intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic- control signals or
police officers.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.41  LIMITATION ON BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement
can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.42  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.43  MUFFLER REQUIREMENT.



   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city without an
effective muffler properly installed on such motor vehicle, nor shall any
vehicle be operated in said city upon which is installed or being used any
motor noise muffler device which fails to suppress the motor exhaust noise to
a level equal to or below the noise volume achieved by the muffler equipment
specified by the manufacturer of such motor vehicle.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.44  WHEN PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.



   No funeral, procession or parade containing 200 or more persons or 25
or more vehicles except the Armed Forces of the United States, the military
forces of this state and the forces of the Police and Fire Departments,
funerals, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in
accordance with a permit issued by the Police Chief and such other
regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. Request for said permit
shall be made no less than two working days preceding said event.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.45  SCHOOL ZONES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the posted
speed limit within a school zone during the following times:



      (1)   As posted within the designated school zone  per
Schedule I, Speed Limits, of Chapter 78.



      (2)   At any other time when yellow flashing lights are
operating near a sign designating the school zone.



   (B)   Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be
guilty of a Class B Infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.



   (C)   The city court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this section.



   (D)   Citations for violations of this section may be issued by any
sworn member of the police department and upon property operated by the city
schools, by a sworn special police officer appointed under IC 36-8-3-7 to
serve the city schools.



(Ord. 43-12-99, passed 12-13-99; Am. Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 71.46  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; REMOVAL REQUIRED; TRACKING MUD.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street, highway or
other public place unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered
as to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom, except that sand or other substance may be dropped for
the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be
sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.



   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the
process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans,
bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste or any other material of an unsanitary
nature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle,
shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a
sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of (ORC 4513.31).



   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle or equipment so as to
track or drop mud, stones, gravel or other similar material on any street,
highway or other public place.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully
drops or deposits mud, stones, gravel or other similar material or permits
the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any street,
highway or other public place to immediately remove the same or cause it to
be removed.



   (E)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section 
commits an infraction and may be fined up to the amount contained in § 70.99.



(Ord. 23-4-03, passed 4-29-03)



§ 71.47  MOTORIZED VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING TRAILS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Motorized vehicles prohibited from operating, parking, or
obstructing the use of public trails or sidewalks within rights-of-way or
easements maintained, operated or located within by the city of shall include
the following types:



      (1)   Golf cart (or any modified version), as defined in IC
9-13-2-69.7.



      (2)   Motor scooter, as defined in IC 9-13-2-104.1.



      (3)   Motor vehicle, as defined in IC 9-13-2-105.



      (4)   Motorcycle, as defined in IC 9-13-2-108.



      (5)   Off-road vehicle, as defined in IC 9-13-2-117.3.



      (6)   Farm tractor, as defined in IC 9-13-2-56.



      (7)   Farm truck, as defined in IC 9-13-2-58.



      (8)   Farm vehicle loaded with a farm product, as defined in
IC 9-13-2-59.



      (9)   Low speed vehicle, as defined in IC 9-13-2-94.5.



      (10)   Bicycle powered with engine or motor.



      (11)   Any motorized piece of equipment or machinery, such as
a garden tractor, operated with a two-cycle engine or larger, that is being
used for transportation or travel purposes.



   (B)   Also included in this section shall be any vehicle determined
by a duly appointed officer of the police department to be operated or parked
in a manner detrimental to the safety and well being of pedestrians and
bicyclists, and that restricts normal use of a trail or sidewalk.



      (1)   This section shall not restrict use by personal mobility
devices, operated in accordance with the needs and requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), from operating on public trails or
sidewalks.



      (2)   This section shall not restrict the use of trails by
manually powered bicycles.



      (3)   This section shall not restrict any vehicle defined
above from crossing a trail or sidewalk while using an existing driveway or
entrance to access a private or public property.



      (4)   The use of trails, multi-use paths and walks by publicly
owned emergency or maintenance vehicles is not restricted by the section.



      (5)   Provisions of this section may be waived under the
provisions of an encroachment permit or an improvement location permit issued
by the duly appointed city department and/or the Board of Public Works and
Safety.



      (6)   Any person who violates the provisions of this section
commits an infraction and may be fined a minimum of $100, or up to an amount
and subject to the provisions contained in § 70.99.



   (C)   Enforcement powers granted to the police department shall
include the authority to cite parents or legal guardians of a minor or other
parties operating a motorized vehicle in violation of this section.



   (D)   The police department is hereby granted the power and
authority by this section to seize or impound any motorized vehicle operating
in violation of this section.



   (E)   Vehicles specifically exempted by this section, not previously
expressly stated, include golf carts and other similar-sized golf course
maintenance equipment crossing in the tunnel under Union Chapel Road at
Sagamore Golf Course.



   (F)   Violations and prosecution of violations in this section. Any
person receiving a notice of violation of this section may appear at the
Noblesville City Court (“city court”) and pay the fine indicated on the
notice, or deny the violation and contest the matter in the city court, which
shall be the proper venue for any such challenge.



      (1)   If a person appears at the city court and denies the
violation, the city court shall cause the matter to be docketed with the
clerk of the city court.



      (2)   The case shall then proceed according to the rules and
procedures of the city court pertaining to ordinance violations.



      (3)   Violators shall, upon conviction, be subject to any
penalties listed in this section as well as § 70.99, and will have court
costs attached.



(Ord. 49-10-17, passed 11-7-17)



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING



Section




Angle Parking




   72.01   Signs or markings indicating angle parking



   72.02   Obedience to angle parking signs or markings




Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places




   72.10   Parking not to obstruct traffic



   72.11   Parking in alleys



   72.12   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited, no signs required



   72.13   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.14   No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or
congested places



   72.15   Temporary parking prohibition



   72.16   Motor vehicles must park between lines




Stopping For Loading or Unloading Only




   72.25   Council to designate loading zones



   72.26   Standing in loading zone



   72.27   Council to designate public carrier stops and stands



   72.28   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands



   72.29   Handicap parking




Stopping, Standing or Parking Restricted  or Prohibited on Certain Streets




   72.40   Application of subchapter



   72.41   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets



   72.42   Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets



   72.43   Parking time limited on certain streets



   72.44   Traffic-control devices required



   72.45   Acts to evade the parking time limitation on certain streets
prohibited



   72.46   Storage and parking in right-of-way or temporary cul-de-sac




Commercial Vehicles




   72.55   Truck parking restrictions




Residential On-street Parking Permits




   72.65   Eligibility



   72.66   Information required in application



   72.67   Information contained on permit



   72.68   Hangtag required



   72.69   Expiration of permits



   72.70   Fees



   72.71   Issuance and revocation of permits



   72.72   Regulations for residential permit holders



   72.73   Disposition of revenue



   72.74   Violation and penalty




Non-residential Parking Permits




   72.85   Eligibility



   72.86   Information required in application



   72.87   Information contained on permit



   72.88   Hangtag required



   72.89   Expiration of permits



   72.90   Parking rates and fees



   72.91   Issuance and revocation of permits



   72.92   Regulations for non-residential permit holders



   72.93   Parking lots



   72.94   Duration of parking in metered areas



   72.95   Fine schedule




Enforcement




   72.98   Towing vehicles



ANGLE PARKING



§ 72.01  SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.



   The Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be
permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall
not be indicated upon any state highway within this city unless the Indiana
Department of Transportation (IDOT) has determined that angle parking shall
be permitted. Angle parking shall be specified in Exhibit I, as from time to
time amended by resolution of the Council.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 72.02  OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE PARKING SIGNS OR MARKINGS.



   Any and all motor vehicles utilizing an angle parking space shall
utilize such space by "head-in" parking.  For purposes of this section, the
term "HEAD-IN" is defined to mean that the front of the motor vehicle shall
be nearest the curb.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 02-01-91, passed 1-14-91)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES



§ 72.10  PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 18
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED, NO SIGNS REQUIRED.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when  necessary
to  avoid  conflict  with  other  traffic or  in compliance  with
law  or the  directions of  a police  officer or traffic-control device,
in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of or between sidewalk and curb or immediately
opposite a public or private driveway;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;



   (G)   within 30 feet upon the approach to any intersection flashing
beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (H)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted);



   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (J)   Within 30 feet of any railway crossing; and



   (K)   At any place where official signs or markings so designate.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.13  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The Council is hereby authorized, upon resolution duly
adopted, to erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides  of
any  street adjacent to  any school  property when such parking would, in
the  Council's opinion, interfere with  traffic or create a hazardous
situation.



   (B)   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon
either  side of a street adjacent  to any school property as authorized 
herein, no  person shall park  a vehicle  in any such designated place.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.14  NO STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED
PLACES.



   (A)   The Council is hereby authorized to determine and designate by
proper signs places in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles
would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay
to traffic as shown on Chapter 78, Schedules VI and VII as from time to time
amended by resolution duly adopted by the Council.



   (B)   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested
places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle
in any such designated place.  Notwithstanding the foregoing limitation for
parking setback, at the intersection of 9th Street and Hannibal Street,
parking is prohibited within 40 feet of the intersection on all corners. 
The City Street Commissioner is hereby authorized to place signs and paint
curbs in an appropriate manner to  identify to the public the prohibition
against parking as stated herein.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 37-9-92, passed 9-29-92)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 72.15  TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION.



   Parking may be temporarily limited or prohibited from time to time for
special occasions and to meet emergencies upon authority of the Police Chief
who is hereby given authority for such limitation and prohibition of parking
and all vehicles shall observe such prohibition and limitations when proper
signs have been erected or placed indicating such prohibition, and the
violation thereof shall be subject to the penalties heretofore or hereafter
provided.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  MOTOR VEHICLES TO PARK BETWEEN LINES.



   Any and all motor vehicles parked at a location upon a public
thoroughfare within the corporte limits of the city that is marked a parking
space, shall be parked in a manner which will cause them to be located within
the lines of a defined parking space.



(Ord. 03-01-91, passed 1-14-91)  Penalty, see § 70.99



STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY



§ 72.25  COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE LOADING ZONES.



   The Council is hereby authorized by resolution duly adopted, to
determine the location of loading zones and shall have placed and maintained
appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the
provisions of this section are applicable.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 72.26  STANDING IN LOADING ZONE.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pick-up and loading of property in any place described in Chapter 78,
Schedule X as from time to time amended by resolution duly adopted and marked
as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones
are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of
materials exceed 30 minutes.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is
waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.27  COUNCIL TO DESIGNATE PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.



   The Council is hereby authorized by resolution duly adopted and
required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for
other passenger common carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such
places and in such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit
and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab
stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs as designated
in Chapter 78, Schedule X as from time to time amended by resolution duly
adopted by the Council.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 72.28  RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when day such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that
the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter such zone.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.29  HANDICAP PARKING.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish handicap
parking spaces within the public rights-of-way and/or parking lots owned,
operated or controlled by the city now or hereafter.  Designation of a
handicap parking space shall be made with appropriate paintings and/or signs
which shall conform to the Uniform Traffic Code relating to such signage.



   (B)   No person shall cause to be parked within a designated
disabled parking place a motor vehicle which is not occupied or driven by a
person who is disabled as that term is defined by the state and who has an
appropriate license, permit or other device issued by the Indiana Bureau of
Motor Vehicles confirming such designation.



   (C)   The number of disabled parking spaces to be designated by the
Chief of Police shall conform to any applicable state or federal standard
governing or purporting to govern the creation of such spaces.  In the
absence of a specific standard, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
create a reasonable number of spaces for disabled person.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B), any disabled
person shall be entitled to use a disabled parking place as it has been so
designated by the City Chief of Police and should such and should such an
individual receive a ticket for improper parking as hereinafter provided,
proof of their disability shall be deemed an absolute defense upon
presentation of a letter or other document from a physician attesting to
their disabled condition.



(Ord. 36-9-92, passed 9-15-92)  Penalty, see § 70.99



STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS



§ 72.40  APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter prohibiting the standing or parking
of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or
as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or official traffic-control device.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 72.41  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in Chapter 78, Schedule
V attached to and made part of this traffic code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.42  PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours specified in Chapter 78, Schedule VI as from time
to time amended by resolution duly adopted on any day except Sundays and
public holidays within the district or upon any street described in said
Schedule VI attached to and made a part of this traffic code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.43  PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time specified in Chapter 78 Schedule VII as from
time to time amended by resolution duly adopted of any day except Sundays and
public holidays within the district at locations described in Chapter 78,
Schedule VII attached to and made a part of this traffic  code.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.44  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED.



   No prohibition, regulation or limitation relating to stopping, standing
or parking imposed under this or any other ordinance of this city shall be
effective unless official traffic control devices are erected and in place at
the time of any alleged offense and it shall be the duty of the Council to
see that such devices are erected and maintained.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 72.45  ACTS TO EVADE THE PARKING TIME LIMITATION ON CERTAIN STREETS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall change, alter, or remove any marking placed
on  any vehicle by an  employee of the city  which marking is placed on
the vehicle for the purpose of enforcing, or attempting to enforce, the
provisions of § 72.43 of this chapter.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle from one parking place on a
street listed in Schedule VII directly to another parking place on a street
listed in Schedule VII.



   (C)   Any person who violates the terms and conditions of this
section shall be issued a citation, pay a fine, court costs, and/or penalty
pursuant to the terms and procedures set out in § 70.99 of the Code of
Ordinances of the city.



(Ord. 58-11-96, passed 11-25-96)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.46  STORAGE AND PARKING IN RIGHT-OF-WAY OR TEMPORARY CUL-DE-SAC.



   The storage of construction materials or equipment on or within a city
right-of-way, easement, street, or temporary cul-de-sac shall be prohibited,
unless specifically authorized by the Board of Public Works; or by an
encroachment permit, improvement location permit, or building permit issued
by the city directly and specifically related to the permitted construction
activity. Temporary cul-de-sacs shall be for use by emergency vehicles and
shall remain free from the storage of equipment and materials.



(Ord. 30-06-15, passed 7-14-15; Am. Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)  Penalty,
see § 70.99



COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



§ 72.55  TRUCK PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   Commercial vehicles of two tons capacity or more or commercial
vehicles  more  than  20  feet  in  length  shall  not  park within
theresidential or business district on public right-of-way of this city
except for the purpose of loading or unloading.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RESIDENTIAL ON-STREET PARKING PERMITS



§ 72.65  ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   Occupants of any residential dwelling unit in an area of the
city zoned for residential purposes and subject to restricted parking, who
own an automobile, and who do not have an off-street parking space available
for their unit, may apply to the Police Department for a permit for one
parking space upon the city street adjacent to such dwelling unit.  At the
time of application, a picture I.D. and a valid automobile registration shall
be shown.



   (B)   As used in this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply:



      (1)   "ADJACENT."  Abutting the property of the residence or,
if no such space is available, then directly across the street and within the
same block as the residence.



      (2)   "HOUSEHOLD." A single individual living upon the
premises as a single housekeeping unit or collective body of persons living
upon the premises as a single housekeeping unit.



      (3)   "RESTRICTED PARKING." Any street or thoroughfare of the
city for which an ordinance has been adopted limiting the hours of parking as
from time to time amended. Such streets or thoroughfares shall be posted for
restricted and limited parking pursuant to said ordinance.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.66  INFORMATION REQUIRED IN APPLICATION.



   The application form shall contain the name and address of the
applicant; the year, make and license number of the automobile owned by the
applicant which is authorized to use the private parking space and a signed
statement from the applicant that he or she resides at the address given in
the application, that he or she owns the listed automobile and if its license
number changes while a permit is in force, the applicant shall amend the
application.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.67  INFORMATION CONTAINED ON PERMIT.



   The permit provided for in this subchapter shall contain the following
information: number of the permit; name and address of the person to whom the
permit is issued; year, make and license number of issuance and date of
expiration.  A copy of a photo I.D. and signed contract will be kept with
the permit.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.68  HANGTAG REQUIRED.



   A colored hangtag bearing the expiration date of the permit will be
issued and the hangtag must be in the vehicle and visible while at the
location of the private residential parking space. The color of the hangtag
shall change each year. The absence of the hangtag shall be presumptive
evidence that the permit has expired and they must comply with the parking
requirements of the area they are parked in or receive a parking violation.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.69  EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.



   All permits expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. Permits
previously issued must be renewed for the coming year on or before December
15 or the application and permit shall expire as of midnight on December 31
of the year of issuance.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.70  FEES.



   Fees include:



   (A)   An annual administrative fee of $30; and



   (B)   An annual permit fee of $30, which shall be paid upon issuance
and shall be paid thereafter and will be pro-rated throughout the year.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 51-7-90, passed 8-15-90; Am. Ord.
80-11-03, passed 3-11-04)



§ 72.71  ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The application for a permit under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be submitted to the Police Department who shall forward it
to the Traffic Engineer.  The Traffic Engineer shall approve or disapprove
the application in accordance with the provision of this subchapter.  An
adverse ruling may be appealed to the Board of Public Works, whose decision
shall be final.



   (B)   The Police Department shall have the authority to revoke any
permit upon finding violation of the regulation in this subchapter and to
order the forfeiture of all fees paid.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.72  REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL PERMIT HOLDERS.



   The following regulations shall be in effect.



   (A)   A  permit shall be issued only when there is a lack of
adequate off-street parking at applicant's place of residence. "ADEQUATE
OFF-STREET PARKING" shall be defined as space for the automobile, including
adequate access to that space.



   (B)   Permits shall be restricted to one per residence.



   (C)   Permits shall be valid only for the calendar year in which
they are issued.



   (D)   Private parking spaces shall be used for passenger vehicles
only.



   (E)   Private parking spaces shall not be subleased or rented, for
consideration or gratuitously, to individuals outside the applicant's
household.



   (F)   The permit holder will purchase from the Street Department and
maintain a standard sign as designated by the city.  Cost to be determined.



   (G)   Residential permits purchased by a resident may be
transferrable by contacting the Police Department for a processing fee of
$20. Transfer and issuance of said permits are subject to the review and
approval of the Police Department.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04; Am. Ord.
16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 72.73  DISPOSITI0ON OF REVENUE.



   All funds derived from the granting of permits under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be placed in the Parking Fund of the city.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.74  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   Any violations of this subchapter constitute a Class D Traffic
Violation and are subject to the fines listed exclusive in this traffic code
as well as enforced removal of the vehicle.



(Ord. 73-10-89, passed 12-15-89; Am. Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



NON-RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS



§ 72.85  ELIGIBILITY.



   This section is subject to the amendments in this subchapter.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.86  INFORMATION REQUIRED IN APPLICATION.



   The application form shall contain the name and address of the
applicant along with the year, make and license number of the automobile
owned by the applicant.  Applicants shall show a picture I.D. in which a
copy will remain with the permit.  Only the person who is issued the parking
permit shall be able to renew the permit and again, a photo I.D. will be
required at the time of renewal.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.87  INFORMATION CONTAINED ON PERMIT.



   The permit provided for this section shall contain the following
information: number of the permit; name and address of the person to whom the
permit is issued; year, make and license number of issuance and date of
expiration. A copy of a photo I.D. and signed contract will be kept with the
permit.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.88  HANGTAG REQUIRED.



   A colored hangtag bearing designated lot number and the expiration date
of the permit will be issued and the hangtag must be in the vehicle and
visible hanging from the mirror or left front dash.  If the individual fails
to display the hangtag then they must comply with the parking requirements of
the area they are parked in or receive a parking violation.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.89  EXPIRATION OF PERMITS.



   All permits will expire on December 31 of the year of issuance.  If
the permit holder fails to renew the parking permit by the expiration date,
they must comply with posted parking requirements or they will receive a
parking violation. If the parking permit is not renewed within 30 days of the
expiration, it will be issued to the next person on the list.  If an
individual wishes to relinquish the permit, the hangtag must be returned to
the Police Department and if time remains on the permit, the money will be
returned as prorated.  A claim will be submitted and it will be four to six
weeks before the money is returned to the individual.  The individual shall
not sell or give the hangtag to anyone else to use.  Upon return of the
hangtag, it will be reissued to the next individual on the waiting list for
the parking lot the permit was issued for.  In the case of a lost hangtag, a
replacement hangtag will be issued for a fee of $10; the lost hangtag will
then be void.  If the voided hangtag is found to still be in use in any
vehicle, that vehicle will be towed at the owner's expense or wheel locked to
recover the hangtag. If the permit holder finds the lost permit, it shall be
turned back in to the Police Department immediately.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.90  PARKING RATES AND FEES.



   Fees for annual parking permits and meters shall be as follows:



   (A)   Three hundred dollars ($300) per year, or $25 per month, for
Parking Lots 1, 3, and 4.



   (B)   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250) per year Parking Lots 2 and
5, including meters on Clinton Street.



   (C)   One hundred fifty dollars ($150) per year for Parking Lot 6.



   (D)   Twenty-five cents ($0.25) per hour for all parking meters.



(Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 72.91  ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   The application for a permit under the provisions of this
section shall be submitted to the Police Department.  An adverse ruling may
be appealed to the Board of Public Works, whose decision shall be final.



   (B)   The Police Department shall have the authority to revoke any
permit upon finding violation of the regulation in this section and to order
the forfeiture of all fees paid.



   (C)   Non-residential permits may be transferrable by contacting the
Police Department for a processing fee of $20. Transfer and issuance of said
permits are subject to the review and approval of the Police Department.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04; Am. Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 72.92  REGULATIONS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL PERMIT HOLDERS.



   The following regulations shall be in effect.



   (A)   Parking permits are only valid for designated city lots they
are issued for or the overflow lot if their assigned lot is full or closed
for any reason.  On occasion, the permit holder may not be able to park in
the lot in question due to repaving or special city functions.  If the city
closes the lot or the lot is full, the permit holder may park on the street
nearest their assigned lot.  However, at no time is the permit holder to
park on the square for more than two hours per day.



   (B)   The hangtag must be visible at all times while parking in the
designated area.  If the individual fails to display the hangtag, they must
comply with the parking requirements of the area they are parked in.



   (C)   Permits shall be valid only for the calendar year in which
they are issued.



   (D)   Parking hangtags shall not be subleased or rented, for
consideration or gratuitously to any other individual.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04)



§ 72.93  PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   The city has a contract with the county for jury parking in
lot #1 located in the 600 block of Logan Street.  The current cost is $750
per year.  The increase is due to the increase in parking per hour, number
of permits issued and the cost of printing.



   (B)   The Police Department will not issue parking permits for more
than half the spaces in any of the following parking lots.



      (1)   Lot #1 located in the 600 block of Logan Street.  There
are 44 parking spaces in this lot with 24 permits issued at this time.  In
the future, we will only issue 22 parking permits. This lot will be
color-coded light blue.  Permit numbers will begin with 100.



      (2)   Lot #3 located at 8th and Maple Street. There are 69
parking spaces in this lot with 48 permits issued at this time.  In the
future, we will only issue 35 parking permits.  This lot will be color-coded
red. Permit numbers will begin with 300.



      (3)   Lot #4 located behind Kirk's Hardware. There are 25
parking spaces in this lot with nine permits issued at this time. In the
future, we will issue 13 parking permits.  This lot will be color-coded
orange.  Permit numbers will start with 400.



      (4)   Lot #7 located behind City Hall will be changed to lot
#2.  There are 87 parking spaces in this lot with 80 permits issued at this
time.  In the future, we will only issue 44 parking permits.  This lot will
be color-coded green.  Permit numbers will start with 200.



      (5)   Lot #S located on 10th Street between Clinton and Logan
Street and on Clinton Street between 9th and 10th Street will be changed to
Lot #5.  There are 16 parking spaces in this area with three permits issued
at this time.  In the future we will issue eight parking permits.  This lot
will be color-coded purple.  Permit numbers will start with 500.



   (C)   The Police Department will not issue parking permits for more
than two-thirds of the spaces in the following parking lot. Lot #6 located on
the west side of 8th Street between Cherry Street and Maple Street. There are
15 parking spaces in this lot. We will only issue 10 permits in this lot with
0 permits issued at this time. This lot will be color-coded royal blue.
Permit numbers will start with 600.



   (D)   All meters will be programmed for $.25 cents per hour with a
maximum of 12 hours.



      (1)   Key city employees will be issued black and gold
non-expiring permits.  Permit numbers starting with N-001.  These permits
will be issued by the Chief of Police and will be for official use only. 
These permits will be assigned to the employee, not the department they are
employed by.



      (2)   If the employee changes positions or leaves employment
with the city, the permit will be returned to the Police Department for
reissue.



      (3)   The color of permit will change each year and will be
printed with the same information on both sides.  Each lot will have a
color-coded stripe for that designated lot.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04; Am. Ord. 46-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 72.94  DURATION OF PARKING IN METERED AREAS.



   The maximum parking duration for non-permit holders in metered spaces
shall be:



   (A)   Parking Lots 1, 3, 4, and 6: a maximum of 12 hours at the
assigned per meter rate.



   (B)   Parking Lots 2, 5, and on-street metered areas on Clinton
Street between 9th and 10th Streets and on 10th Street between Logan and
Clinton Streets: a maximum of four hours at the assigned meter rate.



   (C)    Saturdays, Sundays and observed city holidays, times and
locations as may be designated by the Mayor, parking meters shall be free of
charge.



(Ord. 16-03-16, passed 3-29-16)



§ 72.95  FINE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Fines for all violations written under the Parking Ordinance
shall be as defined in § 70.99.



   (B)   Fines will only be collected Monday through Friday from 8:00
a.m. to 4:30 p.m. excluding holidays. Vehicle owner, auto dealer or leasee is
responsible for all additional fees including towing, booting, etc.



   (C)   Tenth Street and Clinton Street parking meters. Five meters
between Logan and Clinton Street on the west side of 10th Street will be $.25
cents per hour with a 12 hour maximum. The Clinton Street meters are also
considered lot #5. Some permits will be issued at $250 per year.



(Ord. 80-11-03, passed 3-10-04; Am. Ord. 22-3-06, passed 3-14-06)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 72.98  TOWING VEHICLES.



   (A)   The penalties that shall be provided for the violation of the
special restrictions on stopping, standing, and parking as provided in this
chapter, shall be in accord with the penalties and procedures set out in §§
70.50, 70.51 and 70.99.  In addition thereto, whenever, in the opinion of
the Police Chief or his officers, a stopped, standing, or parked vehicle in
violation of the provisions of this traffic code constitutes an immediate
hazard to the safety of the citizens to the city, or flow of traffic, the
Police Chief or his officers may have said vehicle towed from such position
of danger to a containment area and the expense of such towing and storage,
it any, shall be borne by the owner of said vehicle.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89) 



   (B)   The Police Chief and his officers are hereby authorized to
move or cause to be moved and properly stored, at the owner's expense, any 
vehicle improperly parked, parked overtime, or abandoned if, after reasonable
effort, the owner or operator of such vehicle cannot be found or refuses or
fails, upon proper notification, to move such vehicle.



   (C)   Vehicles that have two or more outstanding violations of 60
days or more delinquency shall be subject to be towed at owner's expense to a
secure facility and held in such facility until the delinquent violations
have been satisfied. No person shall stop, stand,or cause to be parked, an
unattached trailer of any variety on any public street, alley, or roadway in
a residentially zoned alley except for vehicles when used in conjunction with
public utility repairs or maintenance with their utilities. Exceptions may be
granted on temporary basis for street booths and concessions when in
conjunction with an approved activity also exempted.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89) 



CHAPTER 73:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   73.01   Crossing at right angles



   73.02   Running, jogging, or walking on roadway



§ 73.01  CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   Except where otherwise indicated by a crosswalk or other official
traffic-control devices, a pedestrian shall cross a roadway at right angles
to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.02  RUNNING, JOGGING, OR WALKING ON ROADWAY.



   Running, jogging, or walking in a roadway where a sidewalk has been
provided is prohibited. Running, jogging, or walking in a roadway without a
sidewalk is permitted provided that the following requirements are met:



   (A)   The pedestrian must stay within two feet zero inches of
pavement edge.



   (B)   The pedestrian's direction of travel must oppose that of the
vehicular traffic in that lane.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES



Section



   74.01   Effect of regulations



   74.02   Traffic ordinances apply to persons riding bicycles



   74.03   Riding on bicycles



   74.04   Riding on sidewalks



   74.05   Attaching bicycles to poles



§ 74.01  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this chapter.



   (B)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code.



   (C)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever
a bicycle is operated upon any street, alley, or highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated
herein.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



§ 74.02  TRAFFIC ORDINANCES APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code except as to special regulations in this chapter
and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature
can nave no application.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.03  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed or equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a backpack or sling, or
approved child seat.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.04  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk
within a zoned business district when such conduct shall constitute a hazard
to the safety of pedestrians.



   (B)   The Police Chief is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk
or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when
such signs are in place no person shall disobey the same.



   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such
person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.05  ATTACHING BICYCLES TO POLES. 



   Any person may park near, and secure a bicycle to, any publicly owned
pole or post for a period of not more than 12 consecutive hours, unless an
official traffic-control device or any applicable law or ordinance prohibits
parking or securing bicycles at that location. No bicycle shall be secured to
any fire hydrant. No bicycle shall be secured in any manner so as to impede
the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 75:  VIOLATIONS



Section



   75.01   Violations of vehicle operation provisions of Indiana Code



   75.02   Citation



   75.03   Passenger endangerment



   75.04   Moving violations



   75.05   Class B and C infractions



§ 75.01  VIOLATIONS OF VEHICLE OPERATION PROVISIONS OF INDIANA CODE.



   Any person who violates a provision of IC 9-21-8 regarding operation of
vehicles within the municipal boundaries of the city shall also be guilty of
a violation of this section.



(Ord. 7-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



§ 75.02  CITATION.



   Any violation of § 75.01 shall be cited as NCC 75.01, with the
addition of the appropriate section number from IC 9-21-8.



(Ord. 7-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



§ 75.03  PASSENGER ENDANGERMENT.



   Any person who operates a motor vehicle within the city which creates a
danger, or a potential danger, to any passenger of such motor vehicle commits
an infraction of passenger endangerment.



(Ord. 7-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



§ 75.04  MOVING VIOLATIONS.



   A violation of any moving offense prohibited in § 75.01, or a
violation of § 75.03, shall be certified as a moving violation to the
Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles.



(Ord. 7-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



§ 75.05  CLASS B AND C INFRACTIONS.



   Any person who violates § 75.01 or 75.03 shall be guilty of a Class C
infraction.  However, any second or subsequent violation within two years
shall be a Class B infraction.



(Ord. 7-3-02, passed 3-26-02)



CHAPTER 76:  GOLF CARTS



Section



   76.01   Definitions



   76.02   Intent



   76.03   Minimum safety equipment



   76.04   General regulations



   76.05   Disclaimer; assumption of risk and insurance



   76.06   Subdivision or neighborhood approval



   76.07   Violations and prosecution of violations



 



   76.99   Penalty



§ 76.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “GOLF CART.”  A vehicle with four wheels substantially similar to
a vehicle originally designed for operation on a golf course, and powered by
a battery or internal combustion engine.



   “OPERATOR.”  A person(s) holding a valid operator’s license
issued by the State of Indiana or another state.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)



§ 76.02  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to allow for the use of golf carts on
the local streets within an established subdivision or neighborhood, and not
for general transportation throughout the city. To ensure public safety and
welfare, the operation of golf carts must comply with certain vehicle
regulations; must be prohibited on certain streets; and must comply with
certain safety regulations tailored to protect the operator and passenger.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)



§ 76.03  MINIMUM SAFETY EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   All golf carts operated on city streets shall have the
following minimum safety equipment:



      (1)   Headlights, tail lights, and turn signals; and



      (2)   A rearview mirror; and



      (3)   A slow-moving vehicle sign that conforms to the
provisions of IC 9-21-9-2, affixed to the rear of golf cart.



   (B)   All of the minimum safety equipment described in division (A)
shall be functional, and in use at all times while the golf cart is in
operation on city streets.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.04  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Speed Limits.



      (1)   Golf carts shall not be operated on any city street
having a posted speed limit in excess of 25 mph.



      (2)   Golf carts may, however, cross a street that has a
posted speed limit in excess of 25 mph, but no greater than 45 mph, when
crossed at intersections in a path perpendicular to the streets or highways.



   (B)   Golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk, pedestrian
walkway, multi-use path, jogging path, greenway, or trail, except to cross at
intersections in a path perpendicular to the path or walkway.



   (C)   The maximum occupancy of a golf cart traveling on city streets
shall be one person per bucket seat and three persons per bench seat. All
persons attached to, or riding on, a golf cart must be seated in one of the
manufacturer-designed seats, and may not be standing or riding on the back or
in any place designed for cargo or sporting equipment.



   (D)   Only persons holding a valid operator’s license may operate
a golf cart on city streets.



   (E)   Golf carts must be operated in compliance with all applicable
local and state traffic laws, and the operator may be ticketed in the same
manner as motor vehicle operators.



   (F)   Golf cart operators shall stay in the far right of the
traveled portion of the road, and yield the right-of-way to an overtaking
vehicle as soon as possible to do so safely.



   (G)   Golf cart rental for use on city streets is prohibited.



   (H)   Golf carts may only be parked in the same manner and at the
same places designated for the parking of motor vehicles. The stopping,
standing or parking of golf carts in areas where parking is not allowed, or
in any place that may impede the flow of traffic, pedestrian walkways, or a
passageway, is prohibited.



   (I)   Golf carts shall not be operated on city streets during
inclement weather or when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or
other conditions.



   (J)   Golf carts may only be operated under the provisions of this
chapter, and within established subdivisions and neighborhoods that have
complied with § 76.06, below, concerning the approval of golf carts for use
in their neighborhood.



   (K)   Exemptions.  Golf carts operated by the persons or entities
described below, in the manner described below, or on the following property,
are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   The operation of golf carts at golf courses, private
clubs, or on private property with the consent of the owner; or traveling to
a golf course, private club, or private property.



      (2)   The operation of golf carts within gated or limited
access communities, unless the streets of the community are dedicated for
public use and maintained by the city.



      (3)   The use of a golf cart in connection with a parade,
festival, or other special event approved by the city.



      (4)   The use of golf carts and similar utility vehicles by
the Police or Fire Departments on official business, or the use of golf carts
by city personnel for official business.



      (5)   The use of golf carts for golfing purposes to cross the
street at golf course crossings designated by signs duly erected by the city
or the Indiana Department of Transportation for such crossing.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.05  DISCLAIMER; ASSUMPTION OF RISK AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   Assumption of Risk.  Any person who owns, operates, or rides
upon a golf cart on a public street does so at his or her own risk and peril,
and assumes all liability resulting from such activity.



   (B)   Insurance.  Upon request by a law enforcement officer, any
operator shall provide proof of financial responsibility or a certificate of
compliance for the operation of the golf cart on city streets.  This
“PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY” shall mean, pursuant to IC 9-25-2-3,
proof of ability to respond in damages for liability that arises out of
ownership, maintenance, or use of a golf cart in amounts equal to, or greater
than, those specified in Indiana Code or by the Indiana State Department of
Insurance for motor vehicle coverage.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.06 SUBDIVISION OR NEIGHBORHOOD APPROVAL.



   (A)   Golf carts may only be operated on city streets within
established neighborhoods and subdivisions that authorize their use in
accordance with this section.



   (B)   The subdivision or neighborhood must have a governing body,
homeowners’ association, or decision-making board authorized to speak on
behalf of the welfare of the neighborhood, created by the covenants of the
subdivision or other organization.



   (C)   Process.



      (1)   The governing board must submit written certification to
the Police Department, stating the board approves of the use of golf carts by
its residents, and within its community; and



      (2)   Install signage at each entrance to the subdivision that
complies with city ordinances concerning such signage, warning motor vehicle
operators and pedestrians of the possibility of golf carts being operated on
the streets therein.



   (D)   A governing board or homeowners’ association may, at its
discretion, rescind such approval by submitting a letter declaring same to
the Police Department.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)



§ 76.07 VIOLATIONS AND PROSECUTION OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person receiving a notice of violation of this chapter may
appear at the Noblesville City Court (“City Court”) and pay the fine
indicated on the notice, or deny the violation and contest the matter in City
Court, which shall be the proper venue for any such challenge.



   (B)   If a person appears at the City Court and denies the
violation, the City Court shall cause the matter to be docketed with the
Clerk of the City Court. The case shall then proceed according to the rules
and procedures of the City Court pertaining to ordinance violations. Any
penalties listed in § 76.99 will have court costs attached.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)



§ 76.99 PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or a failure
to comply with any of its requirements shall subject the offender to a
penalty as follows:



      (1)   In the amount of $50 for the first offense;



      (2)   In the amount of $150 for the second offense during a
rolling 12-month period of time; and



      (3)   In the amount of $300 for the third and each subsequent
offense within a rolling 12-month period.



   (B)   A second or subsequent offense occurring more than 12 months
since the last offense shall be considered a first offense. The penalties
listed in this section do not include court costs and fees that may be
imposed by City Court in addition to the penalty.



   (C)   If a police officer employed by the Police Department finds
cause to issue a notice for a violation of this chapter, the officer has
discretion to issue the notice/citation to the golf cart operator, or in
instances where the operator is an unlicensed juvenile, to the parent(s) of
that operator.



(Ord. 60-12-17, passed 1-9-18)



CHAPTER 77:  (RESERVED)



CHAPTER 78:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.     Speed limits



   II.     One-way streets and alleys



   III.     Stop and yield streets



   IV.     Restricted turns



   V.     Parking prohibited at all times



   VI.     Parking prohibited during certain hours



   VII.     Parking time limited



   VIII.     Streets to be used by commercial vehicles weighing 5,000
lbs. or more



   IX.     No passing areas



   X.     Restricted parking all times taxi/loading zones



   XI.     Diagonal parking schedule



SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.



 


STREET OR PORTION THEREOF

 

M.P.H.

 

HOURS

 

ORD.NO.






All alleys

 

10

 

All times

 

1052;10-2-90




All marked school zones

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Mon-Fri (or when warning lights flashing)

 

65-11-00; 3-1-08; 30-06-15




All trails and multi-use paths (unless otherwise posted due physical features)

 

15

 

All times

 

50-10-17




3rd St. (800 block)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




4th St. (800 block)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




8th St. from Cherry St. to Christian St.

 

20

 

All times

 

75-10-89




8th St. from State Road 32 to Washington St.

 

30

 

All times

 

41-9-02




8th St. from Washington St. to Carbon St.

 

35

 

All times

 

41-9-02




9th St. from Monument St. to Wayne St.

 

25

 

All times

 

75-10-89




9th St. from Cherry St. to Christian St.

 

25

 

All times

 

75-10-89




10th St. from Cherry St. to Christian St.

 

25

 

All times

 

75-10-89




10th St. (Allisonville Road) from Field Drive to  Cumberland Rd.

 

45

 

All times

 

41-9-00




10th St. from Grant St. to Wayne St.

 

25

 

All times

 

75-10-89




10th Street (Wayne to Grant)

 

20

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




10th St. south (Allisonville Rd.) from the south side of Carbon St. to the
north side of the N & W railroad overpass

 

45

 

All times

 

1562




10th St., south (Allisonville Rd.) from the north side of the NW railroad
overpass to the south corporate limits of the city

 

50

 

All times

 

1562




10th St. south (300 & 400 block)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1052




12th Street
(Harrison to Monument)

 

20

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on  school days or  when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




13th St. (Christian to Holland & St.)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




16th St. (Conner to Monument)

 

25

 

All times

 

41-09-14




16th Street (Monument to Field)

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




16th St. (100 ft. north of South St. to 100 ft. south of Woodland Dr.)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




16th St. (Conner St. to Monument St.)

 

25

 

When children not present

 

53-12-93/12-27-93




16th St. (Monument St. to Field Dr.)

 

30

 

When children not present

 

53-12-93/12-27-93




17th St. (Conner north to one-way paved alley at high school)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




17th St. (Conner to Hannibal)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




18th St. (Conner to Hannibal)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




19th St. (Conner to Pleasant)

 

25

 

All times

 

44-7-90




S.R. 19 (city limits to South Park entrance)

 

45

 

All times

 

1052




S.R. 19 (South Park entrance to Westfield Rd. S.R. 32)

 

35

 

All times

 

1052




S.R. 32 (Conner St.) (13th St. to l9th St.)

 

25

 

When children present

 

1627




S.R. 32 (Westfield Rd.) (River Rd. to west city limits)

 

45

 

All times

 

1052




S.R. 38 (city limits to Monterey Dr. West)

 

30

 

All times

 

1052




136th St. (city sections)

 

35

 

All times

 

49-7-05




136th St.-Frontage Rd. from Hoard Dr. to Brooks School Rd.

 

35

 

All times

 

47-10-07




141st St. (city sections)

 

40

 

All times

 

49-7-05




146th St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




146th St.-S.R. 37 to Cumberland Rd.

 

45

 

All times

 

47-10-07




146th St.-Cumberland Rd. to Marilyn Rd.

 

45

 

All times

 

47-10-07




156th St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




161st St. (city sections)

 

40

 

All times

 

49-7-05




166th St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




169th St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




171st St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




186th St. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




186th St. between SR 37 and Cumberland

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




191st St. between SR 37 and Cumberland

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




191st St. (between SR 37 and Roudebush Farms)

 

40

 

All times

 

49-7-05




W. 191st St. (city sections)

 

40

 

All times

 

49-7-05




196th Street (from Morse Beach to Hague)

 

25

 

All times

 

44-9-95




196th Street (from Morse Beach to RR)

 

35

 

All times

 

44-9-95




Allison Trails Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

50-9-98




Arbor Grove (throughout Arbor Grove)

 

25

 

All times

 

91-12-03




Boden Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Boden Rd. (between 146th and 156th Streets)

 

45

 

All times

 

41-9-00




Boden Rd.-Greenfield Ave. to Campus Pkwy.

 

45

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Boden Rd.-146th St. to Atlantic Rd.

 

45

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Brook School Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-95




Brown St.(Woodview-Lakeview Dr.)

 

20

 

When children present

 





Buttonwood Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

1052




Campus Pkwy.-Marilyn Rd. to I69

 

45

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Carlton Heights (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

42-9-95




Carrigan at the Levee (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

46-10-02




Carrigan Rd. (Hague Rd. to Little Chicago Rd.)

 

40

 

All times

 

1614; 54-9-90




Carrigan Rd. (from the city limits 550 ft. east of Banbury Rd. to Little
Chicago Rd.)

 

45

 

All times

 

1614




CBD (White River, Wayne St., Cherry St. and 10th St.)

 

20

 

All times

 





Center Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 





Cherry St. (10th St. to S.R. 37)

 

25

 

All times

 

1619




Cherry Tree Meadows

 

25

 

All times

 

91-12-03




Cherry Tree Rd. (between 146th St. and 160th St.

 

35

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Cherry Tree Rd. (160th St. to S.R. 32)

 

40

 

All times

 

12-5-12




Christian St. (10th to 13th St.)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




Clinton St. (16th to 17th St.)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




Clinton St. (from 10th to 17th St.)

 

25

 

All times

 

21-7-94/7-11-94




Clover Road

 

25

 

All times

 

23-5-98




Conner Crossing subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Conner St. (37 to 19th St.)

 

35

 

All times

 

1052




Creekside at Cedar Path Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

17-6-99




Crystal Lake Subdivision (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

45-10-93/11-  -93




Cumberland Pointe Office Industrial Park

 

25

 

All Times

 

90-12-03




Cumberland Rd.
  Cherry St. to 191st St.

 

35

 

All times except between 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. when children present

 

14-3-11




Cumberland Rd.
  Cherry St. to 191st St.

 

30

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Cumberland Rd.
  191st St. to Allisonville
(city sections)

 

40

 

All times

 

14-3-11




Cumberland Rd.
  Greenfield Ave. to 141st St.

 

40

 

All times

 

14-3-11




Cumberland Road
  contiguous with White River Elementary and Noblesville High School

 

30

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Dakota Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

38-10-97




Deer Path

 

25

 

All times

 

40-11-99




East Harbour I (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

38-10-97




East Haven at Noble West

 

25

 

All Times

 

90-12-03




East Ridge Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

23-5-98




England Ct.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Evans Ave. (10th to 16 St.)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Fairfield Blvd.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Fairfield Farms Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Field Drive from 200 feet  west of Northridge Drive to Cumberland Road

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Field Dr.

 

30

 

All times

 

1619




Forest Park

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Frontage Road (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Gerald Street (8th St. to 10th St.)

 

20

 

All times

 

50-10-17




Greenfield Ave. (10th St. to Bridge over Wilson Ditch)

 

30

 

All times

 

35-7-95




Greenfield Ave. (from Boden Rd. to Union Chapel Rd.)

 

45

 

All times

 

59-11-08




Greenfield Avenue (Bridge over Wilson Ditch to East City Limits)

 

35

 

All times

 

35-7-95




Greenfield Avenue (from Christian to 300 ft. east of entrance to Stony Creek
School)

 

25

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Greenfield Avenue (from Union Chapel Rd. to State Road 37)

 

40

 

All times

 

59-11-08




Hague Road (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

60-10-04




Hague Road contiguous with Noblesville Intermediate School

 

30

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Hannibal St.

 

25

 

All times

 

1619




Harrell Pkwy. from Campus Pkwy. to approximately 1220 feet west/southwest
through Hamilton Town Center

 

20

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Harrell Pkwy. from west entrance to Hamilton Town Center to Corporate Pkwy.

 

35

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Harrison Street
(9th to 12th St.)

 

20

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Harrison St.

 

25

 

All times

 

1108




Hazel Dell Rd. (from 146th St. to Edenshall Lane)

 

40

 

All times

 

59-11-08




Hazel Dell Rd. (from Edenshall Lane to State Road 32)

 

45

 

All times

 

59-11-08




Except for: Hazel Dell Rd.  contiguous with Noble Crossing Elementary

 

35

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Hazeldell Rd. (city sections)

 

40

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Hazeldell Woods

 

25

 

All times

 

91-12-03




Herriman Blvd. (Herriman Ct. to 146th St.)

 

40

 

All times

 

1640




Herriman Blvd.(Greenfield to Herriman Ct.)

 

25

 

All times

 

1640




Highlands Prairie

 

25

 

All times

 

91-12-03




Hillcrest Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 





Hoard Dr.-Harrell Pkwy. to 136th St./Frontage Rd.

 

20

 

All times

 

47-10-07




Holland St. (13th to 15th St. present

 

20

 

When children

 

1108




Howe Rd. - 146th St.  to Greenfield Ave.

 

40

 

All times

 

23-8-11




Howe Rd. - city sections
south of 146th St.

 

35

 

All times

 

23-8-11




James Road - 196th St. to 206th St. (within city limits)

 

45

 

All times

 

01-02-12




Lake Point Way

 

25

 

All times

 





Lake Terrace Court

 

25

 

All times

 





Lakes at Prairie Crossing Sec. 1

 

25

 

All times

 

30-9-99




Lakeside Estates Subdivision 
  Candlewick Road

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Darby Circle

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




  Doverton Drive

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Lakeside Estates Subdivision
  Selby Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Tooley Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Lakeside Estates Subdivision
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Lakeside Estates Subdivision

 

15

 

All times

 

11-4-99




From the intersection of  Poole Pl. and Candlewick Rd. back on Poole Pl.
300  feet (in front of park)

 


 


 





Candlewick Rd. from Skipton Ct. to Crowley Ct. (in front of park)

 

15

 

All times

 

11-4-99




  Hague Rd. from Lakeview Dr. to 216th St.

 

40

 

All times

 

11-4-99




Lakeview Dr. (Park St. to Beechwood)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




Land's End Circle

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Little Chicago Rd. (From 211th St. to a point approximately 275 feet south
from the south edge of pavement of Harborview Ct.)

 

35

 

All times

 

05-01-16




Little Chicago Rd. (From Carrigan Rd. to city limits south)

 

40

 

All times

 

1487; 53-8-90; 19-5-97




Little Chicago Rd. (from 191st St. to 216th St.)

 

40

 

All times

 

61-11-08




Little Chicago Rd. (from State Road 32 to 216th St.)

 

45

 

All times

 

59-11-08




Lochaven at Noble West subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Lochaven of Noblesville (throughout Lochaven)

 

25

 

All times

 

91-12-03




Logan St. (10th to 17th St.)

 

25

 

All times

 

1619




Maple St. (10th St. to 19th St.)

 

25

 

All times

 

12-8-88




Marilyn Rd. (city sections)

 

35

 

All times

 

49-7-05




The Meadows (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Mercantile Boulevard

 

30

 

All times

 

35-7-01




Mill Creek Rd. (city sections between S.R. 38 and S.R. 32)

 

40

 

All times

 

23-8-11




Mill Creek Rd. (S.R. 32 to  171st St.)

 

45

 

All times

 

41-09-14




Mill Grove Subdivision (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

22-5-00; 45-01-02




Monarch Springs

 

25

 

All Times

 

90-12-03




Monument St.

 

25

 

All times

 

1619




Monument St. (9th to 12th)

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Monument St.
(Cumberland Rd. to 16th St.)

 

20

 

7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




Moontown Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Morse Overlook Subdivision (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

54-11-96




Morse Park Estates (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Morse Point Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

23-5-98/59-10-98




Morton St. 12th St. to 16th St.

 

25

 

All times

 

42-8-96




Myers Lake Drive

 

25

 

All times

 





Nixon St.

 

25

 

All times

 

1052




North Harbour Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

1052




Northridge Subdivision
(All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Oak Bay Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Oak Cove Ln.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Oak Harbour Cir.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Oak Point Cir.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Oakbay Cir.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Oakmont (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

19-5-97




Oakview Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

86-11-89




Olio Rd. - Tegler Dr./141st St. to 156th St.

 

45

 

All times

 

01-02-12




Park St.
(Lakeview Dr. to Woodview Dr.)

 

20

 

When children present

 

1108




Village of Pebble Brook
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

19-5-97




Pine Knoll Subdivision
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Pleasant Street

 

30

 

All Times

 

90-12-03




Pleasant St.
(300 block)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Pleasant St.
(11th to 13th St.)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Pleasant St.
(8th to 4th St.)

 

25

 

All times

 

53-8-90




Pleasant St.
(Bismark Dr. to Union Chapel Rd.)

 

40

 

All times

 

12-5-12




Potters Wooks Subdivision
(All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

54-11-96




Prairie Crossing Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

14-3-04




Promise Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




Promise Rd./Union Chapel Rd.
(from 215 feet north of 146th Street to 400 feet north of Spectacular Drive)

 

35

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




River Rd. (city sections)

 

35

 

All times

 

49-7-05




River Rd.
(S.R. 32 South to city limits)

 

35

 

All times

 

1052




River Run Subdivision
(All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Rolling Ridge Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

1052




Roudebush Farms

 

25

 

All Times

 

90-12-03




Roudebush Woods
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

40-11-99
46-10-02




Sagamore
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

45-10-02




Salem Ct.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Schubert Pl.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Settlers Mill Subdivision
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

46-9-96




Slater Ridge subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Slater Run subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Slater Woods subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Sommerwood
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

41-11-97




South St. (8th St. to 10th St.)

 

20

 

All times

 

50-10-17




South St. (Greenfield Ave. to 16th St.)

 

25

 

All times

 

1108; 50-10-17




South Harbour Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

1052




South Harbour Dr. (A point located 158 feet north-northwest of Aspen Way on
South Harbour Dr. to a point located 141.5 feet southeast of Snowberry Ct. on
South Harbour Dr.)

 

20

 

7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days or when beacons are flashing

 

30-06-15




South Harbour Sec. 20

 

25

 

All times

 

30-9-99




Stone Harbour Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

52-9-98




Stoney Creek Road

 

25

 

All times

 

10-2-07




Stony Ridge Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

17-6-99




Summer Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 

49-7-05




The Essex of Noblesville subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Town and Country Boulevard

 

30

 

All times

 

35-7-01




Twin Oaks subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Union Chapel Rd. (Promise Rd. to 166th St.)

 

40

 

All times

 

23-8-11




Washington St. (300 and 400 block)

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Washington St. (800 to 900 block)

 

20

 

All times

 

41-09-14




Waterman Farms Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

14-3-04




Watershed Subdivision
(all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

45-10-93/11-  -93




Wayne Street (10th to 16th)

 

25

 

All times

 

12-8-88




Wellington Estate Subdivision:

 


 


 





Ashbourne Circle

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Ashbourne Drive

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Cambridge Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Manchester Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Somerset Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




White Haven Court

 

25

 

All times

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Wellington Estates (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Wellington Overlook

 

25

 

All times

 

8-4-94/4-11-94




Wellington Pkwy.

 

25

 

All times

 

1487




West Haven at Noble West subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

25-08-13




Westfield Rd. (S.R. 32)
(S.R. 38 to 6th St.)

 

30

 

All times

 

1052




Westminister Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 

1487




Whitcomb Ridge (All streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

4-1-97




Whitcomb Ridge Subdivision

 

25

 

All times

 

59-10-98




Willow Lake (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

46-10-02




Willowview Rd. (city sections)

 

45

 

All times

 





Wimbley Ct.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Windwood At Morse Subdivision (all streets)

 

25

 

All times

 

54-11-96




Winston Ct.

 

25

 

All times

 

30-8-92




Woodland Dr.

 

25

 

All times

 





Woodview Dr.

 

20

 

All times

 

1052




Elderberry Rd. (Buttonwood Dr. to Little Chicago Rd.)

 

25

 

All times

 

1291











(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)




SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



 


STREET

 

BETWEEN

 

DIRECTION

 

ORD. NO.






Division St.

 

8th St. and 9th St.

 

East

 

58-12-95




Division St.

 

10th St. and 14th St.

 

East

 

1570




Division St.

 

8th St. and 14th St.

 

East

 

27-6-96




12th St.

 

Monument and Harrison

 

South

 

36-8-01




14th St.

 

Conner and Hannibal St.

 

South

 

1111




15th St.

 

Holland to South St.

 

North

 

1052




15th St.

 

Wayne and Harrison St.

 

North

 

9-2-07




Holland St.

 

Between Setser and 15th

 

East

 

12-05-12




Wayne St.

 

17th St. to 16th St.

 

West

 

1052




Alley between Cherry & Maple St.

 

1150 to 1050 block

 

West

 

1052




N & S alley between 9th & 10th St.

 

Conner & Maple St.

 

South

 

1052




North/south alley east of 10th St.

 

Cherry and Maple Sts. (changing this temporarily during the remodeling of 
City Hall)

 

North

 

49-7-05




North/south alley and 10th and 11th Streets

 

Conner and Logan Streets

 

South

 

49-7-05




Alley east of Irving St.

 

9th St. & 8th St.

 

West

 

1629




North-south alley between 8th & 9th St.

 

Maple St. & Cherry St.

 

South

 

1556




Parking lot on Conner St. E of 10th

 

Conner & Maple St.

 

South

 

1052




North half of the North-South alley (first alley east of 10th St.)

 

North and Evans

 

South

 

51-10-96




East/west alley

 

Between Conner/Logan Streets and 14th/15th Streets

 

East

 

88-10-06





 


 


 











SCHEDULE III. STOP & YIELD STREETS.



 


INTERSECTION

 

STREET THAT YIELDS OR STOPS

 

ORD. NO.





2nd & Pleasant St.
 
Pleasant St. stops
 
10-2-90


2nd & Vine St.
 
Vine St. stops
 
19-3-90


2nd & Walnut St.
 
Walnut St. stops
 
19-3-90


2nd & Washington St.
 
2nd St. stops
 
19-3-90


3rd & Chestnut St.
 
3rd St. stops
 
 


3rd & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
1076


3rd & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


3rd & Walnut St.
 
3rd St. stops
 
1052


3rd & Washington
 
4-way stop
 
1076


4th & Chestnut St.
 
4th St. stops
 
1052


4th & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
1076


4th & Plum St.
 
4-way stop
 
1076


4th & Walnut St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


4th & Washington St.
 
4-way stop
 
1076


5th & Cherry St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & Chestnut St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & Christian St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


5th & Conner St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & Division St.
 
4-way stops
 
1052


5th & Hannibal St.
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
1052


5th & Irving St.
 
5th St. stops
 
 


5th & Maple Ave.
 
4-way stops
 
41-10-92


5th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry stops
 
 


5th & Pleasant St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & Plum St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & South St.
 
5th St.
 
30-06-15


5th & Vine St.
 
Vine St. stops
 
1052


5th & Walnut St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


5th & Washington St.
 
5th St. stops
 
1052


6th & Cherry St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


6th & Chestnut St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


6th & Christian St.
 
Christian St. stops
 
1052


6th & Conner St.
 
6th St. stops
 
1052


6th & Division St.
 
Division St. stops
 
1052


6th & Hannibal St.
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
1052


6th & Irving St.
 
3-way stop
 
 


6th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
1052


6th & Maple Ave.
 
Maple Ave. stops
 
6-2-93/2-22-93


6th & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


6th & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


6th & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


6th & Vine St.
 
Vine St. stops
 
1052


6th & Walnut St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


6th & Washington St.
 
Washington St. stops
 
1052


7th & Chestnut St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


7th & Christian St.
 
Christian St. stops
 
1052


7th & Division St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


7th & Hannibal St.
 
7th St. stops
 
 


7th & Pleasant St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


7th & Plum St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


7th & Walnut St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


7th & Washington St.
 
7th St. stops
 
1052


8th & Carbon St.
 
Carbon St. stops
 
1052


8th & Cherry St.
 
Cherry St. stops
 
1052


8th & Chestnut St.
 
Chestnut St. stops
 
1052


8th & Christian St.
 
Christian St. stops
 
1052


8th & Clinton St.
 
Clinton St. stops
 
1052


8th & Conner St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


8th & Division St.
 
Division St. stops
 
1052


8th & Gerald St.
 
Gerald St. stops
 
1052


8th & Hannibal St.
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
1052


8th & Logan St.
 
Traffic light
 
75-12-90


8th & Maple St.
 
Maple St. stops
 
1052


8th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
1052


8th & Pleasant St.
 
Pleasant St. stops
 
1052


8th & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


8th & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


8th & Walnut Sts.
 
Walnut St. stops
 
1052


8th & Washington St.
 
Washington St. stops
 
1052


9th & Carbon St.
 
9th St. stops
 
1052


9th & Center St.
 
Southbound 9th St. stops
 
44-7-90


9th & Cherry St.
 
Cherry St. stops
 
1052


9th & Chestnut St.
 
Chestnut St. stops
 
1052


9th & Christian St.
 
Christian st. stops
 
1052


9th & Christian St.
 
4-way stop
 
53-8-90


9th & Clinton St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


9th & Conner St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


9th & Division St.
 
Division St. stops
 
1052


9th & Gerald St.
 
Gerald St. stops
 
1052


9th & Hannibal St.
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
1052


9th & Harrison St.
 
Harrison St. stops
 
1052


9th & Logan St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


9th & Maple St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


9th & Monument St.
 
Monument St. stops
 
1052


9th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
1052


9th & Parkview Place
 
Parkview stops
 
 


9th & Pleasant St.
 
Pleasant St. stops
 
1052


9th & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
71-11-90


9th & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


9th & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


9th & Vine St.
 
Vine St. stops
 
1052


9th & Wayne St.
 
Wayne St. stops
 
1052


9th & Walnut St.
 
Walnut St. stops
 
1052


9th & Washington St.
 
Washington St. stops
 
1052


10th & Carbon St.
 
Carbon St. stops
 
1052


10th & Cherry St.
 
Cherry St. stops
 
1052


10th & Chestnut St.
 
Chestnut St. stops
 
1052


10th & Christian St. & Greenfield Ave.
 
All yield, roundabout
 
50-10-17


10th & Clinton St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


10th & Conner St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


10th & Division St.
 
Division st. stops
 
1052


10th & Evans St.
 
Evans St. stops
 
1052


10th & Field Dr.
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


10th & Gerald St.
 
Gerald St. stops
 
1052


10th & Grant St.
 
Grant St. stops
 
1052


10th & Hannibal St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


10th & Harrison St.
 
Harrison St. stops
 
1052


10th & Logan St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


10th & Maple St.
 
Maple St. stops
 
1052


10th & Monument St.
 
Monument St. stops
 
1052


10th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
1052


10th & North Dr.
 
North Dr. stops
 
 


10th & North St.
 
North St. stops
 
1052


10th & Pleasant St.
 
Signal light
 
1052


10th & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


10th & Roosevelt Dr.
 
Roosevelt Dr. stops
 
1052


10th & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


10th & Vine St.
 
Vine St. stops
 
1052


10th & Walnut St.
 
Walnut st. stops
 
1052


10th & Wayne St.
 
Wayne St. stops
 
1052


11th & Central Ave.
 
Central Ave. stops
 
1052


11th & Cherry St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Chestnut St.
 
Chestnut St. stops
 
1052


11th & Christian St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Clinton St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Conner St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Division St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Evans St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Grant St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Hannibal St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Harrison St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Logan St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


11th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
 


11th & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


11th & Plum St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


11th & Vine St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


11th & Walnut St.
 
Walnut St. stops
 
1052


11th & Washington St.
 
Washington St. stops
 
1052


11th & Wayne St.
 
11th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Central St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Cherry St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Clinton St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Conner St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Division St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Evans St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Grant St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Hannibal St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Harrison St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Lincoln Dr.
 
Lincoln Dr. stops
 
1052


12th & Logan St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Maple St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Monument St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1509


12th & Morton St.
 
Morton St. stops
 
1052


12th & North St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Pleasant St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Plum St.
 
12th St. stops
 
 


12th & Roosevelt Dr.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Wayne St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


12th & Washington St.
 
12th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Cherry St.
 
13th St. stops
 
 


13th & Chestnut St.
 
Chestnut St. stops
 
 


13th & Christian St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Conner St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Division St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Hannibal St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Harrison St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Maple St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


13th & Pleasant St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


13th & Plum St.
 
Plum St. stops
 
1052


13th & Vine St.
 
4-way stop
 
 


13th & Washington St.
 
Washington St. stops
 
 


13th & Wayne St.
 
13th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Central Ave.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Cherry St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Clinton St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Conner St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Division St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Evans St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Hannibal St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Harrison St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Logan St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Maple St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Monument St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Morton St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Mulberry St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
1052


14th & North St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


14th & Wayne St.
 
14th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Central Ave.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Clinton St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Division St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Evans Ave.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Grant St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Hamilton Dr.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Harrison St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Lincoln Dr.
 
Lincoln Dr. stops
 
 


15th & Logan St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Monument St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & North St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


15th & Roosevelt
 
15th St. stops
 
 


15th & South St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


15th & Wayne St.
 
15th St. stops
 
1052


16th & Central St.
 
Central St. stops
 
1052


16th & Cherry St.
 
16th St. stops
 
1052


16th & Clinton St.
 
Clinton St. stops
 
1052


16th & Conner St.
 
(light)
 
1052


16th & Division St.
 
16th St. stops
 
1052


16th & Field Dr.
 
16th St. stops
 
1052


16th & Grant St.
 
Grant St. stops
 
1052


16th & Greenfield Ave.
 
16th St. stops
 
 


16th & Hamilton Dr.
 
Hamilton Dr. stops
 
1052


16th & Hannibal St.
 
16th St. stops
 
1052


16th & Harrison St.
 
Harrison St. stops
 
1052


16th & Logan St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


16th & Maple St.
 
Maple St. stops
 
1052


16th & Monument St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


16th & Morton St.
 
Morton St. stops
 
1052


16th & North St.
 
North St. stops
 
1052


16th & Pleasant St.
 
16th St. stops
 
 


16th & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


16th & Stony Creek Rd.
 
Stony Creek Road stops
 
23-5-98


16th & Wayne St.
 
Wayne St. stops
 
1052


16th & Woodland Dr.
 
Woodland Dr. stops
 
1052


16th & Woodland Dr.
 
16th Street stops
 
23-5-98


17th & Cherry St.
 
Cherry St. stops
 
1052


17th & Clinton St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


17th & Conner St.
 
17th St. stops
 
1052


17th & Division St.
 
17th St. stops
 
1052


17th & Hannibal St.
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
1052


17th & Harrison St.
 
17th St. stops
 
1052


17th & Logan St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


17th & Maple Ave.
 
Maple Ave. stops
 
1052


17th & Monument St.
 
17th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Cherry St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


18th & Conner St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Division St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Hannibal St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Harrison St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Monument St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


18th & Maple St.
 
18th St. stops
 
1052


19th & Cherry St.
 
4-way stop
 
1052; 44-7-90


19th & Conner St.
 
19th St. stops
 
1052


19th & Hannibal
 
Hannibal St. stops
 
39-6-90


19th & Maple St.
 
Maple St. stops
 
1052; 44-7-90


19th & Pleasant St.
 
19th St. stops
 
75-10-89


136th St. and Brooks School Rd.
 
All entry roads yield at the roundabout
 
47-10-07


141st St. & Promise Road
 
4-way stop
 
51-5-06


146th St. and Cumberland Rd.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Cyntheanne Rd.
 
146th St.
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Howe Rd.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Marilyn Rd./Campus Pkwy.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Olio Rd.
 
146th St.
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Prairie Baptist Rd.
 
146th St.
 
47-10-07


146th St. and Promise Rd.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


146th & Rose Dr.
 
Rose Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


156th St. & Summer Rd.
 
4-way stop
 
10-04-18


161st Street & Cherry Tree Road
 
161st Street and Cherry Tree Road a 3-way stop
 
35-7-04


161st St. and Plains Road
 
Plains Road
 
25-08-13


166th St. & Union Chapel Rd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


166th & Summer Rd.
 
Summer Rd.
 
10-04-18


169th St. and Maines Valley Dr.
 
Maines Valley Dr.
 
25-08-13


169th St. and Timbers Edge Dr.
 
Timbers Edge Dr.
 
25-08-13


191st St. & SR 37
 
191st St. stops
 
16-5-94/5-23-94


191st St. & Golden Meadow Way
 
Golden Meadow Way stops
 
30-6-95


191st St. & Little Chicago Rd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


191st St. & Potters Bridge Road
 
Potters Bridge Rd. stops
 
54-11-96


191st St. & Promise Rd.
 
Both (all ways)
 
28-9-10


196th St. & Hague Rd.
 
All yield, roundabout
 
50-10-17


196th St. & Jena Dr.
 
Jena Drive
 
42-8-96


SR 19 & SR 32/SR 38
 
Traffic light
 
1052


SR 19 & Westfield Blvd.
 
Westfield Blvd. stops
 
1052


SR 32 and Bataan Court
 
Bataan Court
 
25-08-13


SR 32 & Carey Dr.
 
Carey Dr. stops
 
1052


SR 32 & Mensa Dr.
 
Mensa Dr. stops
 
6-20-92


SR 32 and Park 32 West Dr.
 
Park 32 West Dr.
 
25-08-13


SR 32 & Pebble Center Dr.
 
Pebble Center Dr. stops
 
35-7-01


SR 32 & River Rd.
 
River Rd. stops
 
1052


SR 32 & River Rd.
 
Traffic light
 
10-2-90


SR 37 & 146th St.
 
146th St. stops
 
 


SR 37 & Cherry St.
 
Cherry St. stops
 
 


SR 37 & Conner St.
 
Traffic light
 
1052


SR 37 & Field Dr.
 
Field Dr. stops
 
 


SR 37 & Greenfield Rd.
 
Traffic light
 
 


SR 37 & Pleasant St.
 
Traffic light
 
 


SR 38 & S.R. 32
 
Traffic light
 
1052


SR 38 & Estates Blvd.
 
Estates Blvd. stops
 
13-2-05


SR 38 & Gretna Green Lane
 
Signal
 
46-9-96/
25-08-13


SR 38 & Lafayette Rd.
 
Lafayette Rd. stops
 
1052


SR 38 & Mill Oak Drive
 
Mill Oak Drive stops
 
22-5-00


SR 238 and Follow Dr.
 
Follow Dr. stops
 
40-11-99


Abbey Ct. & Abbey Rd.
 
Abbey Ct.
 
17-5-10


Abercon Trail & Gretna Green Lane
 
Abercon Trail stops
 
46-9-96


Abercon Trail & Wychwood Place
 
Abercon Trail stops
 
23-8-11


Allen St. & John St.
 
Allen St. stops
 
30-8-92


Allen St. & Nixon St.
 
Allen St. stops
 
30-8-92


Allisonville Rd. and Ashbourne Dr.
 
Ashbourne Dr. stops
 
59-10-90


Allisonville Rd. & Sommerwood Dr.
 
Sommerwood Dr.
 
41-11-97


Allisonville Rd. and Wellington Overlook
 
Wellington Overlook stops
 
59-10-90


Amber Way & Carmine Dr. (both intersections)
 
Carmine Dr.
 
30-6-95


Amhurst Circle and Roxbury Lane
 
Amhurst Circle
 
46-9-08


Anchor Bay Drive and Shorevista Lane
 
Shorevista Lane stops
 
54-11-96


Anchor Bay Drive and Stringtown Pike
 
Anchor Bay Dr. stops
 
54-11-96


Anderson Way and Belchamp Dr.
 
Belchamp Dr.
 
25-08-13


Anderson Way and Daw St.
 
Daw St.
 
25-08-13


Anderson Way and Silver End Circle
 
Silver End Circle
 
25-08-13


Andover Lane & Chesterfield Dr.
 
Andover Lane stops
 
12-26-95


Andover Lane & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Andover Lane stops
 
58-12-95


Angel Way and Caphel Lane
 
Caphel Lane
 
25-08-13


Antigua Dr. and Royal Grove Dr.
 
Antigua Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Antigua Dr. and Tiki Trail
 
Antigua Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Arbor Grove
 
 
 
 


  Arbor Grove Blvd. and Greenfield Ave.
 
Arbor Grove Blvd. stops
 
91-12-03


  Arbor Grove Blvd. and Alto Court
 
Alto Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Arbor Grove Blvd. and  Concert Way
 
Concert Way stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Arbor Grove Blvd. and  Tenor Way
 
Tenor Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Symphony Blvd.(north end) and Tenor Way
 
Symphony Blvd. stops
 
91-12-03


  Symphony Blvd.(south end)  and Tenor Way
 
Tenor Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Symphony Blvd.  and Timpani Way
 
Timpani Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Symphony Blvd.  and Greenfield Ave.
 
Symphony Blvd. stops
 
91-12-03


  Tenor Way and Timpani Way
 
Timpani Way stops
 
91-12-03


Arles Drive and 10th St.
 
Arles Drive
 
43-8-08


Ashbourne Circle & Ashbourne Dr.
 
Ashbourne Circle stops
 
3-9-92


Ashbrook Dr. & Albany Ct.
 
Albany Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Bentgrass Dr.
 
Bentgrass Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Candlewood Ct.
 
Candlewood Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Palmbrook Blvd.
 
Palmbrook Blvd. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Hollowbook
 
Hollowbook stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Racebrook
 
Racebrook stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Sandy Run Ct.
 
Sandy Run Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Sun Ridge Cir.
 
Sun Ridge Cir.
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Tallgrass Ct.
 
Tallgrass Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Ashbrook Dr. & Trull
 
Trull Brook Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Brook Dr. (East & west intersections)
 
 
 
 


Ashbrook Dr. & Village Way
 
Village Way stops
 
24-7-97


Ashford Court and North Harbor Drive
 
Ashford Court
 
46-9-08


Aspen Way and Aspen Court
 
Aspen Court
 
34-08-12


Auburn Lane & Fairview Parkway
 
Auburn Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Aviara Dr. & Ventanna Ln.
 
Ventanna Ln. stops
 
24-7-97


Avon Dr. & Chamberlain Circle
 
Avon Dr. stops
 
21-05-91


Banbury & Carrigan Rd.
 
Banbury stops
 
1603


Banbury & Coventry  east intersection
 
Coventry Way stops
 
1603


Banbury & Coventry Way west intersection
 
Coventry Way stops
 
1603


Banbury & Devonshire
 
Devonshire stops
 
1603


Banbury & Dorchester
 
Dorchester stops
 
1603


Banbury & Essex Ct.
 
Essex Ct. stops
 
1603


Banbury & Palmer Dr.
 
Palmer Dr.
 
81-9-06


Banbury & Queensbury Dr.
 
3-way stop
 
1663


Banbury & Surrey Hill
 
Surrey Hill stops
 
1603


Barnard Dr. and Selis Square Court
 
Selis Square Court
 
25-08-13


Bayley Cir. & Winchester Blvd.
 
Bayley Circle stops
 
24-7-97


Bearsdale Way & Pine Hill Dr.
 
Bearsdale Way stops
 
24-7-97


Bearsdale Way & Summit Rd.
 
Bearsdale Way stops
 
24-7-97


Beechwood Drive and Forest Ridge Drive
 
Beechwood Drive stops
 
25-6-93/


Belchamp Dr. and Daw St.
 
Daw St.
 
25-08-13


Belchamp Dr. and Witham Lane
 
Witham Lane
 
25-08-13


Benton Oak Drive and Shag Oak Drive
 
Shag Oak Drive stops
 
23-5-98


Benton Oak Drive and Summer Oak Drive
 
Summer Oak Drive stops
 
23-5-98


Black Oak Dr. and Cherry Tree Rd.
 
Black Oak Dr.
 
25-08-13


Bladen Dr. and Barnard Dr.
 
Barnard Dr.
 
25-08-13


Bladen Dr. and Boundary Dr.
 
Boundary Dr.
 
25-08-13


Bladen Dr. and Myland Dr.
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Blue Lake Court and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Blue Lake Court stops
 
07-03-13


Blue Ridge Drive and Black Oak Drive
 
Blue Ridge Drive
 
46-9-08


Blue Ridge Dr. and Morello Lane
 
Morello Lane
 
25-08-13


Blue Ridge Dr. and Tree Top Court
 
Tree Top Court
 
25-08-13


Bluestone Dr. and Autumn Bend Court
 
Autumn Bend Court
 
25-08-13


Bluestone Dr. and Hearthfield Way
 
Hearthfield Way
 
25-08-13


Bluestone Dr. and Rustling Ridge Court
 
Rustling Ridge Court
 
25-08-13


Bluestone Dr. and Sweetwater Dr.
 
Sweetwater Dr.
 
25-08-13


Bluestone Dr. and Timber Valley Dr.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
25-08-13


Boundary Dr. and Bounds Court
 
Bounds Court
 
25-08-13


Boundary Dr. and Bounds Dr.
 
Bounds Dr.
 
25-08-13


Boundary Dr. and Gaston Dr.
 
Gaston Dr.
 
25-08-13


Boundary Dr. and Stroup Dr.
 
Stroup Dr.
 
25-08-13


Braddock Lane and Royal Grove Dr.
 
Braddock Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Braddock Lane and Tiki Trail
 
Braddock Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Brady Lane and Royal Grove Dr.
 
Brady Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Brady Lane and Tiki Trail
 
Brady Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Braemar Ave. North and Spayside Dr. N.
 
Spayside Dr. N.
 
25-08-13


Brendandow Ct. & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Brendandow Ct.
 
17-5-10


Brompton Ct. & Westminster Dr.
 
Brompton Ct.
 
17-5-10


Buck Run Dr. and Dry Creek Rd.
 
Buck Run Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Buckeye Court and Ash Circle
 
Ash Circle
 
34-08-12


Burlat Lane and Blue Ridge Dr.
 
Burlat Lane
 
25-08-13


Buttonwood & Buckeye Ct.
 
Buckeye Ct. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood Dr. and Deerberry Dr.
 
Deerberry stops
 
 


Buttonwood & Elderberry Cir.
 
Elderberry Circle stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Elderberry Rd. (all ways)
 
Elderberry Rd. & Buttonwood
 
1603


Buttonwood & Hickory Way
 
Hickory Way stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Ironwood Cir.
 
Ironwood Cir. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Laurel Ln.
 
Laurel Ln. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Linden Cir.
 
Linden Circle stops
 
 


Buttonwood & Little Chicago Rd.
 
Buttonwood stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Maplewood Dr. (east intersection)
 
Maplewood Dr. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Maplewood Dr. (west intersection)
 
Maplewood Dr. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Redbay Dr.
 
Redbay Dr. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Redbud Cir.
 
Redbud Cir. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Sassafras
 
Sassafras Cir. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood Cir. & Sweetgum Ct.
 
Sweetgum Ct. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Tamarack Ln.
 
Tamarack Ln. stops
 
1603


Buttonwood & Wintergreen
 
Wintergreen stops
 
1603


Calico Aster Dr. and Sunflower Drive (North)
 
Sunflower Drive stops
 
54-11-96


Calico Aster Dr. and
 
Calico Aster Dr. stops
 
54-11-96


Sunflower Drive (South)
 
 
 
 


Calico Aster Dr. and Windwood Parkway
 
Calico Aster Dr. stops
 
54-11-96


Campus Pkwy. and Boden Rd.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Campus Pkwy. and Corporate Pkwy.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Campus Pkwy. and Town Center Dr.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Campus Pkwy. and Harrell Pkwy.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Campus Pkwy. and NW Ramp and SW Ramps to and from I-69
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Canterbury Ct. & Westminster Dr.
 
Canterbury Ct.
 
17-5-10


Capstone Court and Allison Road
 
Capstone Court stops
 
50-9-98


Carey Drive
 
Northbound at Logan St.
 
20-6-02


Carrigan at the Levee
 
 
 
 


Waters Edge Court and Carrigan Rd.
 
Waters Edge Court stops
 
46-10-02


Winding Lake Dr. North and Winding Lake Dr. West
 
Winding Lake Dr. West stops
 
46-10-02


Winding Lake Dr. West  and Carrigan Rd.
 
Winding Lake Dr. West stops
 
46-10-02


Carrigan Rd. & Carrigan Crossing
 
Carrigan Crossing stops
 
 


Carrigan Rd. & Chris Ct.
 
Chris Ct. stops
 
1603


Carrigan Rd. & Clarendon Dr.
 
Clarendon Dr. stops
 
 


Carrigan Rd. & Edgewater Dr.
 
Edgewater Dr. stops
 
 


Carrigan Rd. & Hague Rd.
 
All yield, roundabout
 
50-10-17


Carrigan Rd. & Oak Bay Dr.
 
Oak Bay Dr. stops
 
 


Carters Grove Drive & Gretna Green Lane
 
Carters Grove Dr. stops
 
46-9-96; 23-8-11


Carters Grove Drive & Wychwood Place
 
Carters Grove Dr. stops
 
23-8-11


Center & Evans St.
 
Evans St. stops
 
1052


Center Dr. & North St. 
 
North Dr. stops
 
 


Center Dr. & North St.
 
3-way stop
 
53-8-90


Chadwick Court and Longford Way
 
Chadwick Court
 
46-9-08


Charing Cross Ct. & Abbey Rd.
 
Charing Cross Ct.
 
17-5-10


Cherry St. and 17th St.
 
4-way stop
 
21-06-14


Cherry St. and 18th St.
 
18th St.
 
21-06-14


Cherry Tree Meadows
 
 
 
 


  Maraschino Drive and  171" Street
 
Maraschino Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Maraschino Drive and  Black Cherry Court
 
Black Cherry Court stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Maraschino Drive and Peach Lane
 
Peach Lane stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Maraschino Drive and Antwood Court
 
Antwood Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Maraschino Drive and  Blue Ridge Drive
 
Blue Ridge Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Maraschino Drive and Tree Top Lane
 
Tree Top Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Palmetto Way and Tree Top Lane
 
Tree Top Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Palmetto Way and Peach Lane
 
Palmetto Way stops
 
91-12-03


Cherry Tree Rd. and Braemar Ave. North
 
Braemar Ave. North
 
25-08-13


Cherry Tree Rd. and Kippford St.
 
Kippford St.
 
25-08-13


Cherry Tree Rd. and  Macduff Dr.
 
Macduff Dr.
 
25-08-13


Cherry Tree Rd. and Midland Lane
 
Midland Lane
 
25-08-13


Chesire Circle and Westchester Blvd.
 
Chesire Circle
 
46-9-08


Chesterfield Ct. & Chesterfield Dr.
 
Chesterfield Ct.
 
17-5-10


Chesterfield Dr. & Glasgow Lane
 
Glasgow Lane stops
 
3-8-92


Chesterfield Dr. & Scarborough Way
 
Scarborough Way stops
 
3-8-92


Chesterfield Dr. & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Chesterfield Dr. stops
 
58-12-95


Chesterfield Dr. & Yorkshire Circle
 
Yorkshire Circle stops
 
3-8-92


Chipwood Dr. & Creekview Drive
 
Chipwood Drive
 
42-8-96


Chipwood Dr. & Diamond Way
 
Diamond Way
 
42-8-96


Chipwood Dr. & Jena Drive
 
Chipwood Drive
 
42-8-96


Christian St. & Greenfield Ave., east for 10th St.
 
Christian St. at Greenfield Ave., and westbound Christian St. east of turn
south to enter Greenfield Ave. at 1032 Christian Ave.
 
50-10-17


Christian & Setser Sts.
 
Setser St. stops
 
12-8-88


Clarendon Dr. & Avon Lane
 
Avon Lane stops
 
21-05-91


Clarendon Drive & Chamberlain Circle
 
Chamberlain Circle stops
 
21-05-91


Clover Road and Stony Creek Road
 
Clover Road stops
 
23-5-98


Clover Road and Town & Country Blvd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Cold Stream Rd. and Boden Rd.
 
Cold Stream Rd. stops
 
07-03-13


Cold Stream Rd. and Greenfield Ave.
 
Cold Stream Rd. stops
 
07-03-13


Cottage Grove Lane and Pebble Brook Dr.
 
Pebble Brook Dr.
 
25-08-13


Cottage Grove Lane and Stonebluff Lane
 
Stonebluff Lane
 
25-08-13


Country Lake Blvd. and Country Pine Circle
 
Country Pine Circle
 
25-08-13


Country Lake Blvd. & Gavin Ave.
 
Country Lake Blvd. stops
 
58-12-95


Country Lake Blvd. and Lake Knoll Way
 
Lake Knoll Way
 
25-08-13


Country Lake Blvd. and Pinecrest Circle
 
Pinecrest Circle
 
25-08-13


Creekside at Cedar Path
 
 
 
 


  S.R. 238 and Black  Antler Dr.
 
Black Antler Dr. stops
 
17-6-99


  Fawn Hollow Lane and  Black Antler Dr.
 
Black Antler Dr. stops
 
17-6-99


  Fawn Hollow Lane and Brocket Circle
 
Brocket Circle stops
 
17-6-99


  Fawn Hollow Lane and Buck Creek Circle
 
Buck Creek Circle
 
17-6-99


  Fawn Hollow Lane and Wapiti Way
 
Wapiti Way stops
 
17-6-99


  Wapiti Way and  Fawn Hollow
 
Wapiti Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Lane Fawn Hollow Lane and Pronghorn Circle
 
Pronghorn Circle stops
 
91-12-03


  White Tail Run (north end) and Fawn Hollow Lane
 
White Tail Run stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Hollow Lane and  Roe River Court
 
Roe River Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Hollow Lane and White Tail Run (south end)
 
Fawn Hollow Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Hollow Lane and Doe Creek Court
 
Doe Creek Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Hollow Lane and Summer Road
 
Fawn Hollow Lane stops
 
91-12-03


Creekview Dr. and 196th St.
 
Creekview Dr. stops
 
58-12-95


Creekview Drive & Diamond Way
 
Diamond Way
 
42-8-96


Creekview Drive & Jena Drive
 
Creekview Drive
 
42-8-96


Cricket Song Lane and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Cricket Song Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Cricket Song Lane and Dry Creek Rd.
 
Cricket Song Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Cromarty Circle & Abercron Trail
 
Cromarty Circle stops
 
23-8-11


Cromarty Circle & Wychwood Place
 
Cromarty Circle stops
 
23-8-11


Cromwell Cir. & Kensington Dr.
 
Cromwell Cir.
 
17-5-10


Crossbridge Drive & S.R. #38
 
Crossbridge Drive stops
 
23-5-98


Crossbridge Drive & Pathway Pointe
 
Crossbridge Drive stops
 
23-5-98/


Crowndale Ct. & Landsowne Dr.
 
Crowndale Ct.
 
17-5-10


Cumberland & Cherry St.
 
Cumberland Rd. stops
 
1052


Cumberland & Conner St.
 
Cumberland Rd. stops
 
1052


Cumberland Pointe Office Industrial Park
 
 
 
 


  Cumberland Road and  Cumberland Pointe Blvd.
 
Cumberland Pointe Blvd. stops
 
90-12-03


  Cumberland Pointe Blvd. and Endeavor Drive
 
Endeavor Drive stops
 
90-12-03


Cumberland Rd. & Conner St.
 
Traffic light
 
10-2-90


Cumberland Road & Greenfield Avenue
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Cumberland Road & 150th/SMC Blvd.
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Cumberland Road & Mercantile Blvd.
 
3-way stop
 
21-06-14


Cumberland & Monument St.
 
Monument St. stops
 
1052


Cumberland Point Blvd. and Golden Drive
 
Both (all way)
 
34-08-12


Cumberland Rd.
 
Southbound at 141st St.
 
20-6-02


Currant Drive and Heatherwood Court
 
Heatherwood Court
 
34-08-12


Dakota Dr. & Cherokee Ln.
 
Cherokee Ln. stops
 
21-7-94/


Dakota Dr. & Gregory Circle
 
Gregory Circle stops
 
23-5-98


Dakota Dr. & Sioux Circle
 
Sioux Circle stops
 
21-7-94


Dalton Court and River Run Place
 
River Run Place
 
25-08-13


Deer Path
 
 
 
 


  Follow Drive and  156th Street
 
Follow Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Follow Drive and  Locus Lane
 
Locus Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Wandering Way and Locus Lane
 
Locus Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Ten Pointe Drive and Locus Lane
 
Ten Pointe Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Meadow Drive and Locus Lane
 
Fawn Meadow Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Ten Pointe Drive and Wandering Way
 
Ten Pointe Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Fawn Meadow Drive and Wandering Way
 
Fawn Meadow Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Ten Pointe Drive and Stable Chase
 
Stable Chase stops
 
91-12-03


  Marathon Run and Summer Road
 
Marathon Run stops
 
91-12-03


  Marathon Run and Wandering Way
 
Marathon Run stops
 
91-12-03


  Follow Drive and Wolf Run Road
 
Wolf Run Road stops
 
91-12-03


  Runaway Lane and 156th Street
 
Runaway Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Runaway Lane and Outside Trail
 
Runaway Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Outside Trail and Outside Trail Court
 
Outside Trail Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Outside Trail and Inside Trail
 
Inside Trail stops
 
91-12-03


  Outside Trail and Wolf Run Road
 
Outside Trail stops
 
91-12-03


  Wolf Run Road and Wolf Run Court
 
Wolf Run Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Wolf Run Road and  Dusty Trail
 
Dusty Trail stops (both sides)
 
91-12-03


  Inside Trail and  Dusty Trail
 
Inside Trail stops
 
91-12-03


Deerberry Dr. and Deerberry Ct.
 
Deerberry Ct.
 
34-08-12


Deertrail Dr. and Deerview Dr.
 
Deertrail Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Deertrail Dr. and Dry Creek Rd.
 
Deertrail Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Deerview Dr. and Dry Creek Rd.
 
Deerview Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Division St. & 19th St.
 
Division St. stops
 
7-10-89


Dixon Court and Tahoe Circle
 
Dixon Court stops
 
23-5-98


Doverton Drive and Candlewick Road
 
Candlewick Road stops
 
25-6-93/


Downing Ct. & Dover Dr.
 
Downing Ct.
 
17-5-10


Dry Creek Rd. and 156th St.
 
Dry Creek Rd. stops
 
07-03-13


Dry Creek Rd. and Cold Stream Rd.
 
All way stop
 
07-03-13


Dry Creek Rd. and Greenfield Ave.
 
Dry Creek Rd. stops
 
07-03-13


Dry Creek Rd. and Wolf Run Rd.
 
All way stop
 
07-03-13


Dundee Ct. & Wellington Pkwy.
 
Dundee Ct.
 
17-5-10


Dunmore Pointe & Stockton Drive
 
Dunmore Pointe steps
 
59-10-98


Drayton Drive & Redcliff Drive (north intersection
 
3-way stop
 
20-4-00


Drayton Drive & Redcliff Drive (south intersection
 
Redcliff Drive stops
 
20-4-00


East Haven at Noble West
 
 
 
 


  Midland Lane and  Catlin Lane
 
Catlin Lane stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Salisbury Lane and Catlin Lane
 
Salisbury Lane stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


East Haven at Noble West, Sections 2A & 2B
 
 
 
 


  Ramsey Drive and Porter Lane
 
Porter Lane stops
 
90-12-03


  Shellbark Drive and Porter Lane
 
Porter Lane stops
 
90-12-03


  Ramsey Drive and  Breckenwood Drive
 
Breckenwood Drive stops
 
90-12-03


  Midland Lane and  Shellbark Drive
 
Shellbark Drive stops
 
90-12-03


  Ramsey Drive and Shellbark Drive
 
Shellbark Drive stops
 
90-12-03


  Ramsey Drive and Midland Lane
 
Ramsey Drive stops
 
 


Edenshall Lane and Burliegh Place
 
Burliegh Place
 
25-08-13


Edenshall Lane and Midland Lane
 
All way
 
25-08-13


Edenshall Lane and Newark Dr.
 
Newark Dr.
 
25-08-13


Elderberry Rd. & Chestnut Ct.
 
Chestnut Ct. stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Mulberry Cir.
 
Mulberry Cir. stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Persimmon Pl.
 
Persimmon Pl. stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Walnut Way (east intersection)
 
Walnut Way stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Walnut Way (west intersection)
 
Walnut Way stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Willow Way (east intersection)
 
Willow Way stops
 
1603


Elderberry Rd. & Willow Way (west intersection)
 
Willow Way stops
 
1603


Elmwood Circle & Aspen Way
 
Aspen Way stops
 
24-5-95


Elmwood Circle & Pin Oak Court
 
Pin Oak Court
 
34-08-12


English Oak Dr. & Oriental Oak Ct.
 
English Oak Dr. stops
 
19-5-97


Estates Blvd. & Blue Moon Dr.
 
Blue Moon Dr. stops
 
13-2-05


Estates Blvd. & Crescent Moon Dr.
 
Crescent Moon Dr. stops
 
13-2-05


Estates Blvd. & Full Moon Ct.
 
Full Moon Ct. stops
 
13-2-05


Estates Blvd. & Harvest Moon Dr.
 
Harvest Moon Dr. stops (both sides)
 
13-2-05


Estates Blvd. & Silver Moon Dr.
 
Silver Moon Dr. stops
 
13-2-05


Estates Blvd. & Stoney Moon Dr.
 
Stoney Moon Dr. stops
 
13-2-05


Fairfield Blvd. & 191st St.
 
Fairfield Blvd. stops
 
3-8-92


Fairfield Blvd. & Wimbly Way
 
Wimbly Way stops
 
45-10-93/


Fairview Pkwy. & Allisonville Rd.
 
Fairview Pkwy. stops
 
45-10-93/11-  -93


Fairview Pkwy. & Auburn Lane
 
Auburn Lane stops
 
45-10-93/11-  -93


Fairview Pkwy. & Wimbly Way
 
Fairview Pkwy. stops
 
45-10-93/11-  -93


Fairway Dr. & Little Chicago Rd.
 
Fairway Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Fairway Dr. & Pebble Brook Rd.
 
Fairway Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Fairway Dr. and Stones Crossing Lane
 
Yield - all way
 
25-08-13


Fallen Leaves Lane and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Fallen Leaves Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Fallen Leaves Lane and Cricket Song Lane
 
Fallen Leaves Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Farmland Court and Wolf Run Rd.
 
Farmland Court stops
 
07-03-13


Fawn Hollow Lane & Black Antler Dr.
 
All way stop
 
23-8-11


Fawn Meadow Dr. and Stable Chase
 
Stable Chase stops
 
40-11-99


Field & Cumberland Rd.
 
4-way stop
 
1052


Follow Dr. and Cat Tail Ct.
 
Cat Tail Ct. stops
 
40-11-99


Follow Dr. and Greenfield Ave.
 
Follow Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Follow Dr. and Wandering Way
 
Wandering Way stops
 
40-11-99


Forest Park Dr. (north) & S.R. 19
 
Park Dr. stops
 
1052


Forest Park Dr. (south) and S.R. 19
 
Park Dr. stops
 
1052


Forest Park Dr. and Caddy House Dr.
 
Caddy House Dr. stops
 
1052


Forest Park Dr. and Play Ground
 
Play Ground Dr. stops
 
1052


Gaston Dr. and Gaston Circle
 
Gaston Circle
 
25-08-13


Gaston Dr. and Gaston Court
 
Gaston Court
 
25-08-13


Gateway Ave. & Bearsdale Way
 
Gateway Ave. stops
 
24-7-97


Gavin Ave. and Lake Valley Court
 
Lake Valley Court
 
25-08-13


Gavin Ave. and  Madison Anne Court
 
Madison Anne Court
 
25-08-13


Glasgow Ct. & Glasgow Ln.
 
Glasgow Ct.
 
17-5-10


Gloucester Ct. & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Gloucester Ct.
 
17-5-10


Golden Meadow Way & Timothy Lane
 
Timothy Lane stops
 
30-6-95


Gray Rd. and Timber Valley Dr.
 
Timber Valley Dr.
 
25-08-13


Greenfield & Audubon Ct.
 
Audubon Ct. stops
 
10-2-90


Greenfield & Christian Ave.
 
Signal light
 
 


Greenfield & Monticello Court
 
Monticello Ct. stops
 
10-2-90


Greenfield & South St.
 
South St. stops
 
1052


Greenfield Ave. and Boden Rd.
 
Traffic signal
 
47-10-07


Greenfield Ave. and Summer Rd.
 
Summer Rd.
 
10-04-18


Greenfield Ave. and Union Chapel Rd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


The Greens at Prairie Crossing, Section 2
 
 
 
 


  Round Lake Road and Course View Court
 
Course View Court stops
 
90-12-03


Gregory Circle and Dixon Court
 
Dixon Court stops
 
23-5-98


Hague Rd. & Dakota Dr.
 
Dakota Dr. stops
 
1603


Hague Rd. & Windwood Parkway
 
Windwood Parkway stops
 
54-11-96


Hampstead Ct. & Westminster Dr.
 
Hampstead Ct.
 
17-5-10


Hannibal St. and 17th St.
 
17th St.
 
21-06-14


N. Harbour Dr. & Ashford Ct.
 
Ashford Ct. stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Carrigan Rd.
 
N. Harbour Dr. stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Chaucer Cir.
 
Chaucer Circle stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Dorchester Dr.
 
Dorchester Dr. stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & 
 
Hampshire Ct. stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Harbour Trees
 
Harbour Trees stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Oxford Dr.
 
Oxford Dr. stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & Wessex Circle
 
Wessex Circle stops
 
1603


N. Harbour Dr. & West-chester Blvd.
 
Westchester Blvd. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & SR 38
 
S. Harbour Dr. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Aspen Way
 
Aspen Way stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Bittersweet Ct.
 
Bittersweet Ct. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Butternut Ct.
 
Butternut Ct. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Catalpa Ct.
 
Catalpa Ct. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Currant Dr.
 
Currant Dr. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Elmwood
 
Elmwood stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Elmwood Circle
 
4-way stop
 
7-4-94


S. Harbour Dr. & Redwood Cir.
 
Redwood Cir. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Snowberry Ct.
 
Snowberry Ct. stops
 
1603


S. Harbour Dr. & Tulip Ct.
 
Tulip Ct. stops
 
1603


Harbour Woods Overlook Piers End Drive
 
Harbour Woods Overlook stops
 
52-9-98


Harrell Pkwy. and Hoard Dr.
 
All entry roads yield at the roundabout
 
47-10-07


Harrell Pkwy. and Corporate Pkwy.
 
All entry roads yield at the roundabout
 
47-10-07


Harvest Moon Dr. & Crescent Moon Dr.
 
Crescent Moon Dr. stops
 
13-2-05


Haven Hurst Cv and Evanston Close
 
Evanston Close
 
25-08-13


Hazel Dell Road & Midland Lane/Noble Crossing Parkway East
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Hazel Dell Road & 161st Street
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
13-4-09


Hazel Dell Road & 169th Street
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Hazel Dell Rd. and Belchamp Dr.
 
Belchamp Dr.
 
25-08-13


Hazel Dell Rd. and Bladen Dr.
 
Bladen Dr.
 
25-08-13


Hazel Dell Road & Edenshall Lane
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Hazel Dell Woods Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Bruce Boulevard &  Finchum Way
 
Finchum Way stops
 
41-9-00


  Bruce Boulevard & Finchum Way (west intersection)
 
4-way stop
 
41-9-00


  Bruce Boulevard and Linda Way
 
Linda Way stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Bruce Boulevard and  Bitner Way
 
Bitner Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Bitner Way and Bitner Court
 
Bitner Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Bitner Way and 169th Street
 
Bitner Way stops
 
91-12-03


  Hazel Dell Rd & Bruce Boulevard
 
Bruce Boulevard stops
 
41-9-00


Hearthfield Way and Autumn Grove Court
 
Autumn Grove Court
 
25-08-13


Herriman Blvd. & 146th St.
 
Herriman Blvd. stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Abbey Rd.
 
Abbey Rd. stops
 
35-5-90


Herriman Blvd. & Chesterfield
 
Chesterfield stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Glasgow
 
Glasgow stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Glasgow Ln.
 
Glasgow Ln. stops
 
35-5-90


Herriman Blvd. & Greenfield Ave.
 
Herriman Blvd. stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Herriman Ct.
 
Herriman Ct. stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Pemberly Ct.
 
Pemberly Ct. stops
 
 


Herriman Blvd. & Stony Creek Way
 
Stony Creek Way stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Stony Creek Way (north intersection)
 
3-way stop
 
8-4-94/4-11-94


Herriman Blvd. & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Stony Creek Overlook stops
 
 


Herriman Blvd. & Wellington Parkway
 
Wellington Parkway stops
 
1623


Herriman Blvd. & Wellington Parkway (north)
 
4-way stop
 
35-9-92


Herriman Blvd. & Wellington Parkway (south)
 
Wellington Parkway stops
 
35-9-92


Herriman Ct. & Stony Creek Way
 
Herriman Ct. stops
 
10-2-90


Hewes Ct. & Hopkinson Dr.
 
Hopkinson Dr. stops
 
4-1-97


Hickory Way & Tamarack Lane
 
Tamarack Lane stops
 
24-5-95


High Timber Lane and Cold Stream Rd.
 
High Timber Lane stops
 
07-03-13


High Timber Lane and Cricket Song Lane
 
High Timber Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Highlands Prairie
 
 
 
 


  Allisonville Road and  Heather Lane
 
Heather Lane stops
 
91-12-03


  Wagon Trail and Heather Lane
 
4-way stops
 
91-12-03


Hillcrest Dr. & Woodland Dr.
 
Hillcrest Dr. stops
 
1052


Hillcrest Dr. & Stony Creek Rd.
 
Hillcrest Dr. stops
 
1052


Hoard Dr. and 136th St./ Frontage Rd.
 
3-way stop
 
47-10-07


Holland & Greenfield Ave.
 
Holland St. stops
 
1052


Holland & Setser St.   
 
Holland St. stops
 
 


Hollowview Cir. & Sunset Dr.
 
Hollowview Cir. stops
 
1637


Hollowview Dr. & Sunset Dr.
 
Hollowview Dr. stops
 
30-8-92


Hollowview Dr. & Woodview Dr.
 
Hollowview Dr. stops
 
30-8-92


Hopkinson Dr. and McKeon Court
 
McKeon Court
 
25-08-13


James & Harrison St.
 
3-way stop
 
1052


James & Monument St.
 
James Dr. stops
 
1052


John St. & Logan St.
 
John St. stops
 
71-11-90


John St. & Osborn St.
 
Osborn St. stops
 
1052


John St.& Westfield Rd. (S.R. 32)
 
John St. stops
 
1052


Keech Ct. and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Keech Ct. stops
 
07-03-13


Kelly Anne Way and Pine Knoll Blvd.
 
Kelly Anne Way stops
 
19-5-93/


Kennewick Bend and Laurel Crest Run
 
Laurel Crest Run
 
25-08-13


Kennewick Bend and Veranda Dr.
 
Veranda Dr.
 
25-08-13


Kenyon Trail and Merritt Pass
 
Merritt Pass
 
25-08-13


Key Club Drive and Longboat Key Circle
 
Longboat Key Circle stops
 
23-5-98


Kings Cross Ct. & Wellington Pkwy.
 
Kings Cross Ct.
 
17-5-10


Kippford St. and Carrick Rd.
 
Carrick Rd.
 
25-08-13


Kippford St. and Dunrobin Dr.
 
Dunrobin Dr.
 
25-08-13


Kippford St. and Slateford Rd.
 
Yield
 
25-08-13


Lakes at Prairie Crossing Sec. 1
 
 
 
 


  Fox Chase Dr. and  Prairie Crossing Dr. 
 
Prairie Crossing Dr. stops
 
30-9-99


  Hague Rd. and Fox Chase Dr.
 
Fox Chase Dr. stops
 
30-9-99


  Prairie Crossing Dr. and Links Lane
 
Links Lane stops
 
30-9-99


Lakeside Estates Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Candlewick Rd. and Crowley Ct.
 
Crowley Ct. stops
 
11-4-99


  Candlewick Rd. and Darby Circle
 
Darby Circle stops
 
11-4-99


  Candlewick Rd. and Poole Pl.
 
Poole Pl. stops
 
11-4-99


  Candlewick Rd. and Skipton Ct.
 
Skipton Ct. stops
 
11-4-99


  Doverton Dr. and Selby Ct.
 
Selby Ct. stops
 
11-4-99


  Doverton Dr. and Tooley Ct.
 
Tooley Ct. stops
 
11-4-99


Lakeview Dr. & Brown St.
 
Brown St. stops
 
1052


Lakeview Dr. & Forest Ridge Dr.
 
3-way stop
 
1076


Lakeview Dr. & Lafayette Rd.
 
Lafayette Rd. stops
 
1052


Lakeview Dr. & Logan Street
 
Traffic light
 
42-8-96


Lakeview Dr. & Sunset Dr.
 
Sunset Dr. stops
 
1052


Lakeview Dr. & Park St.
 
Park St. stops
 
1052


Lakeview & Westfield Rd. (S.R. 32)
 
Traffic light
 
1052


Lakeview Dr. & Louise Dr.
 
Louise stops
 
 


Lakeview Dr. & Westfield Rd. (S.R. 32)
 
Lakeview Dr. stops
 
3-9-92


Landsend Cir. & Oak Cove Lane
 
Landsend Cir. stops
 
24-7-97


Laurel Lane & Yellowwood Circle
 
Yellowwood Circle
 
34-08-12


Leichester Ct. & 147th Pl.
 
Leichester Ct.
 
17-5-10


Lilac Court & Hawthorne Place
 
Lilac Court
 
46-9-08


Little Chicago Rd. & Carrigan
 
Northbound Little Chicago stops at the "T" intersection, Carrigan Rd.

The eastbound connecting ramp of Little Chicago to eastbound Carrigan Rd.
shall yield

The southbound connecting ramp from Carrigan Rd. to southbound Little Chicago
shall yield
 
16-4-01


Little Chicago Road and Doverton Drive
 
Doverton Drive stops
 
25-6-93/7-12-93


Little Chicago Rd. & Elderberry Rd. stops
 
Elderberry Rd.
 
 


Little Chicago Rd. & Firethorne Cir.
 
Firethorne Cir. stops
 
 


Little Chicago Rd. & Harbourview Ct.
 
Harbourview Ct. stops
 
 


Little Chicago Rd. & Hawthorn Pl.
 
Hawthorn Pl. stops
 
1603


Little Chicago Rd. at Magnolia
 
Magnolia stops
 
1603


Little Chicago Rd. & Myers Lake Dr.
 
Myers Lake Dr. stops
 
25-08-13


Little Chicago Rd. & Pebble Village Lane
 
Pebble Village Lane stops
 
35-7-01


Little Chicago Rd. at Poplar Dr.
 
Poplar Dr. stops
 
1603


Little Creek Dr. and Angel Way
 
Angel Way
 
25-08-13


Lochaven of Noblesville
 
 
 
 


  Cherry Tree Road and Penman Court
 
Penman Court Stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Cherry Tree Road and  Braemer Ave. South
 
Braemar Avenue South Stops
 
91-12-03


  Braemar Avenue South andBladstone Road
 
Bladstone Road Stops
 
91-12-03


  Pennan Court and MacDuff Drive
 
MacDuff Drive stops
 
91-12-03


Logan & S.R. 19
 
Traffic light
 
1052


Logan & S.R. 38
 
Traffic light
 
75-12-90


Logan St. and River Rd.
 
Logan St. stops
 
40-11-99


Longford Way & Clarendon Dr.
 
Clarendon Dr. stops
 
21-05-91


Longford Way & North Harbor Dr.
 
Langford Way stops
 
21-05-91


Longford Way & Regents Park Lane
 
Regents Park Lane stops
 
21-05-91


Longview Dr. & Lacosta Ln.
 
Longview Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Lovely Dove Lane and Deertrail Dr.
 
Lovely Dove Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Lovely Dove Lane and Deerview Dr.
 
Lovely Dove Lane stops
 
07-03-13


Macduff Dr. and Macduff Court
 
Macduff Court
 
25-08-13


Magenta Drive & Timothy Lane
 
Timothy Lane stops
 
30-6-95


Maines Valley Dr. and Meadow Wood Court
 
Meadow Wood Court
 
25-08-13


Maines Valley Dr. and Meadow Wood Dr.
 
Meadow Wood Dr.
 
25-08-13


Maple St. and 17th St.
 
17th St.
 
21-06-14


Maple Grove Way/Mill Oak Drive
 
Maple Grove Way
 
33-6-07


Marie Court & Dakota Dr.
 
Marie Court stops
 
45-10-93/11-  -93


Marilyn Rd. & 141st St.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Meadows Blvd. & 191st St.
 
Meadows Blvd. stops
 
21-7-94/7-11-94


Meadows Blvd. & Amber Way (south)
 
Amber Way stops
 
30-6-95


Meadows Blvd. & Amber Way (north) & Cerulean Drive
 
4-way stop
 
30-6-95


Meadows Blvd. & Canal Way
 
Canal Way stops
 
30-6-95


Meadows Blvd. & Magenta Drive
 
Magenta Drive stops
 
30-6-95


Meek and Cherry St.
 
Meek St. stops
 
1052


Meek and Division St.
 
Meek St. stops
 
1052


Meek and Hannibal St.
 
Meek St. stops
 
1052


Merritt Pass and Merritt Circle
 
Merritt Circle
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Burliegh Place
 
Burliegh Place
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Kippford St.
 
Yield all ways
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Newark Dr.
 
Newark Dr.
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Roundabout at Dillon Park
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Roxburgh Place
 
Roxburgh Place
 
25-08-13


Midland Lane and Strathaven Rd.
 
Strathaven Rd.
 
25-08-13


Mill Grove
 
 
 
 


Awl Court and Mill Grove Drive
 
Awl Court stops
 
45-10-02


Bladed Mills Drive and Maple Grove Way
 
Bladed Mills Drive stops
 
22-5-00/


Bladed Mills Drive and Mill Oak Drive
 
Bladed Mills Drive stops
 
22-5-00/


Crosscut Lane and Pilot Mills Drive
 
Crosscut Lane stops
 
45-10-02


Crosscut Lane and Planner Drive
 
Crosscut Lane stops
 
45-10-02


Dado Court and Pilot Mills Drive
 
Dado Court stops
 
45-10-02


Dado Drive and Mill Grove Drive
 
Dado Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Edwards Grove Drive and Dado Drive
 
Edwards Grove Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Edwards Grove Drive and Mill Oak Drive
 
Edwards Grove Drive stops (2-way)
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Grove Walk Court and Mill Grove Drive
 
Grove Walk Court stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Gussett Court and Maple Grove Way
 
Gussett Court stops
 
45-10-02


Kerf Lane and Saw Mills Drive
 
Kerf Lane stops (on both ends of street)
 
45-10-02


Maple Grove Way and Edwards Grove Drive
 
4-way stop
 
45-10-02


Maple Grove Way and Little Chicago Drive
 
Maple Grove Way stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Maple Grove Way and Mill Creek Road
 
Maple Grove Way stops
 
45-10-02


Mill Grove Drive and Maple Grove Way
 
Mill Grove Drive stops (2-way)
 
45-10-02


Mill Grove Drive and Mill Oak Drive
 
Mill Grove Drive stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Mill Grove Drive and Saw Mill Drive
 
Mill Grove Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Mill Oak Drive and Maple Grove Way
 
Mill Oak Drive stops (2-way)
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Mill Oak Drive and Pilot Mills Drive
 
Mill Oak Drive stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Mill Oak Drive and State Road 38
 
Mill Oak Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Pilot Mills Court and Dado Drive
 
Pilot Mills Court stops
 
45-10-02


Pilot Mills Drive and Planner Drive
 
Pilot Mills Drive stops (2-way)
 
45-10-02


Planner Drive and Maple Grive Way
 
Planner Drive stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Rioux Grove Court and Mill Oak Drive
 
Rioux Grove Court stops
 
22-5-00/45-10-02


Saw Mill Drive and Dado Drive
 
Saw Mill Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Saw Mill Drive and Mill Grove Drive
 
Saw Mill Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Walter Grove Drive and Grove Walk Court
 
Walter Grove Drive stops
 
45-10-02


  Walter Grove Drive  and Mill Grove Drive
 
Walter Grove Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Mill Grove Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Planer Drive and Little Chicago Road
 
Planer Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Pilots Mill Drive and Dado Court
 
Both streets stop
 
14-3-04


Monarch Springs
 
 
 
 


  Monarch Drive and  Meadow Wing Court
 
Meadow Wing Court stops
 
90-12-03


  Monarch Drive and Chestnut Heath Court
 
Chestnut Heath Court stops
 
90-12-03


  Monarch Drive and 191st Street
 
Monarch Drive stops
 
90-12-03


  Monarch Drive and Field Crescent Circle
 
Field Crescent Circle stops
 
90-12-03


  Gossamer Lane and  Monarch Drive
 
Gossamer Drive stops (2 locations)
 
90-12-03


  Monarch Drive and Promise Road
 
Monarch Drive stops
 
90-12-03


Monterey Dr. & S.R. 38
 
Monterey Dr. stops
 
1637


Monterey Ct. & Sunset Dr.
 
Monterey Ct. stops
 
1637


Monterey Dr. & Sunset
 
Monterey Dr. stops
 
1637


Moorgate Ct. & Chesterfield Dr.
 
Moorgate Ct.
 
17-5-10


Morello Lane and Black Oak Drive
 
Morello Lane
 
46-9-08


Morse Point
 
 
 
 


  Bird Key Drive and Pathway Pointe
 
Bird Key Drive stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Bird Key Drive and Rocky Beach Drive
 
Bird Key Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Pathway Pointe and Angel Falls Drive
 
Pathway Pointe stops
 
91-12-03


  Rocky Beach Drive and Angel Falls Drive
 
Rocky Beach Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Rocky Beach Dr. and Bird Key Dr.
 
Bird Key Dr. stops
 
17-6-99


  Sandbar Drive and Silver Spring Drive
 
Sandbar Drive stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Sandbar Drive and Rushing River
 
Sandbar Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Silver Springs Drive and Landrum Circle
 
Landrum Circle stops
 
91-12-03


  Silver Springs Drive and  Sandbar Drive
 
Sandbar Drive stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


Mulberry St. & 19th St.
 
Mulberry St. stops
 
75-10-89


Myers Lake Dr. and Caphel Lane
 
Caphel Lane
 
25-08-13


Myers Lake Drive & Country Lake Blvd.
 
Country Lake Blvd. stops
 
8-4-94/4-11-94/25-08-13


Myers Lake Drive & Lake Point Way
 
Lake Point Way stops
 
25-08-13


Myers Lake Drive & Lake Terrace Court
 
Lake Terrace Court stops
 
25-08-13


Myers Lake Dr. and Little Creek Dr.
 
Little Creek Dr.
 
25-08-13


Myers Lake Dr. and Spring Creek Court
 
Spring Creek Court
 
25-08-13


Nixon St. & Logan St.
 
Nixon St. stops
 
71-11-90


Nixon St. & Westfield Rd. (S.R. 32)
 
Nixon St. stops
 
1052


Noble Crossing Pky East and Evanston Close
 
Evanston Close
 
25-08-13


Noble Crossing Pky East and Kennewick Bend 
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Noble Crossing Pky East and Merritt Pass
 
Merritt Pass
 
25-08-13


Noble Crossing Pky West and Kennewick Bend
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Oak Bay Circle & Oak Bay Dr.
 
Oak Bay Circle stops
 
27-6-01


Oak Bay Dr. & Oak Cove Lane
 
Oak Cove Lane stops
 
86-11-89


Oak Bay Dr. & Oakview Dr.
 
Oakview Dr. stops
 
3-8-92


Oak Harbour Circle & Oak Bay Dr.
 
Oak Harbour Circle stops
 
27-6-01


Oak Point Circle & Oak Bay Dr.
 
Oak Point Circle stops
 
27-6-01


Oakmont
 
 
 
 


  Benton Oak Drive and  Holl Drive
 
Holl Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Benton Oak Drive and Clear Oak Circle
 
Clear Oak Circle stops
 
91-12-03


  Benton Oak Drive and Hardin Oak Drive
 
Benton Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Canyon Oak Drive and  English Oak Drive
 
Canyon Oak Drive stops (both ends)
 
91-12-03


  Kinder Oak Drive and Forreston Oak Drive  north end)
 
Forreston Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Kinder Oak Drive and Forreston Oak Drive  (south end)
 
Kinder Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Oakmont Drive and  Oriental Oak Court
 
Oriental Oak Court stops
 
91-12-03


  Oakmont Drive and  Summer Oak Drive
 
Summer Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Oakmont Drive and  Hardin Oak Drive
 
Hardin Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Oakmont Drive and Forreston Oak Drive
 
Forreston Oak Drive stops
 
91-12-03


  Oakmont Drive and Oak Edge Circle
 
Oak Edge Circle stops
 
91-12-03


Oakmont Dr. & SR #38
 
Oakmont Drive stops
 
19-5-97


Oakmont Dr. & English Oak Dr.
 
English Oak Dr. stops
 
19-5-97


Oakmont Dr. & Scarlet Oak Ct.
 
Scarlet Oak Court Dr. stops
 
19-5-97


Oakmont Drive and Summer Oak Drive
 
Summer Oak Drive stops
 
23-5-98


Oakwood Circle & Oakview Dr.
 
Oakwood Circle stops
 
27-6-01


Oakview Circle & Oakview Dr.
 
Oakview Dr. stops
 
27-6-01


O’Hara Court & Wychwood Place
 
O’Hara Court stops
 
23-8-11


Old Pond Circle and Old Pond Rd.
 
Old Pond Circle stops
 
07-03-13


Old Pond Rd. and Wolf Run Rd.
 
Old Pond stops
 
07-03-13


Olio Rd./Tegler Dr./141st St.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Oriental Oak Court and English Oak Drive
 
English Oak Drive
 
43-8-08


Orleans Court & Fairview Parkway
 
Orleans Court stops
 
41-11-97


Overland Ct. & Monticello Ct.
 
Overland Ct.
 
17-5-10


Oxford Dr. & Roxbury Ln.
 
Oxford Dr. stops
 
21-7-94/7-11-94


Palmbrook Blvd. & Moontown Rd.
 
Palmbrook Blvd. stops
 
19-5-97


Park Dr. & Forest Lane Dr. within Forest Park
 
3-way stop
 
75-10-89


Parliament Ct. & Landsowne Dr.
 
Parliament Ct.
 
17-5-10


Pathway Point and Key Club Drive
 
Key Club Drive stops
 
23-5-98


Pathway Pointe and Key Club Drive
 
Pathway Pointe stops
 
23-5-98


Pathway Pointe & Rushing River
 
4-way stop
 
59-10-98


Pebble Brook Blvd. & SR #32
 
Pebble Brook Blvd. stops
 
24-7-97


Pebble Brook Blvd., Ashbrook Dr., Longview Dr.
 
4-way stop
 
24-7-97


Pebblebrook Blvd. and Crown Pointe Court
 
Crown Pointe Court
 
25-08-13


Pebble Brook Blvd. & Sandbrook Dr.
 
Sandbrook Dr. stops
 
24-7-97


Pebble Brook Blvd. & Village Way
 
Village Way stops
 
24-7-97


Pebble Brook Dr. & Pebble Pl.
 
Pebble Brook Pl. stops
 
24-7-97


Pebble Brook Dr. and Pebble Brook Circle
 
Pebble Brook Circle
 
25-08-13


Pebble Brook Dr. & Pitney Dr., north & south intersections
 
Pitney Drive stops
 
24-7-97


Pebble Village Lane & Pebble Center Dr.
 
Pebble Center Dr. stops
 
35-7-01


Pickwick Court and Westchester Blvd.
 
Pickwick Court
 
46-9-08


Piers End Drive & Stone Harbour Drive
 
Stone Harbour Drive stops
 
52-9-98


Pine Hill Dr. & Gavin Ave.
 
Pine Hill Dr. stops
 
19-5-93/5-13-93


Pine Knoll Blvd. & Pine Hill Drive
 
Pine Knoll Blvd. stops
 
19-5-93/5-13-93


Pine Top Way and Royal Grove Dr.
 
Pine Top Way stops
 
07-03-13


Pine Top Way and Tiki Trail
 
Pine Top Way stops
 
07-03-13


Pitney Dr. & Dugan Ct.
 
Dugan Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Pixley Lane and Queensbury Drive
 
Pixley Lane
 
46-9-08


Plains Rd. and Bayard Dr.
 
Bayard Dr.
 
25-08-13


Plains Rd. and Bladen Dr.
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Plains Rd. and Boundary Drive
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Plains Rd. and Bounds Dr.
 
Bounds Dr.
 
25-08-13


Plains Rd. and Hargay Drive
 
Yield all ways at roundabout
 
25-08-13


Planer Drive & Pilot Mills Dr.
 
Pilot Mills Dr, stops
 
22-5-00


Pleasant Street & Clover Road
 
Signal light
 
13-4-09


Pleasant Street & Union Chapel Rd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Portman Dr. and Porchester Dr.
 
Porchester Dr.
 
25-08-13


Portman Dr. and Redcliff Dr.
 
Redcliff Dr.
 
25-08-13


Potters Bridge Rd. and Covered Bridge Way
 
Covered Bridge Way stops
 
30-9-99


Potters Bridge Rd. and Morrison Way (North)
 
Morrison Way (North Intersection stops)
 
54-11-96


Potters Bridge Rd. and Morrison Way (South)
 
Morrison Way (South Intersection stops)
 
54-11-96


Potters Bridge Rd. and Turnstone Court
 
Turnstone Court stops
 
54-11-96


Potters Woods Sec. 2
 
 
 
 


  Allisonville Rd. and  Covered Bridge Way
 
Covered Bridge Way stops
 
30-9-99


  Covered Bridge Way and Crescent Oaks Dr.
 
Crescent Oaks Dr. stops
 
30-9-99


  Covered Bridge Way and Northern Oaks Ct.
 
Northern Oaks Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


  Potters Bridge Rd. and Blue Oak Ct.
 
Blue Oak Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


  Potters Bridge Rd. and Green Valley Dr.
 
Green Valley Dr. stops
 
30-9-99


  Potters Bridge Rd. and Rockwood Ct.
 
Rockwood Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


  Potters Bridge Rd. and Whispering Woods Ct.
 
Whispering Woods Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


Prairie Crossing Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  196th Street and Hurst Strand Way
 
Hurst Strand Way stops
 
14-3-04


Hurst Strand Way and Busby Road
 
Busby Road stops
 
14-3-04


Hurst Strand Way and Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Prairie Crossing Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Kailey Way and Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Kailey Way stops
 
14-3-04


  Links Land and Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Links Lane stops
 
14-3-04


Fox Chase Drive and Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Prairie Crossing Drive stops(both ways)
 
14-3-04


Meadow Rue Road and  Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Meadow Rue Road stops
 
14-3-04


Vics Court and Big Circle Drive
 
Vics Court stops
 
14-3-04


Prairie Crossing Drive and Lakeview Drive
 
Prairie Crossing Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Long Walk Lane and Lakeview Drive
 
Long Walk Lane stops
 
14-3-04


  Little Circle Road and  Long Walk Lane
 
Little Circle Road stops
 
14-3-04


  Long Walk Lane and Crestline Court
 
Crestline Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Long Walk Lane and Long Walk Court
 
Long Walk Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Round Lake Road and Little Circle Road
 
Little Circle Road stops
 
14-3-04


  Round Lake Road and Course View Road
 
Course View Road stops
 
14-3-04


  Big Circle Drive and Prairie Crossing Drive
 
Big Circle Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Fox Chase Drive and Links Lane
 
Fox Chase Drive stops
 
14-3-04


Queensbury & Dorchester
 
3-way stop
 
32-6-95


Queensbury Dr. and Berkshire Lane
 
Berkshire Lane (both sides)
 
4-1-08


Queensbury Court and Queensbury Drive
 
Queensbury Court
 
46-9-08


Rally Court and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Rally Court stops
 
07-03-13


Redbay Dr. & Redbay Ct.
 
Redbay Court
 
34-08-12


Redcliff Dr. and Porchester Dr.
 
Porchester Dr.
 
25-08-13


Regent Ct. & Dover Dr.
 
Regent Ct.
 
17-5-10


River Ave. and Doves Court
 
Doves Court
 
25-08-13


River Rd. and River Run Place
 
River Run Place
 
25-08-13


River Run Place and Trailview Circle
 
Trailview Circle
 
25-08-13


Rocky Beach Drive & Rushing River
 
Rocky Beach Drive stops
 
59-10-98


Rolling Ridge & Stony Creek Rd.
 
Rolling Ridge stops
 
1052


Rolling Ridge & Woodland Dr.
 
Woodland Dr. stops
 
1052


Rosebud Dr. & 147th Pl.
 
147th Pl. stops
 
41-11-97


Rosebud Dr. & Gardenia Dr.
 
Gardenia Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


Rosebud Dr. & Lavender Dr.
 
Lavender Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


Rosedale Ct. & Abbey Dr.
 
Rosedale Ct.
 
17-5-10


Rosedowne Ct. & Landsowne Dr.
 
Rosedowne Ct.
 
17-5-10


Roudebush Farms, Section 1 & 2
 
 
 
 


  Searay Drive and Cobia Place
 
Cobia Place stops
 
90-12-03


  Searay Drive and Pacifica Place
 
Pacifica Place stops
 
90-12-03


  Searay Drive and Hansen Place
 
Hansen Place stops
 
90-12-03


  Searay Drive and Marlin Court
 
Marlin Court stops
 
90-12-03


  Searay Drive and 19151 Street
 
Searay Drive Stops
 
90-12-03


  Hylas Drive and Searay Drive
 
Searay Drive stops
 
90-12-03


  Godfrey Drive and Searay Drive
 
Godfrey Drive stops
 
90-12-03


Roudebush Woods
 
 
 
 


Amelia Court and Romney Drive
 
Amelia Court stops
 
46-10-02


Balfour Drive and Roudebush Blvd.
 
Balfour Drive stops
 
46-10-02


Bradley Drive and Balfour Drive
 
Bradley Drive stops
 
46-10-02


Bradley Drive and East 191st Street
 
Bradley Drive stops
 
46-10-02


Paxson Place and Upland Way
 
Paxson Place stops
 
46-10-02


Promise Place and Bradley Drive
 
Promise Place stops
 
46-10-02


Promise Place and Promise Road
 
Promise Place stops
 
46-10-02


Romney Drive and Balfour Drive
 
Romney Drive stops
 
46-10-02


Romney Drive and Gresham Place
 
Romney Drive stops
 
46-10-02


Roudebush Blvd. and Gresham Place
 
Roudebush Blvd. stops
 
46-10-02


  Upland Way and Roudebush Blvd.
 
Upland Way stops
 
46-10-02


Roxburgh Place and Ruthven Place
 
Ruthven Place - both ends
 
25-08-13


Roxbury Ln. & Coventry Way
 
Roxbury Lane stops
 
59-10-90


Royal Grove Ct. and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Royal Grove Ct. stops
 
07-03-13


Royal Grove Dr. and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Royal Grove Dr. stops
 
07-03-13


Rugby Ct. & Kensington Dr.
 
Rugby Ct.
 
17-5-10


Sagamore
 
 
 
 


  Glen Eagles Court and Golden Bear Way
 
Glen Eagles Court stops
 
45-10-02


  Golden Bear Circle and Golden Bear Way
 
Golden Bear Circle stops (both ends of street)
 
45-10-02


  Golden Bear Way and Union Chapel Road
 
Golden Bear Way stops
 
45-10-02


  Golden Bear Way and 166th Street
 
Golden Bear Way stops
 
45-10-02


  Hanbury Manor Blvd. and Morningside Court
 
Hanbury Manor Blvd. stops
 
45-10-02


  La Paloma Court and Golden Bear Way
 
La Paloma Court stops
 
45-10-02


  Lost Tree Place and Golden Bear Way
 
Lost Tree Place stops
 
45-10-02


  Morningside Court and Golden Bear Way
 
Morningside Court stops
 
45-10-02


  Park Meadows Court and Golden Bear Way
 
Park Meadows Court stops
 
45-10-02


  Shoal Park and Golden Bear Circle
 
Shoal Park stops
 
45-10-02


  Valhalla Drive and  Golden Bear Way
 
Valhalla Drive stops
 
45-10-02


Sagamore Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Golden Bear Way and Union Chapel Road
 
Golden Bear Way stops (east bound)
 
14-3-04


  Golden Bear Way and Ptarmigan Court
 
Ptarmigan Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Grand Cypress Drive and 166th Street
 
Grand Cypress Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Grand Cypress Drive and Collingtree Drive
 
Collingtree Drive stops (both ends)
 
14-3-04


  Golden Bear Way and Grand Cypress Drive
 
Golden Bear Way stops
 
14-3-04


  Grand Cypress Drive and Lapis Drive
 
Lapis Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Golden Bear Way and Vermont Court
 
Vermont Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Golden Bear Way and Winghaven Drive
 
Winghaven Drive stops (both ends)
 
14-3-04


  Ibis Court and Union Chapel Road
 
Ibis Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Shore Oaks Court and 166th Street
 
Shore Oaks Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Shore Oaks Court and Superstition Court
 
Superstition Court stops
 
14-3-04


Sandbrook Dr. & Sandbrook Ct.
 
Sandbrook Ct. stops
 
24-7-97


Sandbrook Dr. & Sandbrook Circle
 
Sandbrook Circle stops (south leg)
 
24-7-97


Sandlands Circle and Wolf Run Rd.
 
Sandlands Circle stops
 
07-03-13


Sapling Circle and Fawn Meadow Dr.
 
Sapling Circle stops
 
07-03-13


Saville Rd. & Kensington Dr.
 
Saville Rd.
 
17-5-10


Scarborough Circle and Oxford Drive
 
Scarborough Circle
 
46-9-08


Sedwick Court and Surrey Hill
 
Sedwick Court
 
46-9-08


Seminole Road and 161st Street
 
161st Street (east/west bound)
 
46-9-08


Setser St. & South St.
 
4-way stop
 
 


Settlers Mill Sec. 2
 
 
 
 


  Sommerwood Dr. and Orchid Court
 
Orchid Court stops
 
23-5-98


  Sommerwood Dr. & Windsor  Lane
 
4-way stop
 
41-11-97


  Sommerwood Dr. Windsor  Lane and Rosebud Dr.
 
3-way stop
 
41-11-97


  Wychwood Pl. and  Abercon Trail
 
Abercon Trail stops
 
40-11-99


Shadowcrest Ct. & Glasgow Ln.
 
Shadowcrest Ct.
 
17-5-10


Shannon Court and Banbury Road
 
Shannon Court
 
46-9-08


South Harbour Sec. 20
 
 
 
 


  Albemarle Circle and Beardon Ct.
 
Beardon Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


  Albemarle Circle and  Rutledge Ct.
 
Rutledge Ct. stops
 
30-9-99


  Elmwood Circle and  Sycamore Dr.
 
Sycamore Dr. stops
 
30-9-99


  Sycamore Dr. and  Albemarle Circle
 
Albemarle Circle stops
 
30-9-99


St. James Pl. & Westminster Dr.
 
St. James Pl.
 
17-5-10


Stable Chase and Fawn Meadow Dr.
 
Stable Chase stops
 
07-03-13


Standish Place
 
 
 
 


  Standish Place and  Calhoun Place
 
Calhoun Place stops
 
24-4-03


  Standish Place and Pierson Court
 
Pierson Court
 
24-4-03


  Standish Place and Adriana Court
 
Adriana Court
 
24-4-03


Stockton Dr. and Braxton Dr.
 
Stockton Dr.
 
25-08-13


Stockton Drive & Whitcomb Place
 
Stockton Drive stops
 
59-10-98


Stockton Drive & Wythe Drive
 
4-way stop
 
59-10-98


Stone Harbour & Drive State Road 38
 
Stone Harbour Drive stops
 
52-9-98


Stones Crossing Lane and Brookston Lane
 
Brookston Lane
 
25-08-13


Stones Crossing Lane and Cottage Grove Lane
 
Cottage Grove Lane
 
25-08-13


Stony Creek Circle & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Stony Creek Circle stops
 
58-12-95


Stoney Creek Marketplace
 
 
 
 


  Pleasant Street and Mercantile Blvd.
 
Mercantile Blvd. stops
 
90-12-03


Stoney Moon Dr. & Moon Lake Ct.
 
Moon Lake Ct.
 
13-2-05


Stoney Moon Dr. & Bright Moon Ct.
 
Stoney Moon Dr.
 
13-2-05


Stony Ridge
 
 
 
 


  166th St. and Stony Ridge Dr.
 
Stony Ridge Dr. stops
 
17-6-99


  Quartz Dr. and  Pyrite Ct.
 
Pyrite Ct. stops
 
17-6-99


Stony Ridge Dr. and Gemstone Dr.
 
All ways
 
12-2-05


  Stony Ridge Dr. and Jasper Ct.
 
Jasper Ct. stops
 
17-6-99


  Stony Ridge Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Beryl Drive and Stony Ridge Drive
 
Beryl Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Basalt Court and Quartz Drive
 
Basalt Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Quartz Drive and Beryl Drive
 
Quartz Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Little Eagle and Stony Ridge Drive
 
Little Eagle Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Stony Ridge Drive and Gemstone Drive
 
All ways stop
 
14-3-04


Strand Court and Capstone Court
 
Strand Court stops
 
50-9-98


Strathaven Rd. and Burliegh Place
 
Strathaven Rd.
 
25-08-13


Summit Rd. & Pine Hill Dr.
 
Summit Rd. stops
 
24-7-97


Sunset Dr. & Woodview Dr.
 
Woodview Dr. stops
 
1637


Sussex Circle and Roxbury Lane
 
Sussex Circle
 
46-9-08


Tamarack Ln. & Dogwood Ct.
 
Dogwood Court
 
34-08-12


Tiki Trail and Buck Run Dr.
 
Tiki Trail stops
 
07-03-13


Tiki Trail and Cold Stream Rd.
 
Tiki Trail stops
 
07-03-13


Timber Valley Dr. and Hearthfield Way
 
Hearthfield Way
 
25-08-13


Timbers Edge Dr. and Bluestone Dr.
 
Bluestone Dr.
 
25-08-13


Timbers Edge Dr. and Sweetwater Dr.
 
Timbers Edge Dr.
 
25-08-13


Tower Ct. & Westminster Dr.
 
Tower Ct.
 
17-5-10


Town and Country & Mercantile Blvd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
13-4-09


Town and Country Blvd. & Union Chapel Rd.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Town Center Blvd. & Harrell Pkwy.
 
Roundabout - all yield
 
23-8-11


Tradewinds Dr. & Dayflower Ct.
 
Mistflower Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Tradewinds Dr. & Foxglove Lane
 
Foxglove Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Tradewinds Dr. & Royal Fern Lane
 
Royal Fern Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Tremont Court and Queensbury Drive
 
Tremont Court
 
46-9-08


Trilbey Court and Westchester Blvd.
 
Trilbey Court
 
46-9-08


Walnut Way & Walnut Ct.
 
Walnut Court
 
34-08-12


Wandering Way and Bird Watch Way
 
Bird Watch Way stops
 
40-11-99


Wandering Way and Fawn Meadow Dr.
 
Fawn Meadow Dr. stops
 
40-11-99


Waterman Farms Subdivision
 
 
 
 


  Greenfield Avenue and Watson Boulevard
 
Watson Boulevard stops
 
14-3-04


  Venetian Court and Watson Boulevard
 
Venetian Court stops
 
14-3-04


  Watson Boulevard and War Admiral Court
 
Both streets stop
 
14-3-04


  War Admiral Drive and Winning Colors Drive
 
Winning Colors Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Winning Colors Drive and Seattle Slew Drive
 
Winning Colors Drive stops
 
14-3-04


  Winning Colors Drive and Seattle Slew Drive
 
Seattle Slew Drive stops (west bound only)
 
14-3-04


  War Emblem and Seattle Slew Drive
 
All directions stop
 
14-3-04


Watershed Court and Clarendon Drive
 
Watershed Court
 
46-9-08


Waterview Pt. & Carrigan Crossing
 
Waterview Pt. north intersection stops
 
58-12-95


Welham Ct. & Chesterfield Dr.
 
Welham Ct.
 
17-5-10


Welkin Court and Capstone Court
 
Welkin Court stops
 
50-9-98


Wellington Parkway & Abbey Rd.
 
Abbey Road stops
 
24-5-95


Wellington Parkway & Allisonville Rd.
 
Wellington Parkway
 
1487


Wellington Parkway & Chesterfield Dr.
 
Chesterfield Dr. stops
 
1509


Wellington Parkway & Glasgow Lane
 
Glasgow Lane stops
 
24-5-95


Wellington Parkway & Lansdowne Dr.
 
Lansdowne Drive stops
 
24-5-95


Wellington Parkway & Stony Creek Overlook
 
Stony Creek Overlook stops
 
1623


Wesley Circle and Harbor Trees Lane
 
Wesley Circle
 
46-9-08


Westminister Dr. & Allisonville Rd.
 
Westminister Dr. stops
 
1487


Westminister Dr. & Dover
 
Dover Rd. stops
 
 


Westridge Circle & Westridge North Dr. (East intersection)
 
Westridge Circle stops
 
10-2-90


Westridge Circle & Westridge North Dr. (West intersection)
 
Westridge North Dr. stops
 
10-2-90


Westridge South Dr. & River Rd.
 
Westridge South Dr. stops
 
10-2-90


Westridge North Dr. & River Rd.
 
Westridge North Dr. stops
 
10-2-90


Wexford Court and Roxbury Lane
 
Wexford Court
 
46-9-08


Whitcomb Place & SR #38
 
Whitcomb Place stops
 
4-1-97


Whitcomb Place & Stockton Dr.
 
Stockton Dr. stops
 
4-1-97


Whitcomb Place & Wythe Dr.
 
4-way stop
 
4-1-97


Whitcomb Ridge Sec. 3
 
 
 
 


  191st St. and Roudebush Blvd.
 
Roudebush Blvd. stops
 
40-11-99


  Roudebush Blvd. and Standish Pl.
 
Standish Pl. stops
 
40-11-99


  Roudebush Blvd. and Talisman Dr.
 
Talisman Dr. stops
 
40-11-99


  Talisman Dr. and Calhoun Pl.
 
Calhoun Pl. stops
 
40-11-99


  Wythe Dr. and Rodney Pl.
 
Rodney Pl. stops
 
40-11-99


  Wythe Dr. and Gwinnett Pl.
 
Gwinnett Pl. stops
 
40-11-99


Whitley Court and Banbury Road
 
Whitley Court
 
46-9-08


Willow Lake
 
 
 
 


  Griggs Drive and Willow Lakes Blvd.
 
Griggs Drive stops
 
46-10-02


  Trophy Lane and McKenna Way
 
Trophy Lane stops
 
46-10-02


  Willis Drive and Willow Lake Blvd.
 
Willis Drive stops
 
46-10-02


  Willow Lake Blvd. and 171st Street
 
Willow Lake Blvd. stops
 
46-10-02


Willow Pond Dr. and McKenna Way
 
McKenna Way
 
25-08-13


Willow Pond Dr. and  Willowleaf Court
 
Willowleaf Court
 
25-08-13


Willow Way & Cottonwood Circle
 
Cottonwood Circle
 
34-08-12


Willow Way & Willow Ct.
 
Willow Court
 
34-08-12


Willowview Rd. and Park 32 West Dr.
 
Park 32 West Dr.
 
25-08-13


Willowview Rd. and Willow Pond Dr.
 
Willow Pond Dr.
 
25-08-13


Wilshire Court and Roxbury Lane
 
Wilshire Court
 
46-9-08


Windsor Lane & Carnation Dr.
 
Carnation Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


Windsor Lane & Gardenia Lane
 
Gardenia Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


Windsor Lane & Lavender Dr.
 
Lavender Dr. stops
 
41-11-97


Windstone Circle, Piers End Drive, & Gretna Green Lane
 
Four-Way Stop
 
52-9-98


Windwood Parkway & 196th St.
 
Windwood Parkway stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Foxglove Lane
 
Foxglove Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Hollow Reed Court
 
Hollow Reed Court stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Mistflower Lane
 
Mistflower Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Royal Fern Lane
 
Royal Fern Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Wheatgrass Lane
 
Wheatgrass Lane stops
 
41-11-97


Windwood Parkway & Winter Berry Court
 
Winter Berry Court stops
 
41-11-97


Wintergreen Dr. & Hemlock Ct.
 
Hemlock Court
 
34-08-12


Wolf Run Rd. and Old Pond Rd.
 
Wolf Run Rd. stops
 
07-03-13


Woodview & Brown St.
 
Brown St. stops
 
1052


Woodview & Louise Dr.
 
Louise Dr. stops
 
1052


Wordsworth Ct. & Pemberly Ct.
 
Wordsworth Ct.
 
17-5-10


Wythe Dr. and Braxton Dr.
 
Wythe Dr.
 
25-08-13


Wythe Drive & Hewes Ct.
 
Hewes Ct. stops
 
4-1-97


Wythe Dr. and Hopkinson Dr.
 
Hopkinson Dr.
 
25-08-13


York Circle and Roxbury Lane
 
York Circle
 
46-9-08


Yorkshire Circle & Glasgow Lane
 
Glasgow Lane stops
 
3-8-92


Yorkshire Circle & Scarborough Way
 
Scarborough Way stops
 
3-8-92


Zelda & South St.
 
Zelda St. stops
 
1052


Zelda & Holland St.
 
Zelda St. stops
 
1052


Alley between Clinton/Logan Streets and 8th/9th Streets
 
Alley's both directions stop
 
38-7-98




 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



SCHEDULE IV. RESTRICTED TURNS.



 


STREET DIRECTION

 

LANE

 

BETWEEN

 

RESTRICTION

 

INTERSECTION

 

ORD. NO.





5th St.(north)
 
East
 
N/A
 
Right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
5th & Conner St.
 
1113


6th St. (north)
 
North
 
N/A
 
No left turn
 
Conner St.
 
41-09-14


8th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Maple & Conner
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
8th &
 
1113


8th St. (north)
 
East
 
Maple & Conner
 
Straight and right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
8th &
 


8th St. (north)
 
East
 
Conner & Logan St.
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
8th & Logan St.
 
1113


8th St. (north)
 
East
 
Conner & Logan St.
 
Straight and right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
8th & Logan St.
 


8th St. (south)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Logan St.
 
Left turn only for south-bound traffic at intersection
 
8th & Conner St.
 


8th St. (south)
 
West
 
Conner & Logan
 
Straight and right turn only for southbound traffic at intersecton
 
8th & Conner St.
 


Lakeview Dr. (south)
 
West
 
N/A
 
Right turn only
 
State Road 32
 
4-2-02


Logan St. (east)
 
Middle
 
6th & 8th
 
Left turn only for eastbound traffic at  intersection
 
8th & Logan St.
 


Logan St. (east)
 
South
 
6th & 8th
 
Straight and right turn for eastbound traffic at intersection
 
8th & Logan St.
 


9th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Maple
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
9th & Conner St.
 


9th St. (north)
 
East
 
Conner & Maple
 
Straight and right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
9th & Conner St.
 


9th St. (south)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Logan
 
Left turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
9th & Conner St.
 


9th St. (south)
 
West
 
Conner & Logan
 
Straight and right turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
9th & Conner
 


Pleasant St. (east and west)
 
Both
 
N/A
 
No left turn east- and west-bound
 
10th St.
 


10th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Maple
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Conner
 


10th St. (north)
 
East
 
Conner & Maple
 
Straight and right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Conner
 


10th St. (south)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Logan
 
Left turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Conner
 


10th St. (south)
 
West
 
Conner & Logan
 
Straight and right turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Conner
 


10th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Conner & Logan
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Logan
 


10th St. (north)
 
East
 
Conner & Logan
 
Straight and right turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Logan
 


10th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Christian & South
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Christian
 


10th St. (north)
 
East
 
Christian & South
 
Straight and right turn for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Christian
 


10th St. (south)
 
Middle
 
Christian & Chestnut
 
Left turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Christian
 


10th St. (south)
 
West
 
Christian & Chestnut
 
Straight and right turn only for south bound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Christian
 


10th St. (south)
 
Middle
 
Pleasant & Walnut
 
Left turn only for southbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Pleasant
 


10th St. (south)
 
West
 
Pleasant & Walnut
 
Straight and right turn only for south bound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Pleasant
 


10th St. (north)
 
Middle
 
Pleasant & Washington
 
Left turn only for northbound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Pleasant
 


10th St. (north)
 
East
 
Pleasant & Washington
 
Straight and right turn only for north bound traffic at intersection
 
10th & Pleasant
 


West Logan St.
 
Middle
 
SR 19 & Nixon
 
Left turn only for westbound traffic at intersection
 
West Logan & Nixon St.
 




 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 08-02-91, passed 3-11-91; Am. Ord.
4-2-02, passed 2-26-02; Am. Ord. 27-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 33-8-09,
passed 8-25-09)



SCHEDULE V.  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES



 


STREET

 

RESTRICTED ZONE

 

SIDE

 

ORD.NO.






South 6th St.

 

Conner to Maple St

 

Both Sides

 

1053




South 6th St.

 

Maple to Cherry St.

 

West

 

1053




8th St.(north)

 

Wayne St. to first  alley south

 

East

 





8th St. (north)

 

Logan to first alley north

 

West

 

21-5-96




N. 8th St.

 

Logan to Conner

 

West

 

6-20-92




South 8th St.

 

151 S. 8th to Hannibal St.

 

West

 

1053




South 8th St.

 

700 block

 

Both sides

 

1053




South 8th St.(south)

 

Conner to Cherry

 

East

 

11-3-96




9th St.

 

Conner St. to 1st alley south

 

East

 

1086




9th St.

 

9th between Conner and Logan St., the first 2 parking spaces north of Conner
St.

 

West

 

1112




10th St.

 

30 feet in each direction from the north and south back of the curb lines of
Monument St.

 

Both

 

50-10-17




N. 10th St.

 

Christian to South St.

 

West

 





N. 10th St.

 

Clinton to Wayne St.

 

West

 

41-11-97




N. 10th St.

 

Conner St. to Logan

 

East

 





N. 10th St.

 

100 feet N. of Conner St.

 

West

 

1053




N. 10th St.

 

Wayne to alley south

 

east

 

41-11-97




S. 10th St.

 

1100 block

 

Both sides

 

1053




S. 10th St.

 

First ½ block, N. of  Pleasant St.

 

Both sides

 





S. 10th St.

 

Maple south to first alley

 

Both sides

 





S. 10th St.

 

Conner to Maple St.

 

Both sides

 

1053




S. 10th St.

 

115 feet south of Pleasant St.

 

Both sides

 

1509




S. 10th St.

 

From Hannibal to Division St.

 

East

 





N. 11th St.

 

Logan to Conner St.

 

East

 

1053




S. 11th St.

 

Hannibal to Vine St.

 

West

 

1053




S. 11th St.

 

Hannibal to Cherry St.

 

East

 





S. 11th St.

 

Mulberry to Christian St.

 

East

 

1053




N. 12th St.

 

Monument to Harrison St.

 

West

 

1053




N. 12th St.

 

Monument to 1st alley N.of North St.

 

West

 

1053




N. 12th St.

 

Conner to Logan St.

 

East

 

1053




S. 12th St.

 

Maple Avenue to first alley north

 

West

 

42-12-91




13th St.

 

Between Christian St. and Pleasant St.

 

West

 

20-3-05




N. 14th St.

 

Monument to Conner St.

 

West

 

1053




S. 14th St.

 

Conner to Cherry St.

 

East

 

1053




S. 14th St.

 

Hannibal to Division St.

 

West

 

1053; 17-04-91; 37-9-92




15th St.

 

Between Harrison St. and Wayne St.

 

Both

 

01-01-13




16th St.

 

Between Pleasant St. and Greenfield Ave.

 

West

 

41-9-00




N. 16th St.

 

Conner to Harrison St.

 

West

 

40-11-94/11-28-94




N. 16th St.

 

Conner to Wayne St.

 

East

 

40-11-94/11-28-94




S. 16th St.

 

Hannibal to Cherry St.

 

West

 





S. 16th St.

 

South St. to Woodland Dr.

 

West

 





S. 16th St.

 

Pleasant to South St.

 

Both

 





S. 17th St.

 

Hannibal to Cherry St.

 

Both sides

 

1053




17th St.

 

Clinton St. to Logan St.

 

West

 

19-5-97




N. 18th St.

 

Harrison to Monument St.

 

East

 

1053




S. 19th St.

 

Conner to Pleasant

 

Both

 

16-3-90




136th St./ Frontage Rd.

 

Brooks School Rd. to Hoard Dr.

 

Both

 

47-10-07




146th St.

 

S.R. 37 to Marilyn Rd.

 

Both

 

47-10-07




146th St.

 

Between Boden Rd. and Olio Rd.

 

Both

 

46-9-08




156th St.

 

Follow Dr. to Runaway

 

South

 

17-5-10




Abercon Trail

 


 

North

 

40-11-99




Allisonville Road

 

Between Carbon and Wellington Parkway

 

East

 

41-9-02




Aulton Dr.

 

Stoney Creek Road to Lowell Drive

 

East

 

23-5-98




Bannister Dr.

 

Belfry Dr. to Black Farm Dr.

 

East/north

 

41-8-07




Bataan Court

 

S.R. 32 including cul-de-sac

 

Both

 

31-07-12




Belfry Dr.

 

Clapboard Dr. to Cuppola Dr.

 

South

 

41-8-07




Bird Watch Way

 

From 15190 to 15234 Bird Watch Way

 

East

 

46-9-04




Bismarck Dr.

 

North of Pleasant St.

 

Both

 

21-06-14




Black Farm Dr.

 

50 ft. south of Weathervane Dr. to Belfry Dr.

 

West

 

41-8-07




Boden Rd.

 

156th St. to Campus Pkwy.

 

Both

 

47-10-07




Brady Ln.

 

Tiki Trail to Royal Grove

 

South

 

30-8-09




Brocket Circle

 

Fawn Hollow Lane to 11889 Brocket Circle

 

South

 

11-2-05




Bruce Blvd.

 

Between 5611 and Linda Way

 

North

 

82-9-06




Buck Creek Circle

 

Fawn Hollow Lane to 11845 Buck Creek Circle

 

South

 

11-2-05




Buck Run

 

Dry Creek Rd. to Royal Grove Dr.

 

South

 

30-8-09




Butterfly Dr.

 

Clover to Dragonfly

 

Both

 

21-06-14




Cabela Pkwy.

 

From Campus Pkwy. to 136th St./Frontage Road

 

Both sides

 

30-06-15




Campus Pkwy.

 

Marilyn Rd. to I-69

 

Both

 

47-10-07




Carbon St.

 

9th to 10th St.

 

South

 

1053




Carey Drive

 

From the north right-of-way line of S.R. 32 to a point 200 feet north

 

Both

 

36-06-16




Carrigan Rd.

 

Hague Rd. to west city limits

 

Both sides

 

12-8-88




Cat Tail Ct.

 

From 11991 to 11997 Cat Tail Court

 

South

 

46-9-04




Center Dr.

 

From North St. to 9th St.

 

East

 

1053




Central Ave.

 

Between 14th St. and 16th St.

 

South

 

32-05-03




Central Ave.

 

Between 14th St. and 16th St.

 

South

 

32-05-03




Cherry St.

 

18th St., to 2nd alley east of 13th St.

 

South

 

20-05-91




Cherry St.

 

18th to 13th St.

 

South

 

1053/ 20-05-91




Cherry St.

 

6th St. to 5th St.

 

North

 

34-8-93/ 8-9-93




Cherry Street

 

From west edge of southbound lane of 19th Street to a point 70 feet west

 

North

 

11-02-16




Chestnut St.

 

10th St. to 9th St.

 

North

 

1198




Christian St.

 

8th St. to 10th St.

 

Both

 

82-9-06




Clapboard Dr.

 

Belfry Dr. to Lindley Dr.

 

East

 

41-8-07




Clapboard Dr.

 

Lindley Dr. to Maize Dr.

 

West

 

41-8-07




Clarendon Dr.

 

Carrigan Rd. to Newport Dr.

 

Both

 

31-07-12




Clinton St.

 

10th to 17th St.

 

South

 

1053




Clinton St.

 

Two spaces east of 11th St.

 

North

 

1053




Clinton St.

 

10th west to alley

 

Both

 

1053




Clover Road

 

Pleasant Street to Stony Creek Road

 

Both

 

23-5-98




Conner St.

 

10th St. to S.R. 37

 

Both

 





Conner St.

 

White River to 8th St.

 

Both

 





Conner St.

 

8th St. to 6th St.

 

North

 

6-20-92




Conner St.

 

9th to first alley east

 

North

 





Conner St.

 

10th to first alley west

 

South

 





Creekside at Cedar Black Antler Dr.

 

Path Sec. 1 St. Rd. 238 to Fawn Hollow Lane

 

Both

 

40-11-99




Crossbridge Dr.

 

From north edge of the westbound travel lane of  S.R. 38 to a point 250 feet
northward along the centerline of Crossbridge Dr.

 

Both

 

41-09-14




Cumberland Rd.

 

Field Dr. to Cherry St.

 

Both

 

1625




Cumberland Rd.

 

Between Greenfield Ave./ Cumberland Pointe Blvd.

 

Both

 

4-1-08




Cumberland Pointe Blvd.

 

Golden Dr. to Cumberland Rd.

 

Both

 

10-04-18




Cuppola Dr.

 

Lindley Dr. to Weathervane Dr.

 

West

 

41-8-07




Dakota Drive

 

From Hague Road to Cherokee Lane

 

Both sides

 

30-06-15




Deertail Dr.

 

Deerview Dr. to Dry Creek Rd.

 

West & North

 

30-8-09




Division St.

 

6th St. to 8th St.

 

South

 

32-6-95




Division St.

 

10th to 14th St. and
16th to 18th St.

 

North

 

1053; 21-06-14




Division St.

 

Between 10th and 11th Streets (Except Sundays)

 

North

 

41-9-00




Dlarendon Dr.

 

Drayton Dr. to Church property

 

Both

 

17-5-10




Douglas Floyd Pkwy.

 

East of Edgar Way

 

Both

 

01-02-12




Doverton Dr.

 

Little Chicago to Tooley Court

 

Both

 

23-8-11




Drayton Dr.

 

From the north edge of northernmost westbound travel lane along the east edge
of the northbound lane of Drayton Dr. to a point 245 feet north

 

Both

 

57-09-16




Dry Creek Rd.

 

Greenfield Ave. to Deerview Dr.

 

Both

 

30-8-09




Dusty Trail

 

From 15564 to 15334  Dusty Trail

 

East

 

46-9-04




Edgewater Dr.

 

100 feet south of  Carrigan Rd.

 

East

 

26-5-95




Edgewater Dr.

 

Parking circle in front of 142 Edgewater Dr.

 

Both

 

01-01-13




Edgewater Dr.

 

209th Street south to end

 

East

 

50-12-13




Endeavor Dr.

 

BothCumberland Pointe Blvd to end

 


 

10-04-18




Fawn Hollow Lane

 

15160 to 14670 Fawn Hollow Lane

 

Same as addresses

 

11-2-05




Fawn Meadow Dr.

 

Locus Lane to Wandering Way

 

East

 

46-9-04




Field Dr.

 

10th to 16th St.

 

Both

 

16-5-94/5-23-94




Field Drive

 

Cumberland Rd. to 16th Street

 

South

 

42-8-96




Follow Dr.

 

St. Rd. 238 to 156th St.

 

East

 

40-11-99




Follow Dr.

 

St. Rd. 238 to Wandering Way

 

West

 

40-11-99




Forest Ridge Drive

 

Forest Ridge Drive

 

West

 

90-12-03




Gerald St.

 

9th St. to first alley east

 

North

 

50-10-17




Grant St.

 

10th to 11th St.

 

North

 

1053




Greenfield Ave.

 

Between Boden Rd. and Marilyn Rd.

 

Both

 

46-9-08




Gwinnett Pl.

 

Lot 128 to Wythe Dr.

 

South

 

40-11-99




Hannibal St.

 

10th St. east 3 spaces (school buses)

 

South

 





Hannibal St.

 

Meek to 17th St.

 

Both

 

1053




Harrell Pkwy.

 

Campus Pkwy. to Hoard Dr.

 

Both

 

47-10-07




Harrell Pkwy.

 

West property line of Hamilton Town Center to Corporate Pkwy.

 

Both

 

47-10-07




Harrell Pkwy.

 

West property line of Hamilton Town Center to terminus

 

Both sides

 

30-06-15




Harrison St.

 

18th to 19th St.

 

South

 

1053




Harrison St.

 

10th to 16th St.

 

South

 

1053




Hazel Dell Rd.

 

146th St. to S.R. 32

 

Both

 

13-4-09




Herman Blvd.

 

From Greenfield Ave. to Stony Creek Overlook

 

Southwest

 

47-9-04




Hillcrest St.

 

Woodland to Stony Creek Rd.

 

West

 

1053




Holland St.

 

Setser St. to 15th St.

 

South

 

75-10-89




Inside Trail

 

Outside Trail to Dusty Trail

 

North

 

46-9-04




Jared Court

 

All

 

Both

 

01-02-12




Lafayette Road

 

Lakeview Drive to S.R. 38

 

Both

 

11-02-16




Lindley Dr.

 

Cuppola Dr. to Marilyn Dr.

 

North

 

41-8-07




Little Chicago St.

 

Corporate limits north to corporate limits south

 

Both sides

 

19-5-97




Locus Lane

 

Wandering Way to Follow Dr.

 

North

 

46-9-04




Logan St.

 

6th St. west to S.R. 19

 

Both

 





Logan St.

 

8th St. west to first alley

 

South

 

1605




Logan St.

 

S.R. 19 to S.R. 38

 

Both

 

10-2-90




Logan St.

 

Within 60 ft. of the East end of the Logan St. Bridge

 

South

 

32-05-03




Lovely Dove Ln.

 

Deerview Dr. to Deertrail Dr.

 

East

 

30-8-09




Lowell Dr.

 

Stony Creek Road to Aulton Drive

 

Both

 

23-5-98




Maize Dr.

 

In front of 12163 Maize Dr.

 

South

 

23-8-11




Maize Dr.

 

Woods Dr. to Clapboard Dr.

 

Both

 

41-8-07




Maize Dr.

 

Woods Dr. to Cuppola Dr.

 

North

 

41-8-07




Maple Ave.

 

5th to 6th St.

 

North

 

1053




Maple Ave.

 

6th to 9th St.

 

South

 

1053




Maple Avenue

 

8th to first alley east

 

North

 

25-6-93/7-12-93




Maple Ave.

 

9th east to first alley

 

North

 





Maple Ave.

 

10th to 16th St.

 

North

 

1053




Maple Ave.

 

10th east to first alley

 

South

 

1053




Marie Court

 

From Dakota Dr. to cul-de-sac

 

West

 

57-09-16




Marilyn Road

 

From 146th St. to 465 feet north of 146th St.

 

East

 

56-12-18




Meek St.

 

Cherry to Hannibal St.

 

Both

 

1078




Mercantile Blvd.

 

From Stony Creek to northern limits

 

Both

 

35-7-01




Monument St.

 

30 feet east of east back of curb line of 10th St.

 

North

 

50-10-17




Monument St.

 

94 feet west of west back of curb line of 10th St.

 

North

 

50-10-17




Monument St.

 

Two spaces west of 11th St.

 

North

 

1053




Monument St.

 

9th to 16th St.

 

South

 

1053




Monument St.

 

30 feet in each direction from the east and west backs of curb lines of 10th
St.

 

South

 

50-10-17




Monument St.

 

Cumberland Rd. to 16th Street

 

Both

 

42-8-96




Mulberry St.

 

8th St. to 9th St.

 

South

 

14-3-11




Nixon St.

 

S.R. 32, 38 (Conner St.) North to end of Nixon St.

 

Both sides

 

1621




North Drive

 

West of 10th St.

 

Both

 

82-9-06




North Point Blvd.

 

Cumberland Rd. south to the dead end

 

Both

 

4-1-08




North Pointe Blvd.

 

North of 150th Street

 

Both

 

01-02-12




North St.

 

16th St. to 10th St.

 

North

 

1053




Outside Trail

 

From 15412 to 15586 Outside Trail

 

East/South

 

46-9-04




Outside Trail Court

 

From 12175 to 12225  Outside Trail Court

 

South

 

46-9-04




Pleasant St.

 

4th to 10th

 

South

 

1053




Pleasant St.

 

10th to S.R. 37

 

Both

 





Plum St.

 

10th to 13th St.

 

South

 





Plum St.

 

10th to 8th St.

 

North

 

1053




Plum St.

 

6th St. east 2 spaces

 

North

 

1053




Presley Drive

 

From S.R. 32/38 North to terminus

 

Both sides

 

30-06-15




Presley Drive

 

Pleasant St. to S.R. 32/38

 

Both

 

36-06-16




Promenade Shops Blvd. and all entrances from S.R. 32 to Promenade Shops Blvd.

 

Mill Creek Road to Little Chicago Road

 

Both

 

36-06-16




Promise Road

 

From 146th St. to 405 feet north of 146th St.

 

East

 

56-12-18




Pronghorn Circle

 

Fawn Hollow Lane to 11843 Pronghorn Circle

 

South

 

11-2-05




Prosperity Dr.

 

Publicly dedicated street section

 

Both

 

21-06-14




Roeriver Ct.

 

Fawn Hollow Lane to 14631 Roeriver Ct.

 

West

 

11-2-05




Rolling Ridge

 

Stony Creek to north end Dr.

 

East

 

1053




Royal Grove Dr.

 

Buck Run Dr. to Brady Ln.

 

East

 

30-8-09




Sapling Circle

 

From 11925 to 11951 Sapling Circle

 

South

 

46-9-04




South Street

 

100' east of Setser Street

 

North

 

33-08-14




Stable Chase

 

Ten Point Drive to Fawn Meadow

 

South

 

46-9-04




Ten Point Drive

 

Locus Lane to Wandering Way

 

West

 

46-9-04




Tiki Trail

 

Buck Run Dr. to dead end

 

West

 

30-8-09




Timberstream Dr.

 

Drive for storm water BMP in easement on Lots 105 and 106 in Section 3 of
Slater Ridge (17173 and 17185 Timberstream Dr.

 

West

 

57-09-16




Vine St.

 

10th St. to 13th St.

 

South

 

17-5-10




Walnut St.

 

10th to 11th St.

 

North

 

1053




Walnut Way

 

5210 through 5336 Walnut Way

 

Same side as addresses

 

60-10-04




Wandering Way

 

From 15155 to 15505 Wandering Way

 

South/West

 

46-9-04




Wapiti Way

 

11947 to 11801 Wapiti

 

Same as addresses

 

11-2-05




Washington St.

 

8th to 9th St.

 

North

 

1053




Wayne St.

 

8th to 16th St.

 

North

 

1053




Wayne St.

 

16th to 17th St.

 

South

 





Weathervane Dr.

 

Cuppola Dr. to Marilyn Rd.

 

South

 

41-8-07




Whitcomb Ridge

 

S.R. 38 to Stockton Dr.

 

Both

 

17-5-10




White Tail Run

 

Fawn Hollow Lane to 14604 White Tail Run

 

East

 

11-2-05




White Tail Run

 

14689 to 14785 White Tail Run

 

Same as addresses

 

11-2-05




Wolf Run Court

 

From 15386 to 13316 Wolf Run Court

 

East

 

46-9-04




Wolf Run Road

 

Follow Drive to Dusty Trail

 

North

 

46-9-04




Woodland Dr.

 

Lowell Drive to 125 feet west

 

Both

 

23-5-98




Woodland St.

 

16th to Rolling Ridge Dr.

 

South

 

1053




Woods Dr.

 

Maize Dr. to 141st St.

 

East

 

41-8-07




Buttonwood Dr.

 

Little Chicago Rd. to end of Buttonwood Dr. in West Harbour

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Coffee Tree Ct.

 

Firethorn Circle to and including cul-de-sac at end of Coffee Tree Ct.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Deerberry Ct.

 

Deerberry Dr. to and including cul-de-sac at end of Deerberry Ct.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Deerberry Dr.

 

Entire length of drive

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Firethorn Cir.

 

Little Chicago Rd. to and including cul-de-sac at end of Firethorn Circle

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Hemlock Ct.

 

Wintergreen Dr. to and including cul-de-sac at end of Hemlock Ct.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Poplar Dr.

 

Entire length of drive

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Red Bay Ct.

 

Red Bay Dr. to and including cul-de-sac at end of Red Bay Ct.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Red Bay Dr.

 

Buttonwood Dr. to Wintergreen Dr.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Roudebush Blvd.

 

191st St. to Lot 96

 

East

 

40-11-99




Stony Creek Road

 

Clover Road to Rolling Ridge Drive

 

North

 

23-5-98




Stony Creek

 

Clover Road to 16th Street

 

South

 

23-5-98




Stony Ridge Dr.

 

166th St. to Jasper Dr.

 

Both

 

31-07-12




Stony Ridge Dr.

 

Jasper Dr. to Gemstone Dr.

 

West

 

31-07-12




Talisman Dr.

 

Lot 24 to Roudebush Dr.

 

South

 

40-11-99




Town and Country

 

S.R. #37 to end west Country Blvd.

 

Both

 

23-5-98




Town and Country

 

From Clover Rd. to Country Blvd. eastern limits

 

Both

 

35-7-01




Wandering Way

 

Follow Dr. to Fawn Meadow Dr.

 

North

 

40-11-99




Wandering Way

 

In front of 15306 only

 

East

 

07-03-13




Wintergreen Dr.

 

Poplar Dr. to Red Bay Dr.

 

Where "No Parking" signs erected

 

1310




Wychwood Pl.

 

Lot 53 to Lot 58

 

East

 

40-11-99




Wythe Dr.

 

Lot 114 to Lot 124

 

East

 

40-11-99










(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



SCHEDULE VI. PARKING PROHIITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



 


STREET

 

RESTRICTED ZONE

 

PARKING

 

ORD.NO.






8th St.

 

West side between Logan & Conner Sts.   

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Mondays

 

1449




8th St.

 

East side between Logan & Conner Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Tuesdays

 

1449




9th St.

 

West side between Logan & Conner Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Tuesdays

 

1449




9th St.

 

East side between Logan & Corner Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Mondays

 

1449




10th St.

 

West side between Logan & Conner Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Tuesdays

 

1449




S. 10th St.

 

West side 1621 S. 10th St.

 

No parking (except Sundays)

 

1053




S. 10th St.

 

1200 block west side

 

No parking (except Sundays)

 

1053




Conner

 

North side between 8th & 10th Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Tuesdays

 

1449




Conner

 

South side between 8th & 10th Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Mondays

 

1449




Logan

 

North side between 8th & 10th Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Mondays

 

1449




Logan

 

South side between 8th & 10th Sts.

 

No parking 3:00 a.m.-6:00 a.m. Tuesdays

 

1449




Monument St.

 

South side between 9th & 10th Sts.

 

No parking when Noblesville Public Schools are in session from 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.

 

65-11-90




South Harbor Dr.

 

East side of South Harbor Dr. from the south side of Elmwood Circle to a
point 155 feet south of Elmwood Circle

 

No parking 7:00 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m.on school days

 

21-06-14




Wayne St.

 

North side as marked by signs at 1243 Wayne St. (expires when no longer
needed by school district)

 

ADA school loading zone 7:30 a.m.-8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m. on school
days

 

50-10-17





 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 56-12-18, passed 12-18-18)



SCHEDULE VII. PARKING TIME LIMITED



ALL REGULATED PARKING ENFORCED 8:00 A.M. TO 5:00 P.M.
MONDAY THRU FRIDAY EXCLUSIVE OF HOLIDAYS



 


STREET OR DISTRICT

 

RESTRICTED ZONE

 

TIME LIMIT

 

ORD.NO.






S. 3rd St.

 

Plum to first alley south east side

 

15 minutes

 





N. 6th St.

 

Logan to 1st alley south (both sides)

 

2 hours

 





N. 8th St.

 

Clinton to Conner St. both sides

 

2 hours

 

6-2-93/2-22-93




N. 9th St.

 

Clinton St. to first alley northwest side

 

2 hours

 

19-3-90




9th St.

 

Clinton to Cherry St. (west side)

 

2 hours

 





N. 9th St.

 

Clinton to Conner St. (east side) except where posted

 

2 hours

 





S. 9th St.

 

Cherry to first alley north of Maple (east side)

 

2 hours

 





10th St.

 

West side just north of Logan St. (970 Logan St.)

 

2 hours

 

20-6-02




10th St.

 

From Clinton north to the first alley (east side)

 

2 hours

 

4-1-08




S. 10th St.

 

Cherry to first alley north

 

2 hours

 

1053




N. 10th St. 

 

Harrison to Monument east side

 

15 minutes

 





N. 10th St.

 

East side from Logan St. to Clinton St.

 

2 hours

 

1271; 86-11-89




N. 10th St.

 

1st alley north of Logan to 1st alley south Logan St. on the west side

 

2 hours

 

86-11-89




N. 10th St.

 

100' north of Conner Street west side

 

30 minutes

 





S. 17th St.

 

Both sides, Maple to Cherry St.

 

2 hours

 

1053




Cherry St.

 

N. side, 17th to 16th St.

 

2 hours

 

1053




Clinton St.

 

8th St. to the 1st alley east of 9th St., both sides

 

2 hours

 

86-11-89




Clinton St.

 

8th St. to 9th St. north side

 

2 hours

 

19-3-90




Conner St.

 

Both sides 8th to 9th St.

 

2 hours

 

1053




Conner St.

 

6th St. to 8th St. north side

 

2 hours

 

21-7-94




Conner St. (south)

 

9th to first alley east

 

2 hours

 

1053




Conner St. (north)

 

10th to first alley west

 

2 hours

 

1053




Conner St. parking lot

 

4 parking spaces

 

2 hours

 

42-9-93/9-27-93




Division St.

 

N. side 8th to 9th St.

 

15 minutes

 

1053




Division St.

 

Between 15th St. and 18th St. south side

 

2 hours

 

21-3-05




Downtown S. 9th St. parking lot

 

8 parking spaces

 

2 hours

 

42-9-93




Logan St.

 

Both sides from Logan Street over White River to 12th St. (Except where
otherwise posted)

 

2 hours

 

39-9-92




Maple Ave.

 

Two spaces immediately east of alley between 9th & 10th St., north side

 

2 hours

 





Maple Ave.

 

South side-first alley east of 10th to 12th St.

 

2 hours

 

1053




Maple Ave.

 

North side of 9th to first alley west

 

2 hour

 

25-6-93




Maple Ave.

 

9th St. 1/2 block west (south side)

 

2 hours

 

3-1-93/1-25-93




Maple Ave.

 

9th to 10th St. south

 

2 hours

 





Maple St.

 

6th St. to 8th St.
north side

 

2 hours

 

17-5-10




Maple St.

 

Walk Alley to 9th St.
south side

 

2 hours

 

17-5-10




Wayne St.

 

9th St. to first alley east

 

2 hours

 

33-08-14




All marked spaces in the Armory Lot located on the north side of Logan
Street, immediately east of White River - $1 per hour; $.25 for each 15
minutes

 

8 hour limit

 

7-29-92




All metered areas on the city streets with exceptions of parking lots

 

12 hours

 

1053




All paved surface metered parking lots

 

8 hours, except as noted

 

39-6-90




Five meters at the northwest corner of the Conner St. public parking lot

 

2 hours

 

44-7-90





 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 43-09-15, passed 9-29-15)



SCHEDULE VIII. STREETS TO BE USED BY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES WEIGHING 5,000 LBS.
OR MORE.



   (A)   The following designated streets shall be used by commercial
vehicles weighing from 5,000 pounds to 11,000 pounds:



 


STREET

 

BETWEEN

 

ORD. NO.





6th St.
 
Conner and Irving St.
 
34-8-93/8-9-93


8th St.
 
Conner and Carbon St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76


10th St.
 
City limits, north and south
 
'61 Code, 16.76


17th St.
 
Division and Conner St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


18th St.
 
Division and Conner St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


146th St.
 
City limits east to west
 
34-8-93/8-9-93


Carbon St.
 
8th and 10th St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76


Chestnut St.
 
10th and 2nd St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


Christian Ave.
 
10th and 2nd St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


Division St.
 
6th and 18th St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


GreenfieldAve.
 
S.R. 37 and 10th St.
 


Hannibal St.
 
6th and 18th St.
 
'61 Code, 16.76/45-9-04


Herriman  Blvd.
 
146th St. on the south to north property line of Stony Creek Industrial Park
on north
 
3-12-92/45-9-04


River Road
 
S.R. #38 and city limits south
 
34-8-93
8-9-93




 



   (B)   Any street within the corporate limits of the city that uses
paving brick for its surface shall have a maximum weight limit of 5,000
pounds.



   (C)   Exceptions to the above are city public safety and maintenance
vehicles, utility and private maintenance vehicles receiving city permits and
school buses accessing approved corridors.



   (D)   (1)   All trucks rated for more than 20,000 pounds are
prohibited from using the following street:



 


STREET

 

BETWEEN

 

ORD. NO.



161st St.
 
River Rd. to Gray Rd.
 
12-04-13


Cherry Tree Rd.
 
146th St. to State Rd. 32
 
12-04-13



 



      (2)   This division shall not apply to trucks making
deliveries or providing services to private property served by the above
streets.



      (3)   Any operator of a vehicle who violates the terms of this
division shall be guilty of an infraction and may be fined up to $2,500 per
offense. Every trip shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 3-12-92, passed 3-23-92; Am. Ord.
32-8-94, passed 9-26-94; Am. Ord. 45-9-04, passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 12-04-13,
passed 4-9-13)



SCHEDULE IX. NO PASSING AREAS.



 


LOCATION

 

DOUBLE YELLOW

 

ORD. NO.





River Rd. from city limits to S.R.32
 

1,450 ft.

 

1507



Lakeview Dr. from S.R. 32 to 186th St.
 

3,620 ft.

 

1507



From 186th St. and Lakeview west to end of curve
 

2,730 ft.

 

1507



From end of curve, north to city limits
 

2,325 ft.

 

1507



Pleasant St. from S.R. 37 to 13th St.
 

3,580 ft.

 

1507



Stony Creek from 10th St. to city limits
 

3,140 ft.

 

1507



Cumberland Rd. between Cherry St. & Conner St.
 

565 ft.

 

1507



Cumberland Rd. from Conner St. north to Field Drive
 


 

1507



8th St. from Clinton to Carbon
 

No passing both directions

 

1601



9th St. from Clinton to Carbon
 

No passing both directions

 

1601



10th St. from city limits north to Christian Ave.
 

2,425 ft.

 

1507



10th St. from Christian Ave. north to Conner St.
 

3,085 ft.

 

1507



10th St. from north of Conner St. to just south of Clinton St.
 

476 ft.

 

1507



10th St. from Clinton St. north to city limits
 

3,955 ft.

 

1507



10th St. from Carbon St. to Field Dr.
 

No passing  both directions

 

1601



N. 10th St. from Field Dr. to north city limits
 

(Refer to Exhibit D detail layout)

 

1601



S. 10th St. from south city limits to Carbon St.
 

(Refer to Exhibit C for detail layout)

 

1601



16th St. from Conner St. to Field Dr.
 

4,035 ft.

 

1507



South Harbour Dr. at the intersection of Elmwood Cir.
 

780 ft.

 

1507



Little Chicago Rd. from city limits to Carrigan Rd.
 

No passing both directions

 

1507



(refer to Exhibit A for detail layout)
 

Southbound 920 ft. Passing only

 

1507



 

Northbound 1,061 ft. passing only

 

1507



 

Passing both directions 4,316 ft.

 

507



Little Chicago Rd. from south city limits to north city limits
 

(Refer to Exhibit A for detail layout)

 

1601



Carrigan Rd. from  Little Chicago Rd. to causeway/city Eastbound limits
 

No passing both directions
3,956 ft.
1,294 ft.

 

1507
1507



(refer to Exhibit B Westbound for detail layout
 

Passing only 957 ft.
Passing both directions 449 ft.

 

1507
1507



Carrigan Rd. from Little Chicago Rd. westward 180 ft. (refer to Exhibit B for
detail layout)
 

No passing both directions

 




Carrigan Rd. from Little Chicago Rd. to causeway/city limits
 

(Refer to Exhibit B for detail layout)

 

1601





 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89)



SCHEDULE X.  RESTRICTED PARKING ALL TIMES TAXI ZONES/LOADING ZONES.



 


STREET

 

LOCATION

 

ZONE



S. 9th St.
 
1st space south of Conner St.
 
Loading zone 30 minutes


S. 9th St.
 
 
Taxi Zone


S. 9th St.
 
1st alley south of alley between Maple Ave. and Conner (west side)
 
Loading zone 30 minutes



 



(Ord. 65-7-89, passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. 35-5-90, passed 6-25-90; Am. Ord.
6-2-93, passed 2-22-93; Am. Ord. 53-12-93, passed 12-27-93; Am. Ord. 3-1-94,
passed 2-14-94; Am. Ord. 20-6-02, passed 6-11-02)



SCHEDULE XI.  DIAGONAL PARKING SCHEDULE.



   Where diagonal parking spaces are provided for pursuant to this
schedule, vehicles occupying those parking spaces may only be parked with the
front of the car at the curb, that vehicle being entirely between the lines
painted to identify a parking stall.  Diagonal parking is provided for under
the terms of this schedule initially at the following locations:



 


STREET

 

SIDE

 

BETWEEN



9th St.
 
Both
 
Conner St. and Logan St.


Harrell Pkwy.
 
Both
 
Hoard Dr. to west property line of Hamilton Town Center


Hoard Dr.
 
Both
 
Harrell Pkwy. to 136th St./Frontage Rd.


Logan Street
 
Both
 
9th St. and 8th St.



 



(Ord. 75-12-90, passed 12-21-90; Am. Ord. 47-10-07, passed 10-9-07)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION CODE



      93.   NUISANCES



      94.   ENCROACHMENT SPECIFICATIONS



      95.   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



      96.   WATER CONSERVATION



      97.   STREET TREES



      98.   PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS



      99.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      100.   CABLE TELEVISION



      101.   FAIR HOUSING POLICY



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Appropriate shelter



   90.03   Hitching or tying



   90.04   Food and water



   90.05   Vaccination; tags



   90.06   Medical care, generally



   90.07   Removal of excrement



   90.08   Sanitation



   90.09   Wild or exotic animals



   90.10   Property required for stabling



   90.11   Restraint



   90.12   Cruelty



   90.13   Fighting



   90.14   Poisonous bait



   90.15   Motor-vehicle caused injuries



   90.16   Animals in vehicles



   90.17   Training methods



   90.18   Animals in heat/sterilization of dogs and cats



   90.19   Abandonment



   90.20   Public nuisance animals



   90.21   Dangerous animals prohibited



   90.22   Puppy and kitten sale



   90.23   Animals as prizes or inducements



   90.24   Dyed animals



   90.25   Animals as novelties



   90.26   Certain animals prohibited



   90.27   Prohibited animal events



   90.28   Destruction of animals



   90.29   Hauling dead animals



   90.30   Noisy dogs



   90.31   Feeding birds prohibited



   90.32   Interfering with enforcement



   90.33   Enticing animals of another



   90.34   Animal sacrifice



   90.35   Lost or stray animals



   90.36   Biting animals to be reported; not to be destroyed; exception



   90.37   Impoundment



   90.38   Provisions supplemental to state regulations




Registration and Permits




   90.45   [Reserved]



   90.46   [Reserved]



   90.47   Veterinary hospitals; clinics; grooming salons



   90.48   Animal control shelter; animal welfare organization



   90.49   [Reserved]



   90.50   Inspection



   90.51   [Reserved]



   90.52   [Reserved]




Impoundment; Redemption




   90.65   Grounds for and conditions of impoundments



   90.66   Redemption




Destruction of Animals




   90.75   Substances permitted for use



   90.76   Person authorized to destroy animals



   90.77   Assurance of death prior to disposal



   90.78   Class A infraction




Administration and Enforcement




   90.85   Director



   90.98   Disposition of monies



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ABANDONMENT."  To deposit, leave, drop off or otherwise dispose of
any live domestic animal without providing immediate humane care on any
public or private property.



   "ALTERED ANIMAL."  Any animal that has been operated on to prevent it
from procreating.



   "AGENT."  Any person 18 years of age or older authorized by an owner
to act on the owner's behalf.



   "ANIMAL."  Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, except human
beings.



   "ANIMAL CONCESSION."  Any spectacle, display, act or event, other than
circuses, in which animals are used.



   "ANIMAL SACRIFICE."  The injuring or killing of any animal in any
religious or cult ritual or as an offering to a deity, devil, demon, spirit,
or any other type of offering wherein the animal is not killed for food
purposes, regardless of whether all or any part of such animal is
subsequently consumed.



   "ANIMAL SHELTER."  Any facility operated by a humane society
incorporated under the laws of the state, or municipal agency or its
authorized agents, for the purpose of impounding animals under the authority
of this chapter or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption
or euthanasia.



   "ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION."  Any not-for-profit organization for
the prevention of cruelty to animals incorporated under the laws of the state.



   "AT LARGE."  Any animal off the premises of the person owning, keeping
or harboring such animal and while off such premisses, not under control of
such person or person's family member either by leash, cord, chain or other
physical restraint.



   "AUCTION."  Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought
or sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this
section or state law.



   "BREEDER."  Any person who intentionally or accidentally allows the
breeding of an animal or makes an animal available for breeding purposes, or
any person who offers for sale, sells, trades, receives other compensation or
gives away any litter of animals; excepting litter of animals taken to the
Department of Animal Control.



   "CATTERY."  Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee of selling
cats.



   "CIRCUS."  A commercial variety show including animal acts for public
entertainment.



   "CRIME PREVENTION ANIMAL."  An animal trained and used primarily by
its owner for the protection of property.



   "DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL CONTROL."  The municipally owned facility
established for the purpose of animal control, care, and disposition as set
forth in this section, operated by and under the direct supervision of the
Board of Public Safety and the Director of the Department of Animal Control.



   "DIRECTOR."  Shelter manager and Director of the City Department of
Animal Control's Animal Shelter.



   "DOMESTIC ANIMAL."  Animals which are habituated to live in or about
the habitations of men and women, or such as contribute to the support of a
family.  For the purposes of this chapter, "DOMESTIC ANIMAL" means any
animal that is a member of one of the following species.



      dog (canis familiaris)



      cat (felis cattus or felis domesticus)



      cattle (bod domesticus or bos taurus or bos indicus)



      horse (equus caballus)



      donkey (equus asinus)



      pig (sus scrofa)



      sheep (ovis aries)



      rabbit (oryctolagus cuniculua)



      mouse (mus musculus)



      rat (rattus rattus)



      reptile (reptilis)



      guinea pig (cavis porcellus)



      chinchilla (chinchilla laniger)



      hamster (mesocircetua auratua)



      gerbil (gerbillus gerbillus)



   "EXOTIC ANIMAL."  Any animal, not a domestic animal, whose native
habitat is not indigenous to the continental United States.



   "GROOMING SHOP."  A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.



   "GUIDE DOGS."  Dogs trained to assist the handicapped.



   "HARBORING."  The actions of any person that permits any animal to
habitually remain or lodge or to be fed within his home, store, enclosure,
yard, place of business or any premises on which such person resides or
controls.  An animal shall be presumed harbored if it is fed or sheltered
for three or more consecutive days.



   "HUMANE OFFICER."  Any person designated by the state, a municipal
government or a humane society as a law enforcement officer who is qualified
to perform such duties under the laws of the state.



   "KENNEL."  Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, keeping, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or
selling dogs.



   "LAW ENFORCEMENT ANIMAL."  Any dog or horse owned by any law
enforcement agent and used in law enforcement under the guidance and
authority of a municipal, county, town, or state law enforcement agency.



   "OWNER."  A person having the right of property or custody of an
animal or who keeps or harbors an animal or knowingly permits an animal to
remain on or about any premises occupied by that person with the exception of
wild animals.  Subject to the restrictions set forth in § 90.35.



   "PERSON."  A person, for purposes of this section, shall be defined as
an individual, firm, corporation or commercial establishment.



   "PET."  Any animal owned or harbored, kept for pleasure, and/or sport.



   "PET SHOP."  Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation,
whether operated separately or in connection with another business
enterprise, except a cattery, kennel, or breeders, that buys, sells or offers
for sale any species of animal.



   "PUBLIC NUISANCE."  Any animal which:



      (1)   Interferes with passersby or passing vehicles;



      (2)   Attacks other animals or persons;



      (3)   Trespasses on school grounds or other public property;



      (4)   Is at large or unrestrained;



      (5)   Damages private or public property;



      (6)   Barks, whines, howls or makes other sounds common to its
species in excess; or



      (7)   Is offensive or dangerous to public health, safety or
welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals maintained.



   "RABIES VACCINATION."  The injection, by a licensed veterinarian, of a
dog or cat with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S.D.A. and approved by the
Indiana State Board of Animal Health.



   "RESTRAINT."  Any animal secured by a leash or lead, or under the
physical control of the animal's owner or attending party, or within the real
proper limits of its owner.



   "RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE."  Any place which has available for hire,
boarding or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro.



   "RITUAL SLAUGHTER."  The preparation and humane killing of any animal
for food purposes in accordance with state guidelines.



   "RODEO."  A performance featuring bronco riding, steer wrestling, calf
roping, greased pig contest or bull riding.



   "SLAUGHTER."  The human killing of any animal for food purposed.



   "VETERINARY HOSPITAL."  Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for the purpose of hospitalization of animals or the
diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.



   "WILD ANIMAL."  Any living vertebrate animal normally found in the
wild state.



   "ZOOLOGICAL PARK."  Any permanent facility or operation other than a
pet shop displaying or exhibiting one or more species of exotic or wild
animals, operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.02  APPROPRIATE SHELTER.



   (A)   No person shall confine or allow his or her animal to remain
outside without access to appropriate shelter which shall be defined as the
following:



      (1)   Doghouse must be weatherproof and have a protected
entrance (wind break) or a flexible flap;



      (2)   Doghouse must contain bedding that resists dampness such
as straw or cedar chips during the winter season (between November 1 and
March 31 or when real temperature is 45 degrees or lower).



   (B)   Violations of this section shall be considered a Class A
infraction.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  HITCHING OR TYING.



   (A)   No animal shall be hitched, tied, or fastened by any rope,
chain or cord that is directly attached to the animal's neck.  Animals that
must be tied, hitched or fastened to restrain them must wear a properly
fitted collar or harness made of leather or nylon not of the choker type. 
This is not to prohibit the proper use of choke collars in the training of
animals.  A person may not restrain an animal by a fixed point chain or
tether less than ten feet for more than eight hours in a 24 hour period
unless the chain or tether is at least ten feet long, has swivels at each end
and is attached to a pulley or trolley mounted cable at least ten feet in
length and mounted no more than seven feet above ground level.  Any outside
caged or penned animal or dog shall be kept in a cage or pen no less than
10x10x4 feet in size, equaling a 100 square foot roaming area. 



   (B)   Violations of this section shall be considered a Class A
infraction.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  FOOD AND WATER.



   All animals shall have fresh, potable drinking water and be provided
with food that is nutritional for the species in adequate amounts to maintain
good health.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  VACCINATION; TAGS.



   Cats and dogs over the age of six months must be vaccinated by a
licensed veterinarian for rabies.  Dogs must be vaccinated yearly as must
cats.  Both cats and dogs must wear a current rabies tag at all times
attached to a properly fitted collar or harness.  Cats which are routinely
kept inside a residential structure are exempt from wearing a tag and collar
while inside.  This exemption does not apply when said cat is outside the
residential structure.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  MEDICAL CARE, GENERALLY.



   All animals shall be provided with necessary medical care in addition
to the required rabies vaccination.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.07  REMOVAL OF EXCREMENT.



   Persons responsible for an animal shall immediately remove the animal's
excrement from public lands or from the property of another, excepting a
blind person working with a guide dog.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  SANITATION.



   (A)   All animals which are kept inside or are kept in a pen, or are
tied, fastened, hitched, leashed, or are enclosed in a fence shall be kept in
a sanitary manner.  No dog or animal shall be confined so as to be forced to
stand, sit or lie in its own excrement.  The persons responsible for the
animal shall regularly and as often as necessary to prevent odor or health
and sanitation problems, maintain all animal areas or areas of animal
contact. 



   (B)   Violations of this section shall be considered a Class A
infraction and/or Class B infraction.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.09  WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS.



   No wild or exotic animal shall be kept within the city limits without
necessary state and/or federal permits.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.10  PROPERTY REQUIRED FOR STABLING.



   No more than one horse or two ponies shall be stabled, maintained,
pastured, grazed or kept in any manner whatsoever on any property within the
city unless such property consists of an area of one acre or more; and if
such property is an area of more than one acre, only one horse or two ponies
will be kept per acre of such property.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.11  RESTRAINT.



   All animals shall be properly restrained as defined in § 90.01.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.12  CRUELTY.



   No person shall beat, cruelly treat, neglect, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse any animal except that reasonable force may be
employed to drive off dangerous or trespassing animals.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.13  FIGHTING.



   No person shall permit or conduct any dogfight, cockfight, or other
combat between animals and humans.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.14  POISONOUS BAIT.



   No person shall set any type of poisonous substance or bait within the
city limits that is deemed harmful to any domestic animal; provided, however,
that controlled programs under the direction of the County Board of Health,
City Board of Public Works or a license extermination service may be excluded
from the restrictions of this section.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.15  MOTOR-VEHICLE CAUSED INJURIES.



   Any person operating a motor vehicle who causes injury or death to a
domestic animal shall stop at once, assess the extent of injury, and
immediately notify the owner, animal control shelter, or city police
department of the location of the animal.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.



   No animal shall be left unattended in a vehicle when the conditions in
that vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal.  No animal
shall be transported in any open vehicle unless confined in an appropriate
manner intended to prevent the animal form jumping from the vehicle or being
thrown from the vehicle in the event of the accident or rapid stop or other
use of the vehicle which could cause injury to the pet.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.17  TRAINING METHODS.



   Owners of animals shall utilize methods which are humane for the
training of such animals.  To the extent training devices are utilized, they
shall be utilized in a humane and reasonable manner which will not cause nor
be likely to cause physical injury, suffering or trauma.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  ANIMALS IN HEAT/STERILIZATION OF DOGS AND CATST.



   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in an appropriate,
secure building or enclosure so as to prevent conception except during
instances of planned breeding.  Each dog and cat over the age of six months
which is kept in the city shall have been sterilized and rendered incapable
of reproducing by a licensed veterinarian unless a veterinarian has
certification in writing that it would not be in the animal's best medical
interest.  It shall be unlawful for a person to own a dog or cat not in
compliance with this section and for which, the owner does not have a current
and valid intact breeders permit. A violation of this section shall be
punishable by a fine not less than $100.  A veterinarian who sterilizes a
dog or cat shall complete a certificate in triplicate containing the owner
name, address and phone number, date of sterilization, description of the
animal, the name of the veterinarian's facility and the veterinarian's
signature.  One copy shall be provided to the owner, one copy to the
veterinarian and one copy to the township assessor or trustee or its
designee.  For the purpose of compliance with this section, each owner of a
dog or cat which is kept in the city shall cause the sterilization
certificate to be readily available for inspection by an officer authorized
to impound animals and to produce the same upon request by that officer.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.19  ABANDONMENT.



   No person shall abandon any animal anywhere within the city limits in
any public or private place, way or building.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.20  PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMALS.



   No person shall own or harbor a public nuisance as defined in § 90.01.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.21  DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dangerous animal as
defined hereafter within the city; provided, this section shall not apply to
animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.  For the
purposes of this section, an animal may be declared dangerous by the Director
if the following facts or criteria are met:



      (1)   The animal has bitten a person or persons and the bite
and attack was unprovoked, or, that the animal exhibits dangerous
propensities in present or past conduct, including but not limited to conduct
such that the animal has bitten a person in a consecutive 12-month period two
times; or could not be controlled or restrained at the time of bite or attack
to prevent the occurrence; or did bite or attack once causing wounds or
injuries creating a potential danger to the health and life of victim; and



      (2)   That in order to preserve the public health, safety and
welfare of the community the destruction of said animal is necessary;



   (B)   Whenever an animal is declared dangerous, the Director shall
notify the owner of said animal of the declaration.  Such notice shall be
served either in person or by certified mail.  The animal, if not already
held in quarantine at the Department of Animal Control, shall be surrendered
to the Director.



   (C)   Within ten days from the date of receipt of such notification,
the owner must appeal the declaration to the Director or said animal will be
destroyed by the Department of Animal Control at the owner's expense.  The
owner may also release the animal to the Shelter at any time during the
ten-day period.



   (D)   Any decision of the Director under the provisions of these
sections may be appealed to the Board of Safety who shall hear and render a
decision in this matter.  Such appeal by the owner to the Board of Safety
shall be filed with the Director of the Department of Animal Control within
ten days after receipt of notification form the Director that said animal
shall be destroyed.  The disposition of any animal shall be stayed during
the appeal process.  The decision of the Board of Public Safety shall be
final and binding upon the city and upon the appellant, and his or her
decision may be appealed as provided by law.  The Board of Safety shall
review the information provided by both the Director and the owner of said
animal and render a decision to the effect that the animal is not dangerous,
or the animal is dangerous and should be destroyed.



   (E)   The owner of any animal which is impounded and destroyed under
this section shall be held responsible for payment of any expenses incurred
by the Director for the impoundment and destruction, and failure to pay such
fee to the Director within 15 days after destruction of such animal shall
constitute a violation of this section.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  PUPPY AND KITTEN SALE.



   No puppy or kitten which is under the age of eight weeks may be offered
for sale, trade or for other compensation or for free giveaway; except a
puppy, kitten or litter may be taken to the Animal Control Shelter or placed
in the care of a licensed veterinarian.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  ANIMALS AS PRIZES OR INDUCEMENTS.



   No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, barter or giveaway any
live animal, fish, bird, or reptile as a prize for or as an inducement to
enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter
any business establishment or enter into any attracting trade, for business
other than establishments selling animals as their primary business.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.24  DYED ANIMALS.



   No person shall sell, offer for sale, trade, barter any animal whose
appearance has been altered by dyes or staining.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.25  ANIMALS AS NOVELTIES.



   No person or establishment shall offer for sale, sell, barter or give
away chicks, goslings, ducklings or other fowl not domestically bred as pets
or novelties.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.26  CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep, raise, confine or feed hogs, chickens, ducks,
goats, sheep or cows within the corporate limits of the city.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.27  PROHIBITED ANIMAL EVENTS.



   No person, group of persons for profit or not-for-profit organizations
whether for pay, other compensation or for free promotional purposes, shall
conduct or allow any event involving contests between animals or persons
using animals in any form or manner except those events reviewed and approved
for the safety, well-being and comfort of the animals involved by the
Department of Animal Control.  Such approval shall be granted within 24
hours of the request for approval and shall be in writing.  A denial must
specifically set out the reasons therefor.  The written response shall be
delivered to the party making such request in a manner determined to give
actual notice of the decisions of the Director.  The provisions of this
section do no preempt the licensure requirements set out in §§ 119.01,
119.02 and 119.03, which must be met independent of the requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.28  DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS.



   No person other than a duly authorized agent of the animal control
shelter may destroy any domestic animal within the city limits; provided,
however, this provision shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   A licensed veterinarian;



   (B)   Those persons acting in immediate self-protection; or



   (C)   City police officers or firemen acting to prevent undue
suffering.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.29  HAULING DEAD ANIMALS.



   No person shall haul dead animals over or along the streets of the city
without first securely and completely covering the dead animal in such a
manner as to screen or hide the same from public view.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.30  NOISY DOGS.



   No person shall allow the continuous barking, yelping, whining or
howling of a dog.  The human officer may take steps immediately to correct
the situation and cause the noise to be abated, either through issuance of a
citation, or impounding the animal if no owner or agent can be found at the
time of disturbance.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.31  FEEDING BIRDS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except park employees or persons
acting with the permission of park employees, to feed, scatter food, or leave
food of any type or kind in the parks, playgrounds, playfields, parkways,
boulevards and streets of this city, for birds, pigeons or other fowl.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.32  INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT.



   No person shall interfere with a humane officer in the pursuit of
his/her duties as an officer.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.33  ENTICING ANIMALS OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, not so authorized to
enter or invade the private premises of another to capture, entice or take
any animal our of the enclosure or premises of the owner, or to seized any
such animal anywhere while such animal is accompanied by its owner, keeper or
custodian.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to entice any animal away from the
premises of the person owning or keeping such animal, or to entice any animal
from any street, alley or public place in this city with the intention of
depriving the owner of the possession thereof, except as authorized in this
section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to bring within the city any animal for
the purpose of impounding or other disposition thereof, or collecting any fee
or reward for the return thereof, except as provided in this section.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.34  ANIMAL SACRIFICE.



   No person shall engage in, participate in, assist in, or perform animal
sacrifice.  No person shall own, keep, possess or harbor any animal with the
purpose or intention of using such animal for animal sacrifice.  No person
shall knowingly sell, offer for sale, give away or transfer any animal to any
person when he knows or believes that person intends to use such animal for
animal sacrifice.  This section does not prohibit slaughter or ritual
slaughter of animals.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.35  LOST OR STRAY ANIMALS.



   Persons finding a a stray animal are to notify the Department of Animal
Control within 48 hours.  At the discretion of the Department, the animal
may be kept by the finder and a found pet report left with the Department, to
enable the finder an opportunity to return the animal to its rightful
owner.  Upon demand by the Department of Animal Control, any found animal
will be surrendered to the Department and held for a minimum of three days
before a disposition is made.  Persons finding an animal are obligated to
comply with all rules and regulations of this section pertaining to humane
care and treatment of animals, while said animal is in custody awaiting
return to its actual owner.  With the exception of the Hamilton County
Humane Society and the Department of Animal Control, the finder will be
considered the found animal's owner for the purpose of this section only
after the animal is in the finder's custody for 30 continuous days.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.36  BITING ANIMALS TO BE REPORTED; NOT TO BE DESTROYED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   The person responsible for any animal which has bitten a
person or another animal must report the incident to the Department of Animal
Control.  Upon receiving the report of a bite, the Shelter will quarantine
the animal for ten days with the place of confinement to be at the discretion
of the Department of Animal Control.  During the quarantine period, the
animal is to be securely confined and kept from contact with any other animal
or person.



   (B)   During the quarantine period, the owner must provide a current
rabies vaccination certificate for his or her animal that is being
quarantined.  If proof of vaccination cannot be supplied, the animal will be
vaccinated by a veterinarian at the owner's expense before release.



   (C)   No person other than a humane officer or veterinarian shall
kill or cause to be killed any animal suspected of being rabid except in
cases of immediate self-protection.  If that occurs, the person will retain
the body and immediately notify the Department of Animal Control.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04) 
Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.37  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Violations of the provisions of this subchapter may result in
impoundment of the animals in accordance with §§ 90.65 and 90.66.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.38  PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter supplement all laws of the state
covering the same subject matter.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



REGISTRATION AND PERMITS



§ 90.45  [RESERVED].



§ 90.46  [RESERVED].



§ 90.47  VETERINARY HOSPITALS; CLINICS; GROOMING SALONS.



   (A)   All animals shall be housed humanely, and in accordance with
the applicable standards, rules and regulations of the state, if any.



   (B)   Veterinarians, clinic or kennels operators, and
owner/operators of grooming salons, shall keep such records as may be
required by the applicable statutes or regulations of the state.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.48  ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER; ANIMAL WELFARE ORGANIZATION.



   No permit shall be required of the Department of Animal Control or
animal shelter; however, all other provisions of this section shall apply.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.49  [RESERVED].



§ 90.50  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this section or when
there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or
upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this section or state
law, the humane officer, health officer or police officer is authorized at
all reasonable times to inspect the same for compliance with the provisions
of this section or any state law; provided that the officer shall comply with
all laws and regulations governing the entry on and into private property.



   (B)   In the event the humane officer, health or police officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of an animal is
so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to
safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall first
present proper credentials and request entry explaining the reasons
therefor.  If entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or
other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after
reasonable search, the office shall have recourse to secure lawful entry and
inspection of the property in accordance with the laws of the state.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.51  [RESERVED].



§ 90.52  [RESERVED].



IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION



§ 90.65  GROUNDS FOR AND CONDITIONS OF IMPOUNDMENTS.



   (A)   Animals found in cruel, abusive or neglectful situations as
defined in this section or animals that have been abandoned may be promptly
impounded if no immediate contact with a responsible person can be made; 
provided,  however,  that  the humane officer shall leave written notice
saying the location of the animal and the reason for the impoundment.



   (B)   Animals so removed will be impounded and held at the
Department of Animal Control or designated facility until such time that the
violator is in compliance with this section; provided, however, that in no
event shall this period exceed ten days, at which time the animal shall
become the property of the Department of Animal Control, unless an extension
is necessary for the humane officer to have ample time to prepare a court
case if prosecution is warranted.  In the case of an animal impounded for
quarantine at the Department of Animal Control, the animal will become the
property of the Department if not claimed by closing time of the Department
on the 11th day of the quarantine.



   (C)   Animals impounded for reasons beyond the control of the owner,
such as, but not limited to, house fire, death of owner, or arrest of the
owner, will be held for ten days during which time a reasonable effort will
be made to contact the owner and/or their representative.  After the tenth
day of impoundment, the animal will become the property of the Department of
Animal Control.



   (D)   Animals waiting disposition by the courts shall remain in the
custody of the Department of Animal Control unless such disposition is made
or placed in a foster home until legal arrangements have been completed.



   (E)   Animals so removed may be transported to a licensed
veterinarian for examination and/or treatment.  If, in the opinion of said
veterinarian, the animal must be destroyed, euthanasia will be performed
immediately.  Cost of treatment, euthanasia, and/or care shall be the
responsibility of the owner/agent.  Failure of the owner/agent to pay within
30 days of the examination and/or treatment by a licensed veterinarian shall
constitute a Class C infraction and may be punished therefor.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.66  REDEMPTION.



   (A)   A person may reclaim an animal in the custody of the
Department of Animal Control upon providing the following:



      (1)   Proof of ownership;



      (2)   Payment of redemption fee and any other service/medical
fees, as approved by the Director.



   (B)   Stray or large animals will be held a minimum of three days at
the Department of Animal Control, pursuant to § 90.65.



   (C)   Unclaimed animals become the property of the Department of
Animal Control and shall be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized,
pursuant to § 90.65.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



DESTRUCTION OF ANIMALS



§ 90.75  SUBSTANCES PERMITTED FOR USE.



   The Department of Animal Control, other animal shelters, and/or public
animal facilities which destroy animals in the city, shall use only sodium
pentabarbital or derivative substances designed for such purpose and
generally acceptable within the veterinarian profession.  Other acceptable
substances may be available from time to time, subject to specific approval
in writing by the Director.



(Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.76  PERSON AUTHORIZED TO DESTROY ANIMALS.



   (A)   Only persons trained in humane procedures by licensed
veterinarians or by registered veterinary technicians or persons who have
attended certified euthanasia training programs shall perform the destruction
of animals in a humane manner provided that said person holds all required
licenses for storage, use, and the like, for that drug.



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety is authorized to issue
permits to any person, under such terms and conditions as it finds to be
necessary for the public safety and welfare, for the humane killing or humane
trapping within the city, any non-migratory pigeons, starlings, and/or birds
declared or defined by any law or ordinance as pests.  The fee for such
permit is $50 and is payable to the Clerk-Treasurer.  Any permit issued
shall be revocable at will by the Board.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.77  ASSURANCE OF DEATH PRIOR TO DISPOSAL.



   No animal's body shall be disposed of until all vital signs are checked
(fixed pupil, cessation of heartbeat, and respiration) to assure that death
has occurred.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.78  CLASS A INFRACTION.



   Any persons who violates the provisions of this subchapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a Class A Infraction and may be fined
in accordance with the provisions of § 90.99.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 90.85  DIRECTOR.



   The duties of the Director shall be those duties established by the
Mayor, by way of a written job description, which may be, from time to time,
amended, by the Mayor as he or she deems appropriate to carry out the
functions of the office of Director.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.98  DISPOSITION OF MONIES.



   All monies generated, donated, or collected by virtue of the provisions
of this section are to be set aside and placed in the general fund.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violators of this chapter shall be fined as follows:



      Class A Infraction.  Not less than $100 nor more than $1,000.



      Class A Infraction.  All those infractions having to do with the
humane care and/or treatment of animals, unless otherwise specified.  For
purpose of this chapter, Class A Infractions shall be §§ 90.02 - 90.04,
90.06, 90.10 - 90.16, 90.18 - 90.20, 90.22 - 90.26, 90.28, 90.29, and 90.34.



      Class B Infraction.  Not less than $10 nor more than $100.



      Class B Infraction.  Those infractions, unless otherwise
specified, having to do with nuisance violations.  For purposes of this
section, Class B Infractions shall be §§ 90.07, 90.08, 90.17, 90.21, 90.27,
and 90.30 - 90.33.



      Class C Infraction.  Not less than $15 nor more than $1,000.



      Class C Infraction.  Those infractions, unless otherwise
specified, having to do with permits and licenses.  For the purposes of this
section, Class C Infractions shall be §§ 90.05, 90.09, 90.26, and 90.25.



   (B)   Each infraction shall be considered a separate offense and
subject to fines and/or other disposition as herein provided.



   (C)   In the event that an animal is retained at the Department of
Animal Control because its owner has been in violation of this section, the
person redeeming the animal by paying the prescribed fees shall also be
subject to paying for medical bills incurred for routine shots for animals at
the Department.



   (D)   Violators, upon conviction, may be given the opportunity to
work at the Department of Animal Control and/or participate in a humane
education program if so recommended by the Court.



   (E)   Each 24 hours that an infraction occurs will be considered a
separate offense and can be cited as such.



   (F)   Violations of this section may result in immediate impoundment
of animals.



   (G)   Violation of any provisions of this section may result in
revocation of any permit.



(Ord. 13-03-91, passed 5-28-91; Am. Ord. 78-12-04, passed 12-28-04)



CHAPTER 91:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH DISPOSAL



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Board of works and safety empowered to collect garbage and
rubbish



   91.03   Board to regulate storage, collection, and disposal



   91.04   Appointment of superintendent of garbage and rubbish
collection authorized



   91.05   Contract with private collector authorized



   91.06   Fees for trash collection and recycling for residential
customers within the city.




Private Collectors




   91.10   Private collectors; permit required



   91.11   Required equipment



   91.12   Deposit of material at public dumping grounds



   91.13   Private collectors subject to regulations



 



   91.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Special rubbish pickups, see § 95.03(B)



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   "GARBAGE."  Rejected food wastes.  Includes every waste, accumulation
of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or used in
the preparation, use, cooking, sale, or storage of meat, fish, fowl,
vegetables, or fruits.



   "RUBBISH."  Matter such as ashes, cans, metalware, broken glass,
crockery, foul and filthy substances, dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass,
weeds, and waste matter of any kind. 



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate disposal of waste substances,  IC 36-9-2-16
and 36-9-2-17



§ 91.02  BOARD OF WORKS AND SAFETY EMPOWERED TO COLLECT GARBAGE AND RUBBISH.



   The board of public works and safety is authorized and empowered to
collect and dispose of all garbage and rubbish within the city.



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)



§ 91.03  BOARD TO REGULATE STORAGE, COLLECTION, AND DISPOSAL.



   The board of public works and safety is authorized, subject to the
approval of the common council, to prescribe and promulgate regulations
providing methods to be used in the storage, collection, and disposal of all
garbage and rubbish. 



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)



§ 91.04  APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT OF GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION
AUTHORIZED.



   The board of public works and safety is authorized and empowered to
appoint a superintendent of garbage and rubbish collection and disposal to
supervise collection and disposal.  In the absence of such appointment, the
mayor shall serve as superintendent of garbage and rubbish collection and
shall be responsible for the administration of the regulations established by
the board governing the collection and disposition of such garbage and
rubbish.  The board is further authorized and empowered to employ all
necessary labor and to procure all necessary vehicles and equipment to
properly administer the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)



§ 91.05  CONTRACT WITH PRIVATE COLLECTOR AUTHORIZED.



   The board of public works and safety or council may ask for and accept
bids from a private contractor for the handling of the services described in
this chapter; such bids to be advertised for and accepted in the manner now
provided by law.  In the event such contract is entered into, the contractor
shall be subject to the regulations of the board as to the manner and method
of collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish.



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)



§ 91.06  FEES FOR TRASH COLLECTION AND RECYCLING FOR RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS
WITHIN THE CITY.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term "ELIGIBLE RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNIT" means a structure located within the city which includes a
room or series of rooms located within a building or mobile home and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities, which are used, or are intended to
be used for living, cooking, eating and sleeping, and are either:



      (1)   A single-family residential dwelling unit, defined as a
residential dwelling unit separated from any other dwelling unit by open
space, and designed for occupancy for one person or family;



      (2)   A multi-family residential dwelling unit, defined as a
building or related group of buildings not to exceed four units located on
the same lot, tract, or parcel of real estate, with each dwelling unit being
independent of the other; or



      (3)   A Condominium, defined as any multi-family residential
unit where the owner pays separately assessed property taxes.



   (B)   For purposes of this section the term "MONTHLY TRASH
COLLECTION COSTS" is defined as the total annual bid amount for providing
trash collection and recycling services to all eligible residential dwelling
units in the city, divided by the number of eligible residential dwelling
units receiving said service; divided by 12.



   (C)   Beginning with the first city wastewater bill for eligible
residential dwelling units payable after July 1, 2016, through bills payable
in June of 2017, there is hereby imposed a trash collection fee of $10.57 per
month per eligible residential dwelling unit.



   (D)   Beginning with the first wastewater bill collections in July
of 2017, 2018, and 2019, there is hereby imposed a monthly trash collection
fee per Eligible Residential Dwelling Unit as follows:



      July 1,2017-June 2018   $10.69



      July 1,2018-June 2019   $10.82



      July 1,2019-June 2020   $10.94



   (E)   After the above dates, the monthly trash collection costs
shall be re-established by an amendment to this section.



   (F)   (1)   Any owner-occupant of a single family residential
dwelling unit who has filed, and been granted one of the following deductions
from real property taxes and may request a credit against the fee imposed by
this section:



         (a)   A claim for an over age 65 deduction for property
taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-9, or I.C. 6-1.1-20.6-8.5;



         (b)   A claim for a blind or disabled deduction for
Property taxes under I.C. 6-1.1-12-11; or



         (c)   A claim for a disabled veteran or surviving spouse
deduction for property taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-13;



         Any owner-occupant eligible for any of the above credits is
eligible for a 50% per month credit from the fees approved in divisions (C)
and (D) of this section. A residential parcel may receive only one credit
even though the owner-occupant may be eligible under more than one statute.



      (2)   Any request for a credit under this section shall be
made to the City Wastewater Department by the person eligible for the credit.
The credit shall be granted by the Wastewater Department if the
owner-occupant of the Single Family Residential Dwelling has been granted a
credit described in division (F)(1)(a) through (c) of this section.



      (3)   The property owner shall not be eligible for the credit
until the first billing cycle after the request for the credit to the
Wastewater Department. No credits will apply retroactively before the first
month after the request by the owner-occupant.



      (4)   The Common Council shall annually appropriate into the
Trash Collection Fund an amount equal to the total amount of the credits
("the Credit Amount") granted by this subsection.



   (G)   The fees payable under this section for any eligible
residential dwelling unit shall be billed to the person or entity which
receives the wastewater bill for the service to the eligible residential
dwelling unit. If the monthly wastewater bill is for service to more than one
(1) eligible residential dwelling unit, the monthly fee shall equal the
number of eligible residential dwelling units included in the wastewater
bill, times the monthly fee established by this section.



   (H)   The owner of any parcel of real estate containing an eligible
residential dwelling unit which does not receive wastewater services from the
city, but receives trash collection services from the city, shall be billed a
monthly trash fee pursuant to this section, and any unpaid fees for the trash
collection service shall be subject to the same remedies against the owner of
the real estate, or recipient of the bill, which are included in division (J)
of this section.



   (I)   The rate imposed by this section shall be in addition to the
rates charged by the city to operate its municipal sewage works pursuant to
Ordinance No. 64A-8-89, as amended by Ordinance No. 47-9-08; Ordinance No.
04-02-13; and any other Ordinance establishing rates for the collection and
treatment of wastewater by the city's wastewater utility.



   (J)   All unpaid fees imposed by this Ordinance are subject to the
same delinquency fees, penalties, and interest authorized for delinquent
sewer bills and may be collected by any lawful means including the filing of
liens as authorized by Indiana Code 36-9-23.



   (K)   The City Controller shall cause the monthly charges collected
pursuant to this section to be paid into a segregated fund (the Trash
Collection Fund). The Trash Collection Fund shall be separated from the
balance of the revenues of the Wastewater Utility, and to be used solely for
the purpose of paying the city's trash collection cost.



   (L)   The rates approved by this section shall be in full force and
effective for all wastewater bills due after June 1, 2016, paid in July of
2016 and thereafter.



(Ord. 01-01-16, passed 1-26-16; Am. Ord. 01-01-16A, passed 4-26-16)



§ 91.07  FEES FOR TRASH COLLECTION AND RECYCLING FOR RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS
WITHIN THE CITY.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the term "ELIGIBLE RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNIT" means a structure located within the city which includes a
room or series of rooms located within a building or mobile home and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities, which are used, or are intended to
be used for living, cooking, eating and sleeping, and are either:



      (1)   A single-family residential dwelling unit, defined as a
residential dwelling unit separated from any other dwelling unit by open
space, and designed for occupancy for one person or family;



      (2)   A multi-family residential dwelling unit, defined as a
building or related group of buildings not to exceed four units located on
the same lot, tract, or parcel of real estate, with each dwelling unit being
independent of the other; or



      (3)   A Condominium, defined as any multi-family residential
unit where the owner pays separately assessed property taxes.



   (B)   For purposes of this section the term "MONTHLY TRASH
COLLECTION COSTS" is defined as the total annual bid amount for providing
trash collection and recycling services to all eligible residential dwelling
units in the city, divided by the number of eligible residential dwelling
units receiving said service; divided by 12.



   (C)   Beginning with the first city wastewater bill for eligible
residential dwelling units payable after July 1, 2016, through bills payable
in June of 2017, there is hereby imposed a trash collection fee of $10.57 per
month per eligible residential dwelling unit.



   (D)   Beginning with the first wastewater bill collections in July
of 2017, 2018, and 2019, there is hereby imposed a monthly trash collection
fee per Eligible Residential Dwelling Unit as follows:



      July 1,2017-June 2018   $10.69



      July 1,2018-June 2019   $10.82



      July 1,2019-June 2020   $10.94



   (E)   After the above dates, the monthly trash collection costs
shall be re-established by an amendment to this section.



   (F)   (1)   Any owner-occupant of an eligible residential
dwelling unit who has filed, and been granted:



         (a)   A claim for an over age 65 deduction for property
taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-9, or I.C. 6-1.1-20.6-8.5;



         (b)   A claim for a blind or disabled deduction for
Property taxes under I.C. 6-1.1-12-11; or



         (c)   A claim for a disabled veteran or surviving spouse
deduction for property taxes pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12-13;



         is eligible for a 50% per month credit from the fees
approved in divisions (C) and (D) of this section. A residential parcel may
receive only one credit even though the owner-occupant may be eligible under
more than one statute.



      (2)   Any claims for the above credit filed with the City
Wastewater Department pursuant to Ordinance 04-02-13 shall be sufficient to
obtain the credit provided by this section as long as the rate payer meets
the criteria above;



      (3)   Future claims must be filed with the Hamilton County
Auditor and the property owner shall not be eligible for the credit until the
first billing cycle after the claim is filed. Any owner-occupant who has
filed a claim, but does not receive the credit on the wastewater bill, must
file a file marked copy of the owner's affidavit requesting one of the above
deductions.



      (4)   The Common Council shall annually appropriate into the
Trash Collection Fund an amount equal to the total amount of the credits
("the Credit Amount") granted by this subsection.



   (G)   The rate imposed by this section shall be in addition to the
rates charged by the city to operate its municipal sewage works pursuant to
Ordinance No. 64A-8-89, as amended by Ordinance No. 47-9-08; Ordinance No.
04-02-13; and any other ordinance establishing rates for the collection and
treatment of wastewater by the city's wastewater utility.



   (H)   All unpaid fees imposed by this Ordinance are subject to the
same delinquency fees, penalties, and interest authorized for delinquent
sewer bills and may be collected by any lawful means including the filing of
liens as authorized by I.C. 36-9-23.



   (I)   The City Controller shall cause the monthly charges collected
pursuant to this section, and any penalties and collection costs collected
resulting from delinquent payments, to be paid into a segregated fund (the
Trash Collection Fund). The Trash Collection Fund shall be separated from the
balance of the revenues of the Wastewater Utility, and to be used solely for
the purpose of paying the city's trash collection cost.



   (J)   The rates approved by this section shall be in full force and
effective for all wastewater bills due after June 1, 2016, paid in July of
2016 and thereafter.



(Ord. 01-01-16, passed 1-26-16)



PRIVATE COLLECTORS



§ 91.10  PRIVATE COLLECTORS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of hauling any ashes,
trash, or debris over or along any of the streets or alleys of the city
without first having applied for and obtained a license to do so from the
mayor.  The fee for such license shall be $10 payable at the time of the
filing of the application.  The license shall be for a one-year period
commencing on the date that the license is issued.



   (B)   The mayor shall have the right to refuse a license to any
person who shall not have the equipment required by § 91.11, who shall have
been convicted of a violation of §§ 91.10 through 91.13, or who shall have
failed to comply with any regulation of the board of public works and safety.



(Ord. 600, passed 3-27-39)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.11  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall haul any ashes, trash, or debris over or along any of
the streets or alleys of the city in any vehicle which shall not have a bed
or carrying capacity of at least 20 cubic feet, and no person shall be
eligible to engage in the business of hauling such materials unless he has at
his disposal a vehicle of such capacity.



(Ord. 600, passed 3-27-39)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.12  DEPOSIT OF MATERIAL AT PUBLIC DUMPING GROUNDS.



   All ashes, trash, and debris hauled by any person shall be deposited at
a sanitary landfill regulated by the city or designated by the board of
public works and safety.  (Ord. 600, passed 3-27-39) Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.13  PRIVATE COLLECTORS SUBJECT TO REGULATIONS.



   All persons licensed under the provisions of § 91.10 shall be subject
to the regulations of the board of public works and safety.



(Ord. 788, passed 12-14-59)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation of the
board of public works and safety issued thereunder shall be fined not more
than $100.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION CODE



Section



General Provisions



   92.001   Purpose



   92.002   Applicability



   92.003   Conflicting provisions



   92.004   Minimum standards



   92.005   Definitions



Administration



   92.015   Fire Prevention Bureau established



   92.016   Fire Prevention Bureau organization



   92.017   Fire scene authority



   92.018   Emergency lines and limits



   92.019   Emergency entry



   92.020   Liability



   92.021   Fire investigations



   92.022   Fire and life safety inspections



Enforcement



   92.030   Enforcement authority



   92.031   Determination of violation



   92.032   Time limit



   92.033   Notice of violation



   92.034   Imminent danger



   92.035   Duty to correct violations



   92.036   Appeal from orders



   92.037   Variances; appeal



   92.038   False reporting



   92.039   Practical difficulties



Water Supply



   92.050   Water mains



   92.051   Required water supply for fire protection



   92.052   Fire hydrants



   92.053   Dead-end water mains



   92.054   NFPA 24 private fire service mains



Fire Department Access



   92.060   Rapid entry key boxes



   92.061   Security gates



   92.062   Alert decals



   92.063   Security caps



   92.064   Elevator key boxes



   92.065   Obstructions to Fire Department access



   92.066   Emergency vehicle lanes



   92.067   Marking



   92.068   Fire protection equipment identification



   92.069   Exterior doors



   92.070   Abatement of hazards



   92.071   High-rise fire safety plan



   92.072   Traffic signals



   92.073   Fire apparatus access



   92.074   Timing of installation



   92.075   One- or two-family residential developments



   92.076   Turning radius



   92.077   Dead-ends



Fire Protection Systems and Equipment



   92.090   Commercial kitchen exhaust and fixed fire suppression
systems



   92.091   Fire extinguishers



   92.092   Plans for fire protection equipment



   92.093   Fire alarm systems



   92.094   Sprinkler systems



   92.095   Smoke detectors



   92.096   Fire protection system removal



   92.097   Private emergency alarm system



   92.098   Class 1 standpipe system



Means of Egress



   92.110   Means of egress



Certificate of Occupancy Requirements



   92.120   Acceptance test



   92.121   Written verification



   92.122   Installation documentation



Fireworks



   92.130   Public displays of fireworks



   92.131   Consumer fireworks



Fire Watch



   92.140   Fire watch



Controlled Burning



   92.150   Responsibilities



   92.151   Exceptions



   92.152   Non-residential burning



   92.153   Open burning permits



   92.154   Special events with open flames



General Precaution Against Fire



   92.160   Gas lights



Inspections



   92.170   Right to enter



   92.171   Scope of inspections



   92.172   Inspection approval



   92.173   Occupant information



   92.174   Certificate of occupancy inspection



   92.175   Stop work order



   92.176   Liability for damages



   92.177   Wall rough inspections



   92.178   Hindrance to inspections



   92.179   Underground inspections



Permits



   92.190   Building permit



   92.191   Open burning permits



Automatic External Defibrillators



   92.200   Automatic external defibrillators



   92.201   Placement requirements



   92.202   Exceptions



Fees



   92.210   Inspection fees



   92.211   Additional fee schedule/fee summary



   92.212   Disposition of fees/monies collected



 



   92.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations consistent with
nationally-recognized standards for the protection of life, environment, and
property from fire, explosions, hazards arising from the storage, handling,
and use of hazardous substances, from conditions hazardous to life or
property in the use or occupancy of new or existing buildings and premises,
and to establish appropriate administrative procedures for the enforcement of
this chapter.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.002  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this Fire Prevention Code shall be supplemental to
the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, and
Indiana Fuel Gas Code as adopted by the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to maintenance
of fire prevention and life safety features as herein described. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing conditions as well as to
the conditions arising after the adoption thereof. Buildings, systems, uses,
processes, and equipment legally in existence on the effective date of this
chapter shall be permitted to continue so long as they are maintained in a
condition that is equivalent to the quality and fire-resistive
characteristics that existed when the building was constructed, altered,
added to, or repaired.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.003  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   When any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
building, zoning, safety, health, or other applicable law or ordinance of the
City of Noblesville existing on the effective date of this code or hereafter
adopted, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the public shall
prevail.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.004  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   All rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission as set out in Articles 13, 18, 22, 25, and Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated in this Fire Prevention
Code and shall include later amendments to that article as the same are
published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein.



   (B)   Any special processes or procedures not addressed in the
Indiana Fire Code (675 IAC 22) or this chapter shall be subject to
applications found in Fire Safety Standards recognized by Indiana Fire Code
(675 IAC 22) Referenced Standards and as approved by the Fire Chief, or his
or her designee, of the City of Noblesville Fire Department.



   (C)   Any special processes or procedures not addressed in this
chapter shall be subject to applications found in the current editions of the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standards or other recognized
fire safety standards, subject to the rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission.



   (D)   A copy of these standards shall be available in the City of
Noblesville Fire Inspection Division for inquiry and review by the members of
the public during normal business hours.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.005  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      “APPROVED.” Acceptable to the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee.



      “AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED).” A computerized
medical device which can check a person’s heart rhythm, recognize a rhythm
that requires a shock, advise a rescuer when a shock is needed, and uses
voice prompts, lights, and text messages to tell the rescuer the steps to
take.



      “BUILDING CODE.” Indiana Building Code (675 IAC 13).



      “BURNING.” To be on fire, to give forth light and heat during
combustion, or to be charred or scorched by action of fire or heat.



      “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.” A certificate issued by the City
of Noblesville Planning Department to the owner or tenant of a Class 1
structure indicating that the building is in proper condition to be occupied.



      “CLASS 1 STRUCTURE.” Buildings and structures as defined in
I.C. 22-12-1-4.



      “CLASS 2 STRUCTURE.” Buildings and structures as defined in
I.C. 22-12-1-5.



      “COMPLIANCE AFFIDAVIT CARD.” A card that is issued with a
notice of violation wherein the property owner, manager, or other responsible
person states that compliance with the notice of violation has been attained.



      “CONSUMER FIREWORKS.” As defined by I.C. 22-11-14.



      “EMERGENCY VEHICLE LANE (OR, FIRE LANE).” A road or other
passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. An “EMERGENCY
VEHICLE LANE” is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than
fire apparatus.



      “FAAP.” A fire alarm annunciator panel.



      “FACP.” A fire alarm control panel.



      “FPBSC.” The Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission
of the State of Indiana as established by I.C. 22-12-2-1.



      “FIRE.” The combustion of material other than deliberate
combustion for cooking, heating, recreation, incineration, or purposes
incidental to normal operation of a property.



      “FIRE APPARATUS.” Vehicles, i.e., pumpers, aerial ladder
trucks, elevated platforms, rescues, squads, ambulances, administrative
vehicles, or other firefighting or rescue equipment.



      “FIRE CHIEF.” Fire Chief of the City of Noblesville Fire
Department.



      “FIRE CODE.” Indiana Fire Code (675 IAC 22).



      “FIRE DEPARTMENT.” The City of Noblesville Fire Department.



      “FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS ROAD.” A road that provides fire
apparatus access from a fire station to a facility, building, or portion
thereof. This is a general term inclusive of all other terms such as fire
lane, public street, private street, parking lot lane, and access roadway.



      “FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION (FDC).” A connection through
which the Fire Department can pump water into a standpipe and/or sprinkler
system.



      “FIRE EXIT HARDWARE.” Panic hardware that is listed for use
on fire-rated door assemblies.



      “FIRE FLOW.” The flow rate of a water supply (measured at 20
pounds per square inch (PSI) residual pressure) which is available for
firefighting.



      “FIRE HAZARD.” Any act or thing which increases or may
increase the possibility or menace of fire to a greater degree than that
customarily recognized as normal by the City of Noblesville Fire Department;
or which may obstruct, delay, hinder, or interfere with the operations of the
Fire Department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.



      “FUEL GAS CODE.” Indiana Fuel Gas Code (675 IAC 25).



      “GAR.” General Administrative Rules (675 IAC 12) of the
Indiana Fire Prevention and Building and Safety Commission.



      “GARBAGE.” Food wastes such as fruit, vegetables, meat,
cooking greases, dried cereal, bread, beverages, and semi-solid waste
resulting from processing, handling, preparation, and cooking of dead
animals, animal waste, and the like.



      “GAS LIGHT.” Any lighting device that utilizes a flammable or
combustible gas (or liquid) to fuel an open flame.



      “HAZARDOUS CONDITION.” The presence of a structural
condition, equipment, utility connection, materials that constitute or pose a
recognized threat of fire or other injury to persons or property.



      “IAC.” Indiana Administrative Code.



      “I.C.” Indiana Code of the Indiana General Assembly.



      “INSPECTION.” Visual inspection of a building, system,
design, or installation to verify that it meets the standards of all
applicable codes of the jurisdiction, and/or is in acceptable operating
condition and free of defects.



      “JURISDICTION.” Fire service district consisting of the City
of Noblesville and Noblesville Township.



      “KNOX COMPANY.” A private organization that supplies the
rapid entry systems for the City of Noblesville.



      “MECHANICAL CODE.” Indiana Mechanical Code (675 IAC 18).



      “NFD.” Noblesville Fire Department.



      “NFPA.” National Fire Protection Association (publishes the
volumes of the National Fire Codes).



      “NOTICE OF VIOLATION.” A written notice issued by the Fire
Department usually in the form of an inspection report listing violations.



      “NOTIFICATION DEVICE.” A fire alarm system component that
provides audible and/or visual notification upon activation of a fire alarm
initiating device.



      “OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION.” As defined by the Indiana
Building Code (675 IAC 13).



      “OCCUPANT LOAD.” The number of persons for which the means of
egress of a building or portion thereof is designed.



      “ORDER.” A written report that orders the property owner,
occupant, or tenant to cease and correct identified violations of the Indiana
Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, or this Fire
Prevention Code.



      “PANIC HARDWARE.” A door latching assembly incorporating a
device that releases the latch upon the application of a force in the
direction of egress travel.



      “PERSON.” Person, firm, corporation, partnership, association
and bodies political and corporate.



      “PROHIBIT.” To stop or prevent.



      “PUBLIC DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.” Supervised display of Class
1.3G fireworks (non-consumer fireworks) which requires a permit from the
State of Indiana under I.C. 22-11-14-2.



      “RUBBISH.” Any substance that is not readily combustible such
as rubber, oily liquids, cloth, plastics, glass, metal, aluminum, and leather.



      “TESTING.” A functional test of all components to verify
proper operation of the system, design, installation, or use.



      “TRASH.” Something readily flammable that would not emit
toxic or offensive substances or would emit them in quantities too small to
be annoying or dangerous to health or safety.



      “WALL-ROUGH INSPECTION.” A new construction inspection
required by the City of Noblesville Planning Department prior to installing
gypsum board, paneling, or other acceptable material on unfinished walls.



      “YARD WASTE.” Leaves, grass, weeds, brush, and the like.



   (B)   Where terms are not defined in this Fire Prevention Code and
are defined in the Indiana Building Code, Indiana Fire Code, Indiana
Mechanical Code, or Indiana Fuel Gas Code, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as in those codes. Where terms are not defined through the
methods authorized, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such
as the context implies.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 92.015  FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a local Fire Prevention Bureau within the
City of Noblesville Fire Department. The Fire Prevention Bureau, established
within the City of Noblesville Fire Department, shall have jurisdiction
within the Noblesville Fire Services district.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.016  FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU ORGANIZATION.



   The Fire Prevention Bureau of the City of Noblesville Fire Department
shall be under the supervision of the Administrative Assistant Chief and
consist of an Inspection Division and an Investigation/Fire Prevention
Division.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.017  FIRE SCENE AUTHORITY.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, at any fire, explosion, rescue,
emergency medical, hazardous materials incident, or any other emergency which
poses imminent threat to life, environment, or property, shall have the
authority to direct operations as necessary to control, mitigate, or
eliminate the emergency. It shall be unlawful for any person to impede the
emergency operations of the City of Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.018  EMERGENCY LINES AND LIMITS.



   The Fire Chief, or his or designee, may establish emergency lines and
limits; and, barricade or guard from the genera] public such emergency lines
and limits. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, may create an area in
which only firefighters, law enforcement personnel, other emergency
responders, other people, or agencies having a direct interest in any
property threatened by a fire, explosion, hazardous material incident, other
emergency, other people, or agencies at the discretion of the Fire Chief, or
his or her designee, shall be admitted. It shall be unlawful for any
unauthorized person to cross such emergency lines or limits.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.019  EMERGENCY ENTRY.



   The Fire Department shall have the authority to enter any building or
premises without permission or warrant in the event of an emergency situation
constituting a threat to life, property, or the public safety for the purpose
of eliminating, controlling, or abating the hazardous condition or situation.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.020  LIABILITY.



   At no time will the City of Noblesville Fire Department or any of its
agents be responsible for any damages as a result of an emergency entry. The
Fire Department will notify the owner, occupant, or tenant of such an event
and it will be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, or tenant to assure
that the building is re-secured.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.021  FIRE INVESTIGATIONS.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall perform fire
investigations pursuant to I.C. 36-8-17. The Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, is authorized to conduct an origin and cause investigation of all
fires and explosions within the service district of the City of Noblesville
Fire Department. It shall be unlawful for any person to impede the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, from conducting an origin and cause
investigation.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.022  FIRE AND LIFE SAFETY INSPECTIONS.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall conduct fire and life
safety inspections in Class 1 structures pursuant to I.C. 36-8-17. The Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, shall inspect Class 1 structures as often as
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
violation of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical
Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention Code, or any other Fire
Safety Code of the jurisdiction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



ENFORCEMENT



§ 92.030  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall possess the
authority to enforce the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to enforce provisions of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building
Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention
Code, or any other code of the jurisdiction within the City of Noblesville
and Noblesville Township. Such enforcement shall include, but is not limited
to:



      (1)   The prevention of fires.



      (2)   The handling, storage, sale, and use of flammable
liquids, explosives, combustible, and hazardous materials.



      (3)   The adequacy of means of egress from all places in which
numbers of people live, work, or congregate from time to time for any purpose.



      (4)   The location, installation, and maintenance of smoke
alarms, fire alarm systems, and fire suppression systems.



      (5)   The existence of recognized hazardous conditions that
present a clear and immediate hazard to life and property.



   (C)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to institute legal actions in cases of non-compliance. The Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to issue citations
covering the violations of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code,
Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention Code, or
any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction. Violators of these codes may
be cited into the court having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.031  DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever a duly authorized member of the City of Noblesville Fire
Department determines by inspection that a violation of the Indiana Fire
Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code,
this Fire Prevention Code, any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction or
a hazardous condition exists upon any Class 1 structure within the City of
Noblesville and Noblesville Township, the person making such determination
shall issue such Notice of Violation or order as may be necessary for the
enforcement of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana
Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention Code, or any
other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.032  TIME LIMIT.



   Orders shall set forth a time limit for compliance dependent upon the
hazard created by the violation(s).



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.033  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Under I.C. 36-8-17-9, the enforcement of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana
Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire
Prevention Code, or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction, which is
within the jurisdiction, the Fire Department may seek the correction of any
violation or the elimination of any hazardous condition by the methods
specified in this code or by any other appropriate remedy or procedure
provided by law. The failure of the Fire Department to inspect or to issue a
notice of violation or order in accordance with this chapter shall not
constitute approval of any violation or non-compliance. Any notice of
violation or order issued pursuant to this section shall be conveyed upon the
owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the building or
property. Conveyance of such order shall be by one of the following methods:
Personal service (by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the
entrance of said building or premises), by mailing a copy thereof to such
responsible person by first-class mail to his or her last known address, by
fax, or electronic mail pursuant to I.C. 4-21.5-3.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.034  IMMINENT DANGER.



   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her designee, may stop the
operation or require the evacuation of any Class 1 structure or portion
thereof under the provisions of I.C. 36-8-17-9 when it is determined that
conduct or conditions of the property:



   (A)   Present a clear and immediate hazard of death or serious
bodily injury to any person other than a trespasser.



   (B)   Is prohibited without a permit, registration, certification,
authorization, variance, exemption, or other license required under I.C.
22-14 or another statute administered by the Department of Fire and Building
Services and the license has not been issued; or, will conceal a violation of
law.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.035  DUTY TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS.



   The owner or person in control of any premises or building upon which a
violation or hazard exists shall:



   (A)   Cease and correct the violation.



   (B)   Protect persons and property from the hazards of the violation
and correct the violation.



   (C)   Require persons to leave the area that is affected by a
violation and prohibit people from entering the area until the violation is
corrected.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.036  APPEAL FROM ORDERS.



   An owner or occupant who remains aggrieved by an order or decision
issued pursuant to this Fire Prevention Code and the matter involves a rule
of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, may appeal to
the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission as set forth by
I.C. 36-8-17.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.037  VARIANCES; APPEAL.



   (A)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from Indiana
Adopted Fire and Building Laws as set forth by I.C. 22-13-2-11 shall apply
for the variance with the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety
Commission in accordance with the 675 IAC 12-5 (General Administrative Rules).



   (B)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance from a specific
provision of this Fire Prevention Code or an appeal from a notice of
violation or order that are not part of the state adopted fire and building
laws as set forth by I.C. 22-13-2-11 shall apply in writing to the Fire
Chief, or his or designee, within five working days of the date of the notice
of violation or order. The granting of a variance shall be considered only
upon the written application of the owner of the property stating that:



      (1)   Practical difficulties have been encountered in the
implementation of specific requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   Compliance with specific requirements of this chapter
will cause unnecessary hardship to the owner.



      (3)   The owner desires to take advantage of new methods or
equipment which are recognized as adequate for the purpose for which they are
to be substituted.



   (C)   A variance may be granted only if the Fire Chief, or his or
her designee, determines in writing that:



      (1)   The requested modification will conform to fundamental
requirements for safety.



      (2)   The granting of the variance does not increase the risk
of fire or danger to the public. A copy of any variance granted shall be
retained by the Fire Prevention Bureau.



   (D)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, within ten business
days following receipt of a variance or an appeal made under this section,
shall either sustain or overrule the order(s). A written copy of the decision
shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant.



   (E)   Any owner or occupant may appeal the decision of the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee. Such an appeal shall be made in writing to the
Board of Public Works and Safety within ten business days following receipt
of a decision rendered by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



   (F)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall hold a hearing
after which they shall sustain, modify, or override the decision of the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, A written copy of the decision shall be sent
by certified mail to the appellant. Decisions rendered by the Board of Public
Works and Safety shall be final.



   (G)   A variance pertaining to the requirements of this Fire
Prevention Code shall be enforced in the same manner as a notice of violation
or order issued under this Fire Prevention Code.



   (H)   Whenever the City of Noblesville Fire Department learns that
an owner is in violation of the terms of a variance issued pursuant to this
section, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, may order compliance as
provided in the Fire Prevention Code.



   (I)   An owner or occupant requesting a variance or an appeal from a
specific provision of this Fire Prevention Code that are not part of the
state adopted fire and building laws as set forth by I.C. 22-13-2-11 shall be
subject to an administrative fee of $50.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.038  FALSE REPORTING.



   It is a violation of this Fire Prevention Code for a person, firm, or
corporation to willfully and knowingly sign a compliance affidavit card or
other compliance affidavit document attesting that a code violation has been
corrected when such person, firm, or corporation has actual knowledge that
the code violation has not been corrected.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.039  PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is authorized to modify any of
the provisions of this Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by
the owner, a lessee, or duly authorized representative where there is
practical difficulty in the way of carrying out the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code provided that the intent of the code shall be complied with
and public safety is secured.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



WATER SUPPLY



§ 92.050  WATER MAINS.



   All water mains hereafter installed in or adjacent to the City of
Noblesville or Noblesville Township with respect to which fire protection
shall be required or requested for the benefit of owners of property
adjoining or served from such mains shall be made with approved pipe of not
less than six inches inside diameter.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.051  REQUIRED WATER SUPPLY FOR FIRE PROTECTION.



   All Class 1 structures or portions of Class 1 structures hereafter
constructed shall be provided with a water supply capable of providing the
required fire flow for firefighting purposes for a minimum of two hours. In
setting the requirements for the fire flow, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, may utilize the International Fire Code (IFC), as in effect from
time to time, Appendix B entitled “Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings”
as a guide.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.052  FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   All private fire hydrants and water mains shall be installed
and maintained as set forth in the NFPA 24 2007 Edition. In determining the
location and spacing of fire hydrants, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, may utilize the International Fire Code (IFC), as in effect from
time to time, Appendix C entitled “Fire Hydrant Locations and
Distribution” as a guide.



   (B)   All fire hydrants required by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee, shall be approved by the City of Noblesville Fire Department and
accepted by the water utility having jurisdiction prior to any construction
above the foundation.



   (C)   Within the fire protection district of the Noblesville Fire
Department, all new and existing fire hydrants shall be equipped with
connections that are compatible with the Noblesville Fire Department hydrant
adapters.



   (D)   Whenever the provisions of this chapter require the
installation of a public or private fire hydrant, such hydrant shall meet the
specifications outlined in the Noblesville Fire Department Fire Hydrant
Specifications List which is maintained at the office of the Noblesville Fire
Prevention Bureau Inspection Division.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 1-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.053  DEAD-END WATER MAINS.



   (A)   Six-inch dead-end private water mains that supply one fire
hydrant shall not exceed 150 feet.



   (B)   An eight-inch dead-end private water main that supplies one
fire hydrant shall not exceed 500 feet.



   (C)   A dead-end private water main that supplies a fire sprinkler
system (and/or a standpipe system) and two or three fire hydrants shall have
a minimum inner diameter of eight inches.



   (D)   A fire service private water main that supplies four or more
fire hydrants shall be tapped off a distribution supply main in two 
separate areas (looped).



   (E)   A Class 1 structure with private water mains that has a
required fire flow of 4,000 gallons per minute (GPM), regardless of the
number of required fire hydrants, shall be designed as a loop system. When
determining the required fire flow, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee,
shall utilize the International Fire Code Appendix B, “Fire Flow
Requirements for Buildings” as a guide.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.054  NFPA 24 PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE MAINS.



   NFPA 24: The Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service
Mains and their Appurtenances 2007 Edition is hereby adopted as the minimum
standard to be applied pursuant to this Fire Prevention Code.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS



§ 92.060  RAPID ENTRY KEY BOXES.



   Any Class 1 structure built after May 17, 2003, that is protected by an
automatic sprinkler system and/or fire alarm system, and access to, or within
a structure, or an area on that property is unduly difficult because of
secured openings, and where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or
firefighting purposes or property preservation, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, shall require a key box to be installed in an approved location;
e.g., a secured community pool area. The key box shall be manufactured by the
Knox Company and be compatible with the system utilized by the Noblesville
Fire Department. The key box shall house a key for each area protected by the
automatic sprinkler and/or fire alarm system, key(s) to locked points of
ingress whether on the interior or exterior of such buildings, and key(s) to
the fire alarm control panel (FACP), fire alarm annunciator panel (FAAP) and
manual pull stations (if applicable).



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.061  SECURITY GATES.



   When a property is protected by a locked fence or gate and where
immediate access to the property of a Class 1 structure or residential
neighborhood is necessary for life saving, firefighting purposes, or property
preservation, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall require a Knox
Key Switch, Knox Padlock, or other approved device to be installed at a
location approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. The electric key
switch or padlock shall be manufactured by the Knox Company and keyed to the
Noblesville Fire Department Knox Key.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.062  ALERT DECALS.



   Alert decals to advise fire companies to the presence of access
features covered by this chapter shall be displayed on any outside door or
window as approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.063  SECURITY CAPS.



   When a newly constructed Class 1 structure is protected by a
water-based tire protection system with a fire department connection (FDC),
the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall require the property owner or
tenant to install a Knox FDC Plug, FDC Storz Cap, or similar product
manufactured by the Knox Company.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.064  ELEVATOR KEY BOXES.



   When a building is equipped with an elevator(s) and required by local,
state, or national code to install an elevator key box, the owner, or his or
her duly authorized agent, shall contact the City of Noblesville Fire
Department for approval of the location of the elevator key box. After
installation, the owner, or his or her duly authorized agent, shall contact
the City of Noblesville Fire Department to secure the necessary keys in the
box. The necessary keys shall include, but not be limited to, elevator door
key, elevator equipment room key, and Fire Department emergency access
elevator control keys.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.065  OBSTRUCTIONS TO FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS.



   Fire protection equipment, including, but not limited to, fire
hydrants, Fire Department connections, and dry hydrants shall be clearly
marked in a manner approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, to
prevent the presence of any obstructions.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.066  EMERGENCY VEHICLE LANES.



   (A)   The location of emergency vehicle lanes shall be established
by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. The Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, can require signage or striping, or any combination. When striping
is required by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, emergency vehicle
lanes shall comply with the specification outlined in the Noblesville Fire
Department Fire Lane Specifications List which is maintained at the office of
the Noblesville Fire Prevention Bureau Inspection Division. The erection and
maintenance of emergency lane signs and striping shall be the responsibility
of the property owner. All markings shall remain in good visible condition as
determined by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



   (B)   The parking, stopping, or standing of any object or personal
property, including motor vehicles, or any other obstruction in established
fire lanes on private or public property, shall be prohibited.



   (C)   Any vehicle or personal property found to be obstructing an
emergency vehicle lane shall, with the consent of the owner, lessee, or other
person in possession or control of the real estate where the emergency
vehicle lane has been established, be towed away or removed at the request of
the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, or law enforcement officer. The owner
of the towed or removed property shall be responsible for all towing charges
and resulting storage charges incurred during the process of removing the
obstruction. The owner of any personal property or motor vehicle found in
violation of this section shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $15, up
to a maximum of $100.



   (D)   In non-emergency situations, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, shall obtain from each property owner, lessee, or person in
possession of property covered by this Fire Prevention Code, an affidavit
granting permission and their consent to the towing away or removal of any
obstruction or personal property which is obstructing emergency vehicle
lanes. The original affidavit from each property owner shall be filed in the
Clerk-Treasurer’s Office with copies on file in the offices of the Fire
Chief and the Police Chief.



   (E)   In emergency situations, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, can order the towing away or removal of any obstruction or personal
property which is obstructing emergency vehicle lanes without permission from
the property owner or lessee.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.067  MARKING.



   Approved signage, including signage for vertical hazards, shall be
provided and maintained for Fire Department access roads to identify such
roads and prohibit the obstruction of these access roads.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.068  FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   Fire protection equipment including fire hydrants, fire
department connections, dry hydrants, and the like, shall be clearly
identified in a manner approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, to
prevent obstruction by vehicles or other obstructions.



   (B)   In all new and existing Class 1 structures, all interior or
exterior doors that lead to fire protection equipment, electrical panels or
equipment, HVAC equipment, elevator equipment, hazardous materials storage or
process areas, interior roof access, or equipment that controls other
building functions shall be identified for use by the Fire Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.069  EXTERIOR DOORS.



   Exterior doors, or their function, shall not be eliminated without
prior approval of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. Exterior doors
which have been rendered nonfunctional, as approved by the Fire Chief, or his
or her designee, and which retain a functional door appearance shall have a
sign affixed to the exterior of the door stating, “THIS DOOR BLOCKED.”
Required exit doors or Fire Department access doors shall not be eliminated.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.070  ABATEMENT OF HAZARDS.



   Whenever the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, finds in any Class I
structure, combustible or explosive matter, dangerous or unnecessary
accumulation of rubbish, wastepaper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable
material that may endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire
escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows that may interfere with Fire
Department operations or the egress of occupants in case of fire or other
emergency, or finds any other fire hazard, the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, shall order the same to be removed or remedied.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.071  HIGH-RISE FIRE SAFETY PLAN.



   In a high-rise structure, as defined by the Indiana Building Code, a
complete, updated copy of the required Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan shall
be kept in the Fire Command Center or other approved location.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.072  TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   Any time a new development is required to install a traffic control
signal device, or upgrade an existing signal, the developer shall be
responsible for installing approved emergency vehicle preemption signaling
equipment on the new signal. Approved product identification and signaling
information is available from the City of Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.073  FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS.



   Plans for fire apparatus access roads shall be submitted to the Fire
Department for review.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.074  TIMING OF INSTALLATION.



   Required fire hydrants and temporary-surfaced access roads within the
site shall be installed and made serviceable prior to construction of a
building or structure and such hydrants and roads shall be maintained during
construction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.075  ONE- OR TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.



   Developments of one- or two-family dwellings having more than 100
dwelling units shall be equipped with two or more separate tire apparatus
access roads that enter the development.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.076  TURNING RADIUS.



   The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be determined
after the consultation with the City of Noblesville Fire Department. Such
roads shall be designed and constructed to permit turning of the longest
piece of fire apparatus available to the Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.077  DEAD-ENDS.



   Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet in length
shall be designed and constructed to allow the turning around of the longest
piece of fire apparatus available to the Noblesville Fire Department. The
installation, method of construction, and material of the turnaround must be
approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, and the City of
Noblesville Planning Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT



§ 92.090  COMMERCIAL KITCHEN EXHAUST AND FIXED FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Any new installation of a fixed-fire suppression system
installed under a Type I exhaust hood shall be inspected by the Fire Chief,
or his or her designee, prior to the cooking equipment being placed into
service. The installer of the fixed-fire suppression system shall:



      (1)   Adhere to all manufacturers’ recommendations for the
installation.



      (2)   Notify the City of Noblesville Fire Department
Inspection Division at least 48 hours in advance of the system being
completed for system testing.



      (3)   Provide written documentation to the City of Noblesville
Fire Department that states the system has been installed per the
manufacturer’s specifications and successfully tested by the installer.



   (B)   In existing commercial kitchen hood and exhaust systems, the
property owner or tenant shall contact the Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, prior to modifying any portion of the kitchen hood or exhaust
system (i.e. cutting access panels into existing exhaust ductwork). The Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, shall inspect all work performed on existing
systems.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.091  FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.



   (A)   Portable tire extinguishers shall be installed and maintained
in all Class 1 structures as set forth in the latest edition of NFPA 10 and
as required by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



   (B)   In all Group R-2 occupancies, a 2A:20B:C rated fire
extinguisher shall be required in each unit or placed at intervals not to
exceed 75 feet maximum travel distance from each unit in all common areas on
each level.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.092  PLANS FOR FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT.



   Plans for fire alarms systems, water-based fire protection systems,
fire pumps, special hazard fire suppression systems, high-piled storage
arrangements and firestop systems shall be submitted to the City of
Noblesville Fire Department prior to the request for a required wall rough
inspection. Each respective submittal shall contain the following information:



   (A)   Sprinkler systems:



      (1)   One full set of sprinkler/standpipe plans.



      (2)   One full set of sprinkler/standpipe calculations.



      (3)   One copy of the sprinkler construction design release
(CDR).



      (4)   One set of manufacturer’s cut-sheets for all sprinkler
heads in the design.



   (B)   Fire alarm systems:



      (1) One full set of fire alarm plans (1/8” - 1’ scale).



      (2)   One set of battery calculations.



      (3)   One copy of the fire alarm construction design release
(CDR).



      (4)   One set of manufacturer’s cut-sheets for the fire
alarm control panel (FACP) and fire alarm components.



      (5)   One fire alarm performance matrix.



   (C)   Special hazard fire protection systems:



      (1)   One set of plans (if applicable).



      (2)   One set of engineering data (if applicable).



      (3)   One copy of the construction design release (if
applicable).



      (4)   One set of manufacturer’s cut-sheets for system
components.



   (D)   Fire pumps:



      (1)   One copy of the manufacturer’s fire pump
specifications.



      (2)   One copy of the manufacturer’s certified pump test
characteristic curve.



   (E)   Firestop systems:



      (1)   Through-penetration firestop systems.



      (2)   Membrane-penetration firestop systems.



      (3)   Fire-resistant joint systems.



      (4)   Perimeter fire barrier systems.



      (5)   Fire-rated duct and air-transfer openings.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.093  FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   The location of the fire alarm devices must match the design
professional’s approved plans. All deviations without revised plans shall
be approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, and shall be filed
with State Plan Review.



   (B)   All required fire alarm systems shall be monitored by an
approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72.



   (C)   Fire alarm initiating devices, alarm signaling devices,
annunciators, or control panels shall not be concealed, obstructed, or
impaired.



   (D)   All fire alarm systems required to be installed per the
Indiana Building Code shall be equipped with addressable fire alarm
components that can have their respective status individually identified or
that is used to individually control other functions.



   (E)   Access panels shall be provided to facilitate the testing,
inspection, and cleaning of HVAC duct detectors.



   (F)   A posted diagram of all HVAC duct detectors shall be provided
at the main electrical panel or a location approved by the Fire Chief, or his
or her designee.



   (G)   HVAC duct detectors that are not accessible from the finished
floor shall be provided with remote test buttons. The location of the remote
test buttons shall be approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



   (H)   A copy of the as-built fire alarm plans for all required fire
alarm installations shall be kept permanently on-site in an approved location
near the fire alarm control panel (FACP).



   (I)   In all newly-constructed Class 1 structures, a listed fire
alarm notification device shall be required in all walk-in freezers and
coolers that exceed 100 square feet.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.094  SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   If a sprinkler system has multiple zones, an approved zone
diagram or map shall be mounted adjacent to the sprinkler riser.



   (B)   A copy of the as-built sprinkler plans and hydraulic
calculations for every sprinkler system shall be kept permanently on-site in
an approved location.



   (C)   Instructions for the assignment of an impairment coordinator
shall be posted adjacent to the sprinkler riser(s). An impairment coordinator
shall be assigned when required by the Indiana Fire Code.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.095  SMOKE DETECTORS.



   (A)   Smoke detectors and smoke alarms shall be installed as
required by the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical
Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, Indiana Residential Code, I.C. 22-11-18, and any
other code of the jurisdiction.



   (B)   If required by the Indiana Building Code, Indiana Fire Code,
this Fire Prevention Code or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction,
single-station and multi-station smoke alarms shall be installed as follows:



      (1)   R-2 occupancies shall be equipped with a minimum of one
ionization smoke alarm and one photoelectric smoke alarm. Alternatively, one
ionization/photoelectric combination smoke alarm may be used instead.



      (2)   The location of these smoke alarms shall be approved by
the Fire Chief or his or her designee.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.096  FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM REMOVAL.



   No person shall interfere with, tamper with, or remove any fire
protection system, emergency lighting system, fire hydrant, or any other
firefighting equipment without first obtaining a written approval from the
Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.097  PRIVATE EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM.



   Any person, entity, or corporation that operates a private emergency
alarm system within the jurisdiction of the City of Noblesville Fire
Department shall be subject to the provisions of City of Noblesville
Ordinance No. 65-8-03, now codified in Chapter 110 of the Noblesville Code of
Ordinances.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.098  CLASS 1 STANDPIPE SYSTEMS.



   Whenever a Class 1 standpipe system is installed in a Class 1
structure, the standpipe connection(s) shall be equipped with an approved two
and one-half inch to one and one-half inch reducer. The one and one-half inch
connection(s) shall be supplied with an approved cap.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



MEANS OF EGRESS



§ 92.110  MEANS OF EGRESS.



   (A)   Means of egress illumination shall be provided and maintained
in accordance with 675 IAC 13 and 675 IAC 22. Means of egress shall be
illuminated and exit signs shall be maintained when any Class 1 structure is
occupied.



   (B)   Equipment providing emergency power for means of egress
illumination and exit signs shall be maintained in an operable condition.



   (C)   In all newly-constructed Class 1 structures, exit signs shall
be placed to identify a clear and unambiguous path of travel to the exit
discharge.



   (D)   The face of a photoluminescent sign shall be continually
illuminated while the building is occupied. The illumination levels on the
face of the photoluminescent sign shall be in accordance with its listing.
The charging light source shall be of a type specified in the product
markings.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS



§ 92.120  ACCEPTANCE TEST.



   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for a
newly-constructed, renovated, or remodeled Class 1 structure, the City of
Noblesville Fire Department is required to witness a successful acceptance or
performance test in accordance with the appropriate installation standard or
manufacturer’s specifications for the following systems:



   (A)   Fire alarm system.



   (B)   Sprinkler and standpipe system.



   (C)   Special hazard fire suppression system.



   (D)   Private fire service underground piping hydrostatic test and
flush.



   (E)   Fire pump.



   (F)   Smoke control system.



   (G)   Above-ground piping hydrostatic test.



   (H)   Emergency lighting system.



   (I)   Underground storage tank tightness test.



   (J)   Grease duct leakage test (Type I Hood Exhaust System).



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.121  WRITTEN VERIFICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for a
newly-constructed, renovated, or remodeled Class 1 structure, the City of
Noblesville Fire Department requires written verification that each fire
protection and life-safety system has been installed in complete agreement
with the terms of the listing, manufacturer’s instructions, and the
applicable installation standard.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.122  INSTALLATION DOCUMENTATION.



   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for a
newly-constructed, renovated, or remodeled Class 1 structure, the City of
Noblesville Fire Department requires the following documentation (if
applicable):



   (A)   Record of completion for fire alarm systems as required by
NFPA 72.



   (B)   Contractor’s material and test certificate for aboveground
piping for sprinkler and standpipe systems as required by NFPA 13.



   (C)   Contractor’s material and test certificate for underground
piping for private fire service mains, fire hydrants, and piping as required
by NFPA 13 and 24.



   (D)   Certificate of completion/installation for all special hazard
automatic fire extinguishing systems.



   (E)   Field acceptance test report and manufacturer’s certified
test characteristic curve for fire pumps as required by NFPA 20.



   (F)   Air balance test report (Type I and II Exhaust Hoods).



   (G)   Verification on the non-combustibility or flame-resistance of
all applicable interior finish, decorative materials, and furnishings.



   (H)   Inspection and drop test record for vertically and
horizontally closing fire-rated doors and shutters.



   (I)   Affidavit for 90-minute emergency lighting test for all
emergency lighting systems.



   (J)   Smoke control system engineered analysis and test report.



   (K)   Tank tightness report for all underground storage tank
installations for flammable and combustible liquids.



   (L)   Architect’s statement of substantial completion (if a design
professional is required by 675 IAC 12-6-9).



   (M)   Prepared fire safety and evacuation plan.



   (N)   Material safety data sheets for all flammable and combustible
liquids.



   (O)   As-built construction drawings on computer disk.



   (P)   Completed Noblesville Fire Department emergency contact form.



   (Q)   Backflow prevention test certification.



   (R)   Grease duct leakage test report (Type I Hood Exhaust Systems).



   (S)   Completed City of Noblesville alarm permit application.



   (T)   Fire stopping affidavit including the specific firestop
systems utilized for each application.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



FIREWORKS



§ 92.130  PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF FIREWORKS.



   The documentation requirements for providing a public display of
fireworks within the City of Noblesville or Noblesville Township are listed
below:



   (A)   A copy of the completed fireworks permit application from the
Office of the Indiana Department of Homeland Security (IDHS) as required by
I.C. 22-11-14-2.



   (B)   A letter of intent to display fireworks. This letter of intent
to display fireworks shall include:



      (1)   Name of the sponsoring organization.



      (2)   Day, date, and time of the display.



      (3)   Location of the display.



      (4)   Number and maximum diameter size of aerial display shell.



      (5)   Types and amounts of ground materials and locations.



      (6)   Timetable of operations including delivery set-up and
time of the “live load.”



      (7)   A statement that only materials listed and approved by
the U.S. Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
(BATF) will be utilized.



      (8)   A statement attesting to be the understanding of all the
rules and regulations governing public fireworks displays and that the
display located in the City of Noblesville will be in accordance with NFPA
1123.



      (9)   A list of personnel who will be representing the
fireworks vendor, their function, experience, and qualification.



      (10)   A site plan of the proposed display site.



      (11)   A copy of the certificate of insurance as required by
I.C. 22-11-14-3.



      (12)   A copy of the contract between the sponsor and the
fireworks vendor.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.131  CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-11-14-10.5, consumer fireworks may only be
used in the City of Noblesville, Indiana, corporate limits during the days
and times listed in I.C. 22-11-14-10.5(c)(3) which are listed below:



      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and two hours after
sunset on June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7,
July 8, and July 9.



      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
July 4.



      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00
a.m. on January 1.



   (B)   In the event that the hours of use for consumer fireworks
listed in I.C. 22-11-14-10.5(c)(3) are amended, the state statute shall
control.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



FIRE WATCH



§ 92.140  FIRE WATCH.



   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-3(b) and 675 IAC 22, as
amended, there is established the City of Noblesville Fire Watch Code.



   (B)   If the provisions of this subchapter conflict with the
provisions of the I.C. 22-13-2-2, the state statute controls as required by
I.C. 22-13-2-3.



   (C)   The definition of a Class I structure contained in the
provisions of 675 IAC 12-6-2 is adopted by this section and incorporated by
reference in this section as if copied in full.



   (D)   For purposes of this subchapter, a qualified person shall be a
firefighter with a State of Indiana Certified Firefighter I Certification.



   (E)   The Common Council of the City of Noblesville designates the
Noblesville Fire Department as the department authorized to administer acts
of the city under this subchapter and 675 IAC 22.



   (F)   (1)   Whenever it is essential for public safety in any
Class 1 structure, due to the number of persons or the nature of the activity
being conducted, the Chief of the Noblesville Fire Department may require the
owner or lessee to employ one or more qualified persons to be approved by the
Chief, or his or her designee, to be on-duty in such Class I structure to
serve as a fire watch. Such person(s) shall:



         (a)   Be subject to the orders of the Chief, or his or
her designee, at all times.



         (b)   Be in uniform.



         (c)   Remain on-duty at all times that such Class 1
structure is open to the public.



      (2)   Such persons shall not be required or permitted while
on-duty to perform any duties other than the fire watch. Such persons shall
be provided at the ratio of one qualified person per 500 occupant load.



   (G)   If the qualified person deployed by the Chief, or his or her
designee, to serve as fire watch is a City of Noblesville Fire Department
employee, the employee shall be considered on-duty and acting within the
scope or course of the qualified person’s duties on behalf of the city for
purposes of medical treatment provisions of the worker’s compensation laws
for injuries and for coverage under the general liability insurance
provisions.



   (H)   If the qualified person deployed by the Chief, or his or her
designee, to serve as fire watch is a City of Noblesville Fire Department
employee, the owner or lessee of the Class 1 structure shall compensate the
city at a rate of $35 an hour for each city employee deployed. Unpaid
reimbursement entitles the city to charge and accumulate interest at an
annual rate of 8% plus reasonable attorney’s fees and legal costs of
collection.



   (I)   This subchapter is not intended to prevent the owner or lessee
of a Class 1 structure from employing a qualified person to perform a fire
watch function that is not a City of Noblesville Fire Department employee. If
the qualified person employed by the owner of the Class 1 structure is not a
City of Noblesville Fire Department employee, the qualified person shall be
paid directly by the owner of the Class 1 structure under such terms as are
agreeable between the qualified person and the owner.



   (J)   In the event of an excessive number of accidental or
undetermined alarm activations, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is
authorized to require the property owner, tenant, or occupant to provide an
approved fire watch until the system is repaired or restored to service.



   (K)   Any property owner or tenant that does not comply with a fire
watch order issued by the City of Noblesville Fire Department may be fined
$500 per day.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



CONTROLLED BURNING



§ 92.150  RESPONSB1LITIES.



   No person within the city shall burn any rubbish, trash, garbage, yard
waste, leaves, construction materials, tree limbs, shrubbery trimmings, or
dangerous materials at any time within the city limits.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.151  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted with prior approval
of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee:



      (1)   Fires used for celebrating Twelfth Night Ceremonies.



      (2)   Fires used for celebrating school pep rallies.



      (3)   Fires used for celebrating scouting activities.



      (4)   Fires used for recreational or cooking purposes.



   (B)   All exempted fires, including fires for cooking or
recreational purposes, shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   Only wood products shall be burned.



      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times, until completely
extinguished.



      (3)   If fires create an air pollution problem, a nuisance, or
a fire hazard, they shall be extinguished.



      (4)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, air
stagnation, and the like.



      (5)   Burning shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any
combustible material or any structure.



   (C)   Burning with prior approval of the Fire Chief, or his or her 
designee, may be authorized for the following:



      (1)   Burning of refuse consisting of material resulting from
a natural disaster.



      (2)   Burning for purposes of fire training.



      (3)   Emergency burning of spilled petroleum products when all
reasonable efforts to recover the spilled material have been made and failure
to burn would result in an imminent fire hazard or water pollution problems.



      (4)   Burning of highly explosive or other dangerous materials
for which no alternative method exists or where transportation of such
materials is impossible.



      (5)   Prescribed burning of native vegetation, i.e., prairie
grass, in accordance with the requirements of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM) and in accordance with 326 IAC 4.



      (6)   Agricultural burning on agricultural properties for
maintenance purposes in accordance with 326 IAC 4-1-3.



      (7)   Old or tattered American Flags, which are not in a
condition to provide a fitting emblem for display, shall be destroyed in a
dignified manner. Cotton flags may be burned in an appropriate manner by an
approved organization in a Flag Burning Ceremony. Approved organizations
include Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW), the American Legion, the Knights of
Columbus, the Elk’s Lodge, the Boy Scouts of America, and the Girl Scouts
of America. The Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) does
not allow the burning of nylon flags in the State of Indiana. The City of
Noblesville Fire Department encourages the recycling of all nylon flags.



      (8)   (a)   Due to the unique hazards associated with the
methods of burning described in this division (C), the Fire Chief, or his or
her  designee, may require additional measures to ensure the public safety
including but not limited to:



            1.   Standby fire personnel.



            2.   Standby fire apparatus and equipment.



            3.   Increased minimum separation distances and/or
specific burning containers.



         (b)   The financial costs associated with these
additional requirements shall be the responsibility of the petitioner.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.152  NON-RESIDENTIAL BURNING.



   All burning taking place which is non-residential in nature must comply
with the following conditions:



   (A)   All burning must meet the guidelines and restrictions of the
Indiana Department Environmental Management on incinerator limitations.



   (B)   All such burning must utilize a stationary incinerator and
shall not take place in any portable incinerator or homemade incinerators
unless approved by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management.



   (C)   All burning shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.



   (D)   All incinerators in which burning takes place shall be
maintained properly as specified by the manufacturer and shall be operated
only according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.153  OPEN BURNING PERMITS.



   Prior approval from the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is required
for recreational open burning in the City of Noblesville. Prior approval is
further defined in this section as requiring an open burn permit issued by
the City of Noblesville Fire Department. The required burn permit shall be
kept at the site of the fire during burning operations.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.154  SPECIAL EVENTS WITH OPEN FLAMES.



   Any community or civic special events that include any type of open
flame shall be approved only by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. The
Fire Chief, or his or her designee, has the authority to disallow open flames
if the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, finds that the open flame may be
detrimental to the safety of bystanders, the community, or emergency
responders.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



GENERAL PRECAUTION AGAINST FIRE



§ 92.160  GAS LIGHTS.



   In all new and existing premises, including Class 1 structures and one-
and two-family dwellings, the use of gas lights, gas lamps, gas lanterns, and
gas torches shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations, the Indiana Fuel Gas Code (675 IAC 25), and
the gas utility having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



INSPECTIONS



§ 92.170  RIGHT TO ENTER.



   As authorized by I.C. 36-8-17, the Chief of the Noblesville Fire
Department, or any duly authorized member of such Fire Department may, at all
reasonable hours, enter the interior of any Class 1 structure for the purpose
of making an inspection. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall have
the authority to inspect or cause to be inspected as often as necessary for
the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any violation of the
Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana
Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention Code, or any other Fire Safety Code of
the jurisdiction.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.171  SCOPE OF INSPECTIONS.



   New construction or work for which Fire Department approval is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. It
shall be the duty of the permit applicant or contractor to both cause the
work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
Fire Chief, nor his or her designee, nor the City of Noblesville shall be
liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material
required to allow inspection. It shall be the duty of the person requesting
any required inspections to provide access to and means for proper inspection
of such work, i.e., ladder, and the like.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.172  INSPECTION APPROVAL.



   Approval, as a result of an inspection, shall not be construed to be an
approval of a violation of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Building Code,
Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire Prevention Code, or
any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel provisions of the Indiana Fire Code, Indiana
Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire
Prevention Code, or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction shall not
be valid.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.173  OCCUPANT INFORMATION.



   Each building owner, occupant, or tenant is required to supply the City
of Noblesville Fire Department with emergency contact information. For new
construction projects, it is the responsibility of the building owner,
occupant, or tenant to provide this information prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. This emergency contact information is required
anytime there is a change in the ownership of or new tenants inhabit a Class
1 structure. The required information shall be submitted on the NFD emergency
contact form.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.174  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY INSPECTION.



   Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the City of
Noblesville Planning Department for a Class 1 structure, the Fire Chief, or
his or her designee, shall conduct a final inspection with a building
official from the City of Noblesville. All fire protection systems shall be
successfully inspected and tested prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.175  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Whenever the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, finds any new
construction work in a Class 1 structure regulated by the Indiana Fire Code,
Indiana Building Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this
Fire Prevention Code, or any other code of the jurisdiction being performed
in a manner contrary to the provisions of those codes or in a dangerous or
unsafe manner, the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is authorized to issue
a stop work order. A failure to comply with a stop work order issued by the
City of Noblesville Fire Department may result in a $250 fine per day.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.176  LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   This Fire Prevention Code shall not be construed to hold the public
entity, any officer, or employee responsible for any damage to persons or
property by reason of the inspection authorization herein provided or by
reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment or process authorized
herein.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.177  WALL ROUGH INSPECTIONS.



   Plans for fire alarm systems, water-based fire protection systems, fire
pumps, special hazard fire suppression systems, high-piled storage
arrangements and firestop systems shall be submitted to the City of
Noblesville Fire Department prior to the request for the required wall-rough
inspection. The request for the wall rough inspection will not be honored by
the City of Noblesville Planning Department without the proper submittal of
all required fire protection plans.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.178  HINDRANCE TO INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, interfere with, or in
any manner hinder the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, while engaged in
the discharge of his or her inspection duties.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.179  UNDERGROUND INSPECTIONS.



   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall inspect all underground
private fire service and underground Fire Department connection
installations. The contractor shall notify the Fire Department 48 hours in
advance of this required inspection.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



PERMITS



§ 92.190  BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   No building permit for the construction of, alteration, or
addition to a Class 1 structure shall be issued by the City of Noblesville
Planning Department without the prior life safety plan review of the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee.



   (B)   All information deemed necessary for a complete life safety
plan review shall be submitted by the design professional upon request prior
to release of the building permit.



   (C)   No building permit shall be issued by the City of Noblesville
Planning Department until such time that notification has been received from
the water utility having jurisdiction for a project stating the water mains
have been accepted and are in service; and, the fire hydrant connections and
locations have been approved by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.
(Ordinance #42-5-05).



   (D)   No building permit shall be issued by the City of Noblesville
Planning Department until such time that notification has been received by
the City of Noblesville Fire Department indicating that fire apparatus access
roads have been constructed and approved; and, the temporary or permanent
street signs have been installed.



   (E)   No improvement location permit (ILP) shall be issued by the
City of Noblesville Planning Department until such time that the Fire Chief,
or his or her designee, has received approved site and utility plans for all
projects that require approval.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.191  OPEN BURNING PERMITS.



   As required by this Fire Prevention Code, prior approval from the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, is required for recreational open burning.
Prior approval is further defined in this section as requiring an open burn
permit issued by the City of Noblesville Fire Department. The required Burn
Permit shall be kept at the site of the fire during burning operations.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS



§ 92.200  AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS.



   (A)   AED devices, where required, shall be installed in sufficient
numbers and in locations so that an AED device shall be accessible, at a
minimum, within three minutes or 500 feet maximum travel distance in the
event of an emergency in accordance with the American Heart Association
recommendations.



   (B)   AED devices, where required, arc to be wall mounted and
installed so that they are clearly visible to staff and visitors.



   (C)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall review and
approve the number and installation locations for AED devices; and, shall
inspect the establishment to confirm the AED installation as approved prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   The installation and maintenance of the AED device(s) and
periodic training on the use of the AED device(s) shall be the responsibility
of the owner. A business, institution, or other entity which is required to
install AED devices shall train one or more persons in the use of an AED.



   (E)   All AED installations shall be subject to annual inspections
by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee.



   (F)   A business, institution, or other entity which is required to
install AEDs can appeal to the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, for relief
from this section if it can be demonstrated that an undue hardship will exist
from complying with the conditions of this section.



   (G)   AED devices shall be installed in newly constructed Class 1
structures as required in this Fire Prevention Code. The intent of this Fire
Prevention Code is not to require AED devices in Class 1 structures in
existence prior to the adoption of this Code.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.201  PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Group A with an occupant load that exceeds 300.



   (B)   Group B with an occupant load that exceeds 300.



   (C)   Group E with an occupant load that exceeds 300.



   (D)   Group H.



   (E)   Group I-1 Assisted Living Facilities.



   (F)   Group I-2 and I-3.



   (G)   Group M with an occupant load that exceeds 1,000.



   (H)   Group R-l, three stories or great in height.



   (I)   Covered malls exceeding 50,000 square feet.



   (J)   Single-tenant Class 1 structures exceeding 60,000 square feet.



   (K)   Class 1 structures where the floor level of the highest story
is located more than 30 feet above the lowest level of Fire Department
vehicle access.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.202  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Group A occupancies used exclusively for purposes of religious
worship that have an occupant load less than 1,000 in the sanctuary.



   (B)   Self-storage facilities.



   (C)   Parking garages and Group U occupancies.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



FEES



§ 92.210  INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   Fire and life safety inspections shall be conducted by the
Fire Chief, or his or her designee, in existing Class 1 structures per I.C.
36-8-17-8. Upon the discovery of a violation of the Indiana Building Code,
Indiana Fire Code, Indiana Mechanical Code, Indiana Fuel Gas Code, this Fire
Prevention Code, or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction, a
re-inspection may be necessary to confirm compliance with a notice of
violation or an order issued by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. A fee
for re-inspections may be charged as indicated below:



      (1)   First re-inspection: No charge.



      (2)   Second re-inspection: $100.



      (3)   All subsequent re-inspections: $250.



   (B)   The fees assessed by this chapter are in addition to those
fines or fees that may be levied by the State of Indiana, Hamilton County,
and/or the City of Noblesville.



   (C)   All payments are due within 30 days from the date or the
assessment of the fee. Violators who fail to make payment prior to the
payment due date shall be assessed an additional $25 late fee for each
outstanding fee and shall be subject to litigation for failure to pay an
ordinance violation fee.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)  Penalty, see § 92.999



§ 92.211  ADDITIONAL FEE SCHEDULE/FEE SUMMARY.



 



Administrative review (appeal)/variance
 
$50


Fire investigation report
 
$20


Fire investigation report with pictures
 
$25


Fire NFIRS report
 
$5


Fire watch fee
 
$35/hour


Violation of fire watch order
 
$500/day


Violation of stop work order
 
$250/day


Open burning violation
 
$200/day


Fire lane violation
 
$15 - $100


Driving over a fire hose violation
 
$50 per incident


Re-inspection fees
 
See above


Late fees
 
$25


False fire alarms
 
See § 110.10


AED violation
 
$100 for first offense with additional $100 for each 45-day period of
non-compliance thereafter




 



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.212  DISPOSITION OF FEES/MONIES COLLECTED.



   (A)   Monies generated from permit applications, re-inspection fees,
fees collected related to the enforcement of a fire watch order, variance
request fees or any other fee, fine or damage award collected pursuant to
this Noblesville Fire Prevention Code shall be deposited in the Fire
Prevention Enforcement Fund.



   (B)   Monies deposited in the Fire Prevention Enforcement Fund shall
be used by the Noblesville Fire Department to pay for education, training,
and enforcement material required by the personnel of the Fire Department.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



§ 92.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   If any person, firm, or corporation shall violate any of the
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code, or shall do any act prohibited
herein, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined within the time
prescribed by the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, or shall fail, neglect,
or refuse to obey any lawful notice of violation or any order by the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, in connection with the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Code or any other Fire Safety Code of the jurisdiction for each
such violation, failure, or refusal, such person, firm, or corporation may be
cited into the court having jurisdiction and fined up to an including the
maximum penalty prescribed by I.C. 36-1-3-8(10).



   (B)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to levy fees or issue citations covering violations of this Fire
Prevention Code. Violators shall be fined and/or cited into the court having
jurisdiction.



   (C)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall have the
authority to cause improvement location permits (ILP) and building permits to
be held and not released by the City of Noblesville Planning Department for
all projects that require Fire Department approval until all required or
requested information is received by the City of Noblesville Fire Department.



   (D)   Fire watch order. Any property owner or tenant that does not
comply with a fire watch order issued by the City of Noblesville Fire
Department pursuant to § 92.140 may be fined $500 per day. Each day during
which violation of this section takes place shall be deemed to be a separate
violation.



   (E)   Controlled burning. Any person, firm, or corporation violating
any provision of §§ 92.150 through 92.154 shall, upon conviction, be fined
up to $200 for each offense. Each day during which a violation of this
section takes place shall be deemed to be a separate violation.



   (F)   Emergency vehicle lanes. Any vehicle or personal property
found to be obstructing an emergency vehicle lane shall, with the consent of
the owner, lessee, or other person in possession or control of the real
estate where the emergency vehicle lane has been established, be towed away
or removed at the request of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee, or
police enforcement officer. The owner of such property shall be responsible
for all tow-in charges and resulting storage charges from such violation. The
owner of any personal property or motor vehicle found in violation of this
section shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $15 up to a maximum of
$100.



   (G)   Fire hose. It is unlawful for a vehicle to drive over an
unprotected fire hose owned and operated by the Fire Department that has been
laid down on a public or private street, a private driveway, or parking lot
without the consent of the Fire Chief, or his or her designee. The driver of
any motor vehicle that violates this section shall be subject to a fine in
the amount of $50.



   (H)   Automatic external defibrillator requirement. Any person,
firm, or corporation violating any provision of §§ 92.200 through 92.202
shall, upon conviction, be fined $100 for the first offense and an additional
$100 shall be assessed for each 45-day period thereafter in which compliance
has not occurred.



(Ord. 50-10-09, passed 10-27-09)



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES



Section



Public Nuisances



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Public nuisances affecting health



   93.03   Public nuisances offending morals and decency



   93.04   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   93.05   Weeds, grass and debris



   93.06   Junk



   93.07   Enforcement and remedies



Noise



   93.20   Applicability



   93.21   Definitions



   93.22   Prohibited activities



   93.23   Violations



   93.24   Exemptions



Unsafe Structures Code



   93.35   Unsafe structures code adopted; enforcement



 



   93.99   Penalty



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “LITTER”, “GARBAGE” and “RUBBISH” (as these terms are
defined in § 91.01). Newspapers, handbills, circulars, and all other waste
material thrown or deposited in any street, sidewalk, alley or public place
in the city.



   “PUBLIC NUISANCE.”  A thing, act, occupation, condition, or use of
property which shall continue for such length of time as to:



      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort,
health, repose, or safety of the public;



      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the
use of property;



      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or



      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct,
or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley,
highway, navigable body of water, or other public way.



(Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   (A)   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things
are hereby specifically declared to be public health nuisances, but shall not
be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming within the definition
of § 93.01 above.



      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated, or unwholesome food
or drink sold or offered for sale to the public.



      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds, or fowl not buried or
otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death.



      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animals or vegetable matter,
trash, rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, or any material in
which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects, rats, or other vermin may
breed, or may be a fire hazard.



      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies, or other
insects can multiply.



      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight, or not kept clean.



      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids,
fumes, gases, fly ash, or industrial dust within the city limits in such
quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or
to threaten or cause substantial injury to property.



      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
river, lake, canal, or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes
or other substances.



      (8)   Any use of property, substances, or things within the
city emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure, or inconvenience
the health of any appreciable number of persons within the city, or any
slaughterhouse.



      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from
public use.



      (10)   All noxious weeds. See § 93.05 for additional
regulations.



      (11)   Any accumulation of junk, rubbish, scrap metal,
automotive parts, building materials, machinery, dead trees, or parts
thereof, upon any premises in a residential area. See § 93.04 for additional
regulations.



   (B)   It shall be illegal to throw, place, or deposit litter or any
foreign matter of any kind in any street, sidewalk, alley or public place in
the city.



   (C)   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other
public place, or upon private property.



   (D)   Such nuisances shall be subject to abatement in accordance
with § 93.07.



(Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   (A)   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things
are hereby specifically declared to be public nuisances offending public
morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude
other nuisances offending public morals and decency coming within the
definition of § 93.01.



      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame,
gambling houses, and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the
purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse, or gambling.



      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines.



      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt
beverages are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured, or
rectified without a permit or license as provided for by this subchapter.



      (4)   Any place or premises within the city where city
ordinances or state laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals, or
welfare are openly, continuously, repeatedly, and intentionally violated.



      (5)   Any place or premises resorted to for the purpose of
drinking intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages in violation of the
laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.



   (B)   Such nuisances shall be subject to abatement in accordance
with § 93.07.



(Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   (A)   The following acts, omissions, places, conditions and things
are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting peace and safety, but
such enumeration shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances affecting
public peace or safety coming within the provisions of § 93.01.



      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired, or altered within the
city in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to
materials and manner of construction of buildings and structures.



      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or devices
which purport to be or may be mistaken as official traffic-control devices
placed or maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway
crossing.



      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions
which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys, or highways
from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk.



      (4)   Actions involving trees included in the following.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, grow
or maintain any shade tree or trees, which will obstruct the proper
distribution of light from the street lamps now in use and hereinafter to be
erected.



         (b)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to have a clear
height of ten feet above the surface of sidewalks and 12 feet above the
surface of the street or roadway, and the branches of all trees in front of
and along lots or lands near which street lights are placed shall be trimmed
so as not to obstruct the free passage of light from the street lights to the
street and sidewalks.







 



         (c)   The Designated Department is authorized to give
written notice by mail to property owners ordering them to trim trees so that
the trees shall conform to the provisions of division (A)(4)(b) of this
section.



         (d)   If the property owner fails to trim said trees as
ordered, the Designated Department may cause the trees to be trimmed as
ordered, and the cost thereof shall be a lien on such real estate and
collectible in the same manner as assessments made for street improvements.



         (e)   Except as noted in the maintenance requirements
above, no person shall cut, break, or injure the roots, body, limbs, or
branches of a tree planted or growing in and upon the streets, alleys,
avenues, public places, or parks within the city, or tack or post a notice or
handbill or advertisement of any kind upon said trees, guards around the
same, or do any other thing whereby the beauty or life of any tree or shrub
may be marred, disfigured, or injured.



      (5)   Actions involving shrubbery and obstructions included in
the following.



         (a)    On property at any corner formed by intersecting
streets, it shall be unlawful to install, set out, or maintain, or to allow
the installation, setting out, or maintenance of any sign, hedge, shrubbery,
natural growth, or other obstruction to the view, higher than three  feet
above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, within that
triangular area between the property line and a diagonal line joining points
on the property lines 25 feet from the point of their intersection, or in the
case of rounded corners, the triangular area between the tangents to the
curve and a diagonal line joining points on said tangent 25 feet from the
point of their intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the
beginning and at the end of the curve at the corner.







 



         (b)   Section 93.04 shall not apply to permanent
buildings; public utility poles; trees trimmed to the trunk to a line at
least 12 feet above the level of the intersection; saplings, or plant species
of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so
planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed
crossview; supporting members of appurtenances to permanent buildings
existing on the date this chapter becomes effective; official warning signs
or signals; to places where the contour of the ground is such that there can
be no cross-visibility at the intersection; or to signs mounted ten feet or
more above the ground and whose supports do not constitute an obstruction as
defined in § 93.04.



      (6)   Actions involving street lawns included in the
following: no person shall willfully, mischievously, or maliciously injure
any lawn or the grade of such lawn upon any improved street within the city,
or tramp or travel upon such lawn, or drive any horse or other animal, or run
any vehicle upon the same, except at some street or alley crossing unless
permission shall have been granted by Common Council to such person to use
part of such lawn at a designated point.



      (7)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated, or out
of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit for
human use; or shall be an invitation to children and endanger the lives of
such children, or which, because of its condition has become a fire hazard.



      (8)   All wires over streets, alleys, or public grounds which
are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground.



      (9)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations in
violation of § 93.22.



      (10)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
crosswalks and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by
the ordinances of the city or which, although made in accordance with such
ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished.



      (11)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations, or
unused basements freely accessible from any public street, alley, or sidewalk.



      (12)   All abandoned refrigerators, iceboxes, or similar
containers from which the doors and other covers have not been removed or
which are not equipped with a device for opening from the inside by pushing
only with the strength of a small child.



      (13)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting
on a public street, alley, or sidewalk or of a public street, alley, or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic
and free use of the streets or sidewalks.



      (14)   Any sign, marquee, or awning which is in an unsafe
condition, or which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk
less than eight feet above the sidewalk surface.



      (15)   Any nuisance so defined by I.C. 32-30-6, et seq., and
any other provisions of the Indiana statutes.



   (B)   Such nuisances shall be subject to abatement in accordance
with § 93.07.



(Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  WEEDS, GRASS AND DEBRIS.



   (A)   Any owner of real estate located within the city or the tenant
residing therein shall be required to cut high weeds and grass, and remove
debris and rubbish from said real estate within five days after receiving
written notice of such requirement from the planning department. Property
owners shall also be responsible to cut high weeds and grass, and remove
debris and rubbish from the area between the streets and sidewalks adjacent
to the real estate. All parcels/land located within a floodplain, wetlands,
woods, or undeveloped areas may be exempt from the above requirements, as
determined by the Planning Director upon request of a landowner. In
determining whether a parcel of land is exempt from the provisions of this
section, the planning director shall consider the following:



      (1)   The impact of the exemption upon surrounding property
owners and their use of their real estate;



      (2)   The ecological impact of the exemption including the
potential impact upon wildlife habitat, water quality, air quality, flood
control, and erosion control;



      (3)   The contributory effect of the exemption upon the
creation or preservation of green space and natural undeveloped land; and



      (4)   The general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the city.



   (B)   Weeds shall mean any plant exceeding six inches in height.
Plant material in a floodplain area exempted from the provisions of this
section, as described in division (A) of this section, shall not be subject
to these regulations. Trees, shrubberies, flowers, ornamental grasses, and
agricultural crops, including hay and pasture, exceeding six inches are not
considered to be weeds or rank vegetation.



   (C)   Rank vegetation shall include the following weeds.



      (1)   Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense).



      (2)   Johnson grass and Columbus grass (Sorghum halepense and
Sorghum album).



      (3)   Bur cucumber (Sicyos angulatus).



      (4)   Shattercane (Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench spp. Drummondii
(Seud.) deWet).



      (5)   Poison ivy.



      (6)   Poison sumac.



      (7)   Poison oak.



      (8)   Quackgrass (Elytrigia repens).



      (9)   Carolina horsenettle (Solanum carolinense).



      (10)   Cocklebur (Xanthium strumarium).



      (11)   Wild Mustard (Brassica kaber var, pinnatifida).



   (D)   Grass, excluding ornamental grass, shall not exceed six inches
in height.



   (E)   In the event that the owner of the real estate shall fail to
perform as required in this section for a period of five days after the
giving of notice of non-compliance described in § 93.07 of this chapter, the
city or a contractor acting on behalf of the city shall have the right to
enter onto the real estate and bring the real estate into compliance with the
requirements of this section.



(Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  JUNK.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   “COMPOST PILE.”  A pile, mound, or heap (whether on the ground or
in a container or structure) consisting solely of organic materials that are
intentionally collected in order to create a compost material for gardening
purposes.



   “DEBRIS.”  Remains of something broken down or destroyed, rough
broken bits and pieces of stone, glass, wood, concrete building materials
after demolition, bits and pieces of rubbish or litter, or a heap of rock
fragments.



   “JUNK.”  Any article in any form composed of or consisting of any
of the following enumerated: discarded, abandoned, or cast-off materials. The
term shall include, but not be limited to, paper, rags, tin, metals, residue
from burning, broken glass, clothing, rubber, plastics, synthetic substances
and fabrics, bottles, feathers, automobile parts detached from the vehicle as
a whole, and household items not intended for exposure to rain and other
inclement weather (includes furniture, mattress, and major appliances).



   “LUMBER.” Wooden materials that are not in good usable condition or
are not kept in an orderly fashion or are not actively being used in a
construction process on the parcel where the materials are being kept.



   “PUBLIC PLACES.”  Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
avenues, lanes, alleys, or other public ways, and parks, squares, plazas,
grounds, and buildings frequented by the general public whether publicly or
privately owned, including but not limited to, restaurants, shopping centers,
stores, hotels, motels, industrial establishments, office buildings,
apartment buildings, gas stations, hospitals, and clinics.



   “TRASH.”  Waste such as feathers, coffee grounds, ashes, tin cans,
paper boxes, glass, wood, shrubs, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, and
other similar materials.



   (B)   Because of the danger to health by providing places for vermin
and insects to harbor the fire hazard danger caused by the accumulation of
discarded materials and the risk caused by the attraction of children to it,
junk is hereby declared to be a nuisance.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the accumulation
of junk, trash, or debris upon any property unless located in a properly
zoned and established landfill or junkyard. This shall include any of the
following:



      (1)   Junk, trash, litter, refuse, debris, lumber, wood, and
brush;



      (2)   Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment
such as automobiles, mobile homes, trailers, campers, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, appliances, cans, or containers;



      (3)   Automobile parts, including tires and any other portion
or parts of any motor vehicle detached from the vehicle as a whole; and



      (4)   Scrap metal or pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin,
zinc, copper, aluminum, or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain,
plastic, rubber, or any other materials and whether intact or in parts.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the
contrary, it shall not be a violation of this section to create and maintain
a residential compost pile provided:



      (1)   The compost pile does not occupy an area greater than
100 square feet; and



      (2)   The compost pile is either 100 feet from any other
parcel or completely screened by a fence or other man made or natural screen
such that the compost pile is not visible from any other parcel.



   (E)   Maintenance of property.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling
any private premises to maintain such private premises in a clean and orderly
manner. It shall be a violation of this ordinance to abandon, neglect, or
disregard the condition or appearance of any premises so as to permit the
accumulation of junk and trash thereon.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of any person owning or controlling
any public place to keep the premises clean of all junk, trash, litter,
refuse, and debris and to take measures, including daily cleanup of the
premises, to prevent the accumulation of the above listed materials or
movement by the elements to adjoining properties.



      (3)   The property owners and contractors in charge of any
construction site shall maintain the construction site in such manner as to
avoid the accumulation of junk and trash, and no junk or trash shall be
allowed to be carried by the elements to adjoining properties. All junk,
trash, and litter from construction or related activities shall be picked up
at the end of each work day and placed in a container for regular removal.



   (F)   Such nuisances shall be subject to abatement in accordance
with § 93.07.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12; Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12) 
Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   Abatement of public nuisances. Any violation of Chapter 93
shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Designated Department is authorized to
give written notice by mail to property owners ordering them to abate the
nuisance.



   (B)   Summary abatement.



      (1)   Inspection of premises. Whenever a complaint is made to
the Designated Department that a public nuisance exists or has existed within
the city, the Designated Department shall forthwith inspect or cause to be
inspected the premises and, whenever practicable, the inspecting officer
shall cause photographs to be made of the premises and shall file the same in
the Planning Department.



      (2)   Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the
Designated Department may serve a notice on the owner by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Such notice shall direct the owner, to abate or
remove the nuisance within ten days and shall state that unless such nuisance
is so abated, the city will cause the nuisance to be abated and will charge
the cost thereof to the owner.



      (3)   In the event that the city has to abate a violation of
this section due to owner noncompliance, the city shall issue a bill to the
owner of the real property for the costs incurred by the city in abating the
violation, including administrative costs and removal costs. The bill shall
be sent by the Planning Department by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or personal or copy service upon the land owner if he or she is a
resident of the city, or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to his or her last known address if he or she is a non-resident of
the city. The bill shall be paid within 30 days of receipt by the owner of
the real property.



      (4)   In the event that the bill described in division (B)(3)
of this section is not paid to the city Planning Department within 30 days,
the Director of the Planning Department shall certify to the Hamilton County
Auditor the amount of the bill, plus any additional administrative costs
incurred in the certification. Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-10.1-4, the Hamilton
County Auditor shall place the total amount certified on the tax duplicate
for the property affected, and the total amount, including any accrued
interest, shall be collected as delinquent taxes are collected and shall be
disbursed to the general fund of the city.



      (5)   Any property owner wishing to appeal a notice of
violation or a bill received due to the city’s abatement of the violation
must submit a written request for appeal to the Director of the Planning
Department within ten days of receipt. The Director of the Department of
Planning shall then issue his written findings within ten  days after
receipt of the appeal. The findings of the Director of Planning are subject
to review by the city Board of Public Works and Safety if a request for
review is filed with the Office of the Clerk-Treasurer by the property owner
within ten days of the receipt of the Director’s written findings.



   (C)   Great and immediate danger and abatement by court action.



      (1)   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public
nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency, the
Designated Department may direct the chief of police, or a deputy sheriff, to
serve a notice on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant
or person causing, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance and to post a
copy of the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner,
occupant, or person causing, permitting, or maintaining the nuisance to abate
or remove the nuisance within 24 hours.



      (2)   Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer
shall determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that
the nature of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals, or decency; the property
owner has not responded to written notice; and abatement by the city is not
feasible, the inspecting officer shall initiate an enforcement action in the
Noblesville City Court to abate such nuisance in the name of the city.



(Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



NOISE



§ 93.20  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all persons, corporations, entities, and
landholders who are within the boundaries of the properties described in the
legal description provided in Exhibit “A” of Ordinance 40-5-03.



(Ord. 40-5-03, passed 6-10-03; Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning. 
All terminology used in this subchapter, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI).



   “A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL.”  The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network.  The level so
read is designated dB(A).



   “AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL.”  The composite of noise from all sources
near and far.  In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the
normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location when
sound is not being electronically amplified at a location.



   “EXCEEDANCE LEVELS L10 AND L1.”  The A-weighted sound levels which
exceed 10% and 1%, respectively, of the specified measurement period.



   “INTRUSIVE NOISE.”  That noise which intrudes over and above the
existing ambient noise at a given location.  The relative intrusiveness of a
sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence,
and tonal or information content as well as the prevailing ambient noise
level.



   “NOISE.”  Any sound which annoys or disturbs human beings or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
human beings.



   “SOUND AMPLIFICATION EQUIPMENT.”  Any device for the amplification
of the human voice, music, instruments, or any other sound associated with
mass assemblies.



   “SOUND LEVEL METER.”  An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter or recording device, and frequency weighting
network for the measurement of sound level, which satisfies the requirements
for Type S2A meters, as set forth in the American National Standards
Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most
recent revision thereof.



(Ord. 40-5-03, passed 6-10-03; Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.22  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, entity, or
landowner within the land area specified in § 93.20 to cause or permit any
person, machine, electronic device, or any other means of generation of sound
to be generated, which causes sound levels to exceed the levels prohibited by
this subchapter.



   (B)   No person, corporation, entity, or landowner shall permit any
noise to be generated or produced which exceeds 75 dB/A for more than two
minutes per hour, measured at a point no closer than one-half mile from the
boundary of the property line from which the sound is generated.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, entity, or
landowner to generate or permit the generation of sound from their property
through electronic amplification at a level above 25 dB/A above ambient noise
level for more than two minutes per hour at the property line where the sound
is generated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., daily from Sunday
evening through Friday morning and from 11:30 p.m. to 9:00 a.m., daily from
Friday evening through Sunday morning.



   (D)   No person shall play, use or operate any machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound, including, but not limited to,
loudspeakers, radios, CD players, television sets, musical instruments,
phonographs, cassette players or any other machine designed or intended to
produce or reproduce sound, nor operate any motor vehicle that contains a
modified or defective exhaust system, if such machine, device or vehicle is
located in or on any of the following:



      (1)   Any public property, including any public right-of-way,
highway, building, sidewalk, public space, park or thoroughfare and the sound
generated therefrom is: (1) clearly audible 40 feet or more from its source;
or (2) is at a level of 90 decibels (90dB) or more when measured from a
distance of not less than six feet from its source; or



      (2)   Any private property and the sound generated therefrom
is: (1) clearly audible 40 feet or more outside of said private property
line; or (2) is at a level of 90 decibels (90dB) or more when measured from a
distance of not less than six feet from the private property line.



(Ord. 40-5-03, passed 6-10-03; Am. Ord. 42-12-99, passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord.
43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.23  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Citations for violations of this subchapter may be issued by
any sworn member of the Police Department.  Any person who violates the
provisions of this subchapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by
a fine of not more than:



      (1)   First offense:  Up to $250.



      (2)   Second offense within two years:  Up to $500.



      (3)   Third offense within two years:  Up to $1,000.



      (4)   Fourth and subsequent offenses within two years:  Up to
$2,500.



   (B)   The City Court shall be the court of proper venue and
jurisdiction for the enforcement of this subchapter.  Citations for
violations of this subchapter shall be issued by a sworn member of the Police
Department.  Citations for violations of §§ 93.22 and 93.24 may be issued
by any sworn member of the Police Department and upon property operated by
the Noblesville Schools by a sworn special police officer appointed under
I.C. 36-8-3-7.  Any fine imposed by this subchapter may be suspended if the
court finds that the violation was the result of natural causes or
circumstances beyond the control of the person charged with the violation of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 40-5-03, passed 6-10-03; Am. Ord. 42-12-99, passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord.
43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.24  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   Sounds emitted from authorized emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Lawn mowers, garden tractors, construction equipment, and
power tools, when properly muffled, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. only.



   (C)   Burglar alarms and other warning devices when properly
installed, providing the cause for such alarm or warning device sound is
investigated and turned off within a reasonable period of time.



   (D)   Parades, festivals, carnivals, fairs, celebrations, concerts,
artistic performances or other events authorized by the Board of Public Works
and Safety or another appropriate governmental entity.



   (E)   Attendant noise connected with the actual performance of
athletic or sporting events and practices related thereto.



   (F)   The emission of sound for the purposes of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency, or for the performance of emergency work.



   (G)   Sounds associated with the use of legal fireworks.



   (H)   Sounds associated with the use of an approved public safety
training facility between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (I)   Sounds associated with the normal conduct of legally
established non-transient businesses when such sounds are customary,
incidental and within the normal range appropriate for such use.



(Ord. 42-12-99, passed 12-27-99; Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



UNSAFE STRUCTURES CODE



§ 93.35  UNSAFE STRUCTURES CODE ADOPTED; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is established the
City of Noblesville Unsafe Structures law.



   (B)   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through 36-7-9-28 and its amendments are adopted
by the city and incorporated by reference in the City Unsafe Structures law.
All proceedings concerning land within the city for the inspection, repair,
and removal of unsafe structures shall be governed by that state statute and
this section. If the provisions of this section conflict with the provisions
of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 367-9-28, the state statute controls.



   (C)   All structures or parts of structures within the boundaries of
the city which are determined by the Director of the Planning Department to
be unsafe, as defined by this section, are declared to be public nuisances
and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal.



   (D)   The Director of the city Planning Department may administer
and proceed under the provisions of the state statute in ordering the repair
or removal of any buildings found to be unsafe, as specified in state statute
or as specified in this section.



   (E)   The description of an unsafe building contained in the
provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-4 is adopted by this section and incorporated by
reference in this section as if copied in full.



   (F)   The definition of “substantial property interest” set
forth in I.C. 36-7-9-2 is adopted by this section and incorporated by
reference in this section as if copied in full.



   (G)   All work for the reconstruction, repair, or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike
manner in accordance to the accepted standards and practices in the trade.
The provisions of the building laws as defined in I.C. 22-12-1-3, adopted as
the rules of the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, shall be
considered standard and acceptable practice for all matters covered by this
section or orders issued pursuant to this section by the Director of the
Planning Department.



   (H)   No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant,
shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove,
demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any structure, building or premises
or cause or permit such to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the
subsections of this section or any order issued by the Planning Department.
Any person violating this section commits a Class C Infraction for each day
such violation occurs.



   (I)   The Common Council designates the Planning Department as the
department authorized to administer acts of the city under this section and
I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28.



   (J)   The Director of the Planning Department is considered the
enforcement officer for implementing this section within the city.



(Ord. 68-8-05, passed 9-13-05; Am. Ord. 43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined up to $500 for each violation.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   The payment of a penalty for the violation of any provision of
this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.  Nor
shall such payment be held to prevent the enforced correction of the
prohibited conditions by the court in which any complaint based on these
sections shall be filed, or by separate action as provided for herein.



   (C)   In addition to any penalties provided for herein or by any
other section of Title IX, the city shall have the right to enforce
compliance with the code or to enjoin the acts in violation of the code by
filing the necessary actions for injunctive relief.  If injunctive relief is
granted by any court, the city shall further be entitled to recover the costs
of prosecuting the suit, which costs shall include attorney fees or other
necessary expenses.



   (D)   Violations of any of the sections of Title IX may be brought
by the city or its authorized agent on a form complaint and summons, the same
as or similar to the complaint and summons marked Exhibit “A” attached to
Ord. 1575, available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 1485, passed 5-23-83; amend. Ord. 1575, passed 2-25-86; Am. Ord.
43-11-12, passed 11-27-12)



CHAPTER 94:  ENCROACHMENT SPECIFICATIONS



Section



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Authority



   94.03   Types of encroachments and approval requirements



   94.04   Regulations for all encroachment permits



   94.05   Regulations for construction encroachments



   94.06   Regulations for special provision encroachments



   94.07   Regulations for community encroachments



   94.08   Regulations for downtown encroachments



   94.09   Regulations for permanent encroachments



   94.10   Fees



 



   94.99   Penalty



   Appendix: Tables and Details



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   The regulations of this chapter are intended to protect the city and
its citizens from unnecessary expenses related to private construction and
use of the public right-of-way. The city is responsible for maintaining all
streets and structures accepted within Noblesville right-of-way, therefore,
it is necessary to set minimum standards for obstruction of right-of-way and
the construction of all improvements. These minimum standards protect,
maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
city is responsible for all these improvements, and in order to avoid
assuming unnecessary maintenance costs and inconvenience to the citizens and
businesses of the city reasonable permit and inspection requirements for
these activities are necessary. For the purpose of this chapter, an
encroachment shall be any activity within a public right-of-way or city
easement.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.02  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Board of Public Works and Safety has the legal
responsibility for the management of all city property. The proper use of the
public right-of-way is within the legal authority of the Board of Public
Works and Safety. All encroachments shall be in accordance with this chapter
and subject to the authorization of the Board of Public Works and Safety. The
Board of Public Works and Safety shall designate a city department (hereafter
Designated Department) the authority to approve encroachment permits, as an
agent of the Board, on local streets for routine encroachment requests. The
Designated Department shall have the right to appoint a deputy to perform the
duties of encroachment permit administration subject to the approval of the
Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to open, cut, bore
into or under any street, alley, or other public way, paved or unpaved, or to
obstruct the right-of-way for the express purpose of construction, vending,
or other purpose restricting the intended use of the right-of-way within the
limits of the city shall be required to obtain a specific permit for such
purpose. All streets shall have right-of-way widths equal to or greater than
the widths shown in the Noblesville Construction Standards found in the
Unified Development Ordinance Appendix F and the Noblesville Thoroughfare
Plan included in the city Comprehensive Master Plan. All new streets not
specifically identified shall be classified as determined by the City
Engineer, Planning Director, and/or Street Commissioner using the
classification set forth in the Noblesville Construction Standards and
Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.03  TYPES OF ENCROACHMENTS AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Construction encroachments.



      (1)   The following right-of-way encroachments shall require
an encroachment permit to be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



         (a)   Addition of auxiliary lanes to existing
development.



         (b)   Street cut requests on any primary or secondary
arterial street as determined by the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan located in
the city Comprehensive Master Plan.



         (c)   The off-site extension of services to a new
development from existing city right-of-way.



         (d)   Any proposed encroachment within the Central
Business District defined by the area between Clinton Street south to Maple
Street, and 10th street west to the White River. Temporary obstructions and
encroachments in the Central Business District equal to or less than a total
of eight hours in any 24 hour period shall be exempt from the permit
requirements subject to the following conditions:



            1.   Work must be associated with the repair and
maintenance of signs, building, lighting, or other structures within the
district;



            2.   A continuous, safe, accessible pedestrian way
must be maintained at a minimum width of 40 inches, and must continue through
the entire work zone; and



            3.   Exempt encroachments shall not be consecutive
or continuous, and any additional or subsequent encroachments within a 48
hour period shall require a permit.



         (e)   Special provision encroachments. Permits for these
encroachments are subject to additional regulations.



            1.   Pavement surfaced up to 36 months prior to
the encroachment application.



            2.   Brick streets, alleys, sidewalks, or any
other brick surface within the right-of-way of the city.



      (2)   The following right-of-way encroachments shall require
an encroachment permit to be submitted to the Designated Department. The
Designated Department may review and approve the requested encroachment
permit unless they determine the requested encroachment is an unusual
circumstance requiring Board of Public Works and Safety approval.



         (a)   The extension of services to a new development
from existing city right-of-way.



         (b)   The extension of services to existing homes from
city right-of-way.



         (c)   New utility connections accessed within the
right-of-way.



         (d)   Upgrade of service to a single user from city
right-of-way.



         (e)   Directional bores within the right-of-way.



         (f)   Parallel, diagonal, or perpendicular cuts through
the existing pavement or the right-of-way.



         (g)   Installation of overhead services within the
right-of-way.



         (h)   Open trenching.



         (i)   Emergency encroachments for utilities relating to
an event where public safety is a concern.



         (j)   Boring and trenchless excavation.



         (k)   Irrigation systems.



         (l)   Right-of-way blockage.



            1.   Obstruction due to dumpster, construction
equipment, construction materials, gravel, aggregate, mulch, unattached
moving trailers, portable storage units, and tree removal or disposal
equipment.



            2.   Any work to be done on single family drive
approaches or sidewalk replacements within right-of-way.



         (m)   Curb cuts/new access into city right-of-way.



            1.   New residential driveways.



            2.   Upgrade of commercial or residential
driveways.



         (n)   Aerial work in the right-of-way that restricts
traffic for one hour or less shall be covered under a blanket permit for the
company completing the work. Such permit shall be good for one calendar year.



   (B)   Permanent encroachments shall be approved by the Board of
Public Works and Safety.



   (C)   Community encroachments.



      (1)   The following right-of-way encroachments shall require
an encroachment permit to be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



         (a)   Street closures for community events and festivals.



         (b)   Street closures for block parties.



         (c)   Downtown encroachments. Any new applications
within the Downtown (DT) zoning district, as shown on the city’s Official
Zoning Map.



      (2)   The following right-of-way encroachments shall require
an encroachment permit to be approved by the Designated Department.



         (a)   Downtown encroachments. Any application for
renewal within the Downtown (DT) zoning district, as shown on the city’s
Official Zoning Map.



         (b)   Community garage sale signs.



         (c)   Right-of-way blockage or obstruction due to due to
sidewalk sales, both commercial and residential.



      (3)   Mobile basketball goals and other mobile recreational
equipment are permitted from May 1 through September 30 each calendar year
without an encroachment permit. Permanent foundations for basketball goals or
other recreational equipment which are located in right-of-way or which allow
the equipment to jut into or overhang right-of-way are prohibited. Basketball
goals and other recreational equipment must be removed from and may not
overhang the right-of-way in any manner from October 1 through April 30 in
order to avoid damage to city vehicles that must work in the right-of-way,
for among other things, the removal of snow, leaves, branches, and debris.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  REGULATIONS FOR ALL ENCROACHMENT PERMITS.



   (A)   Encroachment application and permit procedures. All
encroachment permit applications shall be on forms supplied by the Designated
Department and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as required.
Applications must be submitted to the Designated Department in a manner
prescribed by them.



      (1)   Application shall be accompanied by a drawing of the
proposed encroachment that provides sufficient detail to determine the exact
location of the encroachment and the extent of work being completed.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Designated
Department shall have up to five working days to review administrative
permits.



      (3)   Permits requiring Board of Public Works and Safety
approval shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting for which the
item can be advertised and placed on the proposed agenda.



      (4)   The Board of Public Works and Safety and the Designated
Department may impose reasonable conditions which may need to be completed
prior to the issuance of a permit.



      (5)   No work shall be completed prior to the issuance of a
permit, and no permit shall be issued until all applicable fees are paid in
full.



      (6)   Additional permits. The applicant is responsible for
obtaining all the necessary additional permits for their project, including
but not limited to the following agencies:



         (a)   City;



         (b)   Hamilton County;



         (c)   Indiana Department of Transportation;



         (d)   Department of Natural Resources;



         (e)   Indiana Department of Environmental Management; and



         (f)   Army Corps of Engineers.



   (B)   Prior to the start of any encroachment, the permit holder
shall provide to the Designated Department an Indiana Underground Plant
Protection Service (IUPPS) authorization number a minimum of 48 hours prior
to any encroachment in the right-of-way. Failure of notification prior to the
start of the encroachment shall result in a penalty.



   (C)   No property owner shall hold the city responsible for damage
to any structures or equipment within the right-of-way of the city which are
not covered under the IUPPS.



   (D)   Notification of residents. The applicant shall be responsible
for the proof of proper notification of all residents affected by the
proposed encroachment, as determined by the city. A copy of the letters shall
be provided to the Designated Department to become part of the encroachment
permit documentation.



   (E)   Encroachments shall be maintained and constructed to conform
to the ADA Standards for Accessible Design (28 CFR Part 36) requirements
currently in effect at the time work is completed.



   (F)   The permit card shall be onsite during the period of
encroachment.



   (G)   Inspection cancellation procedures. Cancellation of any
scheduled inspection is required prior to the inspection, and failure to
provide notice will result in penalty fee.



   (H)   Permit life. Encroachment start dates shall be provided on the
encroachment permit application. If encroachment work does not commence
within 45 working days of the issuance of the permit, the permit shall be
considered void and the application must be resubmitted. All work must be
completed within 60 working days of the issuance of the permit unless
otherwise noted by the Designated Department. This does not apply to
administratively approved right-of-way blockages and work within the Central
Business District, which shall be valid for a period not to exceed 30 days
unless altered by the Board of Public Works and Safety. This also does not
apply to Downtown encroachments which are valid for one year.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  REGULATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   All improvements intended for public use, to be constructed in
a city right-of-way or easement, or to be constructed as a privately
maintained improvement must conform to city standards according to the
Noblesville construction standards, the Noblesville Unified Development
Ordinance, and shall conform to or exceed the standards as set forth in these
documents.



   (B)   The standards set forth in this chapter are intended to be
minimum standards. Variances from these standards may be considered by the
Board of Public Works and Safety upon written application to the board citing
unusual conditions justifying changes based upon sound engineering practices.
Proposed variances shall have been reviewed by any applicable agency of
jurisdiction, the Engineering Department, the Planning and Development
Department, and/or the Technical Advisory Committee, as appropriate, before
consideration by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (C)   The city may request to review all Indiana Department of
Transportation encroachment permits obtained for work within the Noblesville
corporate limits.



   (D)   Traffic control shall be required for all encroachments that
restrict the natural flow of traffic. All temporary traffic control measures
shall conform to the latest edition of the Indiana Workzone Safety Manual. If
deemed necessary, the city may require the use of off-duty law enforcement
officers to provide traffic control with cost to be paid by the applicant.
Unless otherwise provided, the street shall be kept open to all traffic while
undergoing improvements. Where so provided on maintenance of traffic plan,
approved by the Designated Department, traffic may be bypassed over a detour
route. The detour route markings shall be erected, maintained, and removed by
the contractor.



   (E)   Flowable backfill, conforming to INDOT Specification Section
213, may be required on any cut made in streets, alleys, shoulders, or
sidewalks within five feet of the edge of pavement. The Board of Public Works
and Safety or the Designated Department, herein referred to as “City,”
shall review and approve any exceptions. The installation of all underground
utilities outside of the five foot edge of pavement easement shall be in
compliance with the Noblesville Unified Development Ordinance.



   (F)   All permit work shall be performed Monday through Friday
during the normal business hours of the Designated Department unless
pre-approved by the Department Director and/or his or her representative.
Applicants are responsible for reimbursement of any overtime incurred by the
inspectors for any work done out of normal business hours. The Board of
Public Works and Safety may require work involving significant closures or
disruptions to occur during off-peak, night time, or weekend hours.



   (G)   All encroachment permits shall be inspected by the city. The
appropriate inspections shall be determined by the Designated Department
based upon the type of encroachment and shall be provided to the applicant at
the issuance of the permit. The Applicant is responsible for scheduling all
required inspections.



   (H) Materials shall conform to the specifications set forth in the
Noblesville Construction Standards unless approved in writing by the City
Engineer. Material specifications or mix designs shall be provided to the
city prior to the commencement of work activities. During completion of work
activities, the applicant shall provide the city with load tickets for
materials used on the project, as required.



   (I)   All open cuts in streets and alleys shall have permanent
patches in place no later than 20 working days of the temporary patch
inspection date, or within the permit life, whichever comes first. Temporary
construction patches shall be maintained to the satisfaction of the
Designated Department until permanent patches are complete.



   (J)   Concrete and sod areas are to be restored to equal, if not
better, condition within the 20 working days of the completion of work.



   (K)   All permanent patches shall be maintained by the Applicant for
a period of one year. Maintenance periods will begin with the approval of a
final inspection. All temporary patch methods are to be determined by the
Designated Department. The permit bond will be released one year from the
final inspection of work.



   (L)   Special methods of street cuts shall be implemented from
November 1 through April 30 to ensure temporary patches do not interfere with
the normal operation of city services. These methods shall be determined by
the Director of the Designated Department for each individual permit
application.



   (M)   Boring or any other trenchless excavation which is proposed to
occur in a city right-of-way or easement shall be held to the same
requirements as open excavation. Construction plans, detailing boring or
trenchless activities, shall accompany any permit application for work within
any land in which the City has rights or interest. Applicant shall be
required to submit a three year maintenance bond in the amount of $10,000 to
cover any damages that may be identified after work is completed. Public
utilities may file a $10,000 blanket bond each year to cover all work for
which permits are procured. Any such bond will not expire until three years
after the date on which the last project was completed under a valid permit.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL PROVISION ENCROACHMENTS.



   In addition to the regulations for construction encroachments listed
above the following regulations shall apply for special provision
encroachments.



   (A)   Street cuts for streets paved within three years of the
encroachment permit application date shall be a minimum 1 1/2 inch mill and
overlay. Open street cuts parallel, diagonal, or perpendicular to the travel
lanes shall require a full pavement width mill and overlay which extend a
minimum of 25 feet beyond each of the saw cut patches.



   (B)   Bricks shall be replaced with original bricks removed from
patches or with alternative material approved by the Board of Public Works
and Safety.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.07  REGULATIONS FOR COMMUNITY ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   The applicant for a community encroachment that involves a
street closure or blockage shall be required to notify all those located in
the closure area and obtain signatures agreeing to the closure.



   (B)   The applicant for a community encroachment that involves a
street closure or blockage may be required to submit an emergency action
plan. The determination of whether an emergency action plan is necessary
shall be at the discretion of the Noblesville Fire Department after the
submission of the application. An emergency action plan would be necessary
for any event that has the potential to draw crowds large enough to limit or
delay emergency access to the closure area and also is necessary when a
closure area includes a target hazard occupancy. A target hazard occupancy is
a building or site that contains special hazards that are greater than those
found in the average residential or commercial location and requires a
specific level of access in case of emergency.



      (1)   An emergency action plan is intended to minimize hazards
to human health which result from emergencies. They are put in place to allow
the attendees and organizers to be better organize what to do if an emergency
does occur.



      (2)   An emergency action plan needs to predefine what actions
will be taken to report fires and other emergencies. The plan will identify
who will call in an emergency, which will be the contact for emergency
personnel on arrival, how emergency vehicles and personnel will access the
site, evacuation procedures, a way to account for everyone after the
emergency, as well as any other elements as necessitated by the specific
location.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.08  REGULATIONS FOR DOWNTOWN ENCROACHMENTS.



   (A)   Encroachment permits are required for any activity, display,
sign, or sale when placed in public right-of-way. This requirement does not
apply to items owned and placed by the city, Hamilton County, or the State of
Indiana.



   (B)   All applications for encroachments in this district shall be
accompanied by a letter of consent from the building owner if not the
applicant. This letter shall be notarized and shall acknowledge specifically
the extent of the encroachment.



   (C)   Upon approval of a new permit application, the applicant shall
be required to submit to the Designated Department proof of insurance for
general liability within ten business days that states that the city is
listed as an additional co-insured. An application for renewal shall be
submitted with proof of insurance for general liability. The minimum
insurance requirement shall be $1,000,000 per occurrence, $300,000 per
person, and $50,000 for legal unless the Board of Public Works and Safety
decides to reduce or increase such amounts. The Board may find in certain
situations a substantial risk of liability and at their discretion may
increase the required insurance amounts equal to those amounts found in the
Indiana Tort Claims Act, currently codified in I.C. 34-13-34.



   (D)   An ADA clear zone of at least 40 inches must be maintained.
Such clear zone shall be measured from the brick paver band on the sidewalk
towards the building. If no such band exists, the clear zone shall be
measured from the back of curb or an appropriate location as determined by
the Designated Department. At intervals of no more than 200 feet, to be
located at a minimum at the intersection of the streets and alleys, a clear
zone of at least 60 inches by 60 inches shall be provided to allow space for
passing, and ramps must be kept clear at all times. Merchants are responsible
for maintaining a clear means of egress from the entrance to their building
to the clear zone on the sidewalk.



   (E)   Sandwich board signs (SB) are allowed with an encroachment
permit and a temporary sign permit and are subject to the following
restrictions:



      (1)   Signs shall be sufficiently weighted to ensure stability
during inclement weather conditions;



      (2)   Signs shall not be illuminated or flashing;



      (3)   One sign is allowed per each first floor business;



      (4)   Sign shall be placed in the brick paver band
perpendicular to the front door;



      (5)   Sign must be no more than 36 inches high and 24 inches
wide;



      (6)   Sign shall have a minimum height of 24 inches;



      (7)   Sign shall be wood or woodframe and may contain material
inserts such as slate to allow a different interior material on the sign; and



      (8)   Signs are subject to additional regulations contained in
Article 11 of the Unified Development Ordinance.



   (F)   Bicycle parking is permitted only at the bicycle racks that
have been installed throughout downtown. No bicycles shall be parked on the
sidewalk.



   (G)   Merchants shall be responsible for keeping sidewalks in front
of their business unobstructed and clear for pedestrian traffic. Merchants
must keep walk surface clear of trash, debris, clutter, spills, or items
brought in by their customers such as strollers and shopping bags.



   (H)   Tables and chairs for dining are allowed with an encroachment
permit so long as a 40 inch clear zone from the brick paver band is
maintained to allow pedestrians to utilize the sidewalk unimpeded.



   (I)   Display of the American flag in the existing holders in or
near the brick paver band is exempt from the permit requirement and the
provisions of this chapter.



   (J)   Flags containing seasonal images or text and/or any attention
getting displays on the sidewalk using the existing flag holder in or near
the brick paver band are prohibited.



   (K)   Flags attached to the building must maintain a minimum
clearance from the sidewalk of eight feet. These flags shall be limited to
messages such as “open”“ and “sale” and seasonal images.



   (L)   Sales, vending, seating, or display must be located directly
in front of the business and not overlap adjoining businesses unless written
approval of the affected business is obtained. A copy of such



written approval must be provided as a part of the permit application, and
shall be provided each year.



   (M)   No vending machines shall be placed in public right-of-way in
the DT zoning district. Publication boxes are exempt from this prohibition.



   (N)   Community events are exempt from these regulations. These
events include, but are not limited to, the street dance, Saturday night
hot-rod drive-in, Lions Club pork chop dinner, first Fridays, and jazz on the
square.



   (O)   Non-compliance will result in the revocation of the permit.
Any activity at a location that has had a permit revoked shall not be
eligible for an encroachment permit for a minimum of one year from the
revocation date.



   (P)   Any applications for encroachments under this section must
include a site plan that details specifically the number and location of
encroachments, and notes the required clear zones. Site plans should also
include identification of the uses on each side of their location.



   (Q)   All applications proposing the use of existing alleys in the
DT zoning district must be approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.
Such applications shall be subject to the conditions set out by the Board,
and are not eligible for administrative approval.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.09  REGULATIONS FOR PERMANENT ENCROACHMENTS.



   Permanent encroachments shall consist of two types. The first type
shall be service permanent encroachments that receive regular visits from the
provider and customers to receive goods and services. These shall include,
but not be limited to, package earner services, newspaper boxes, food service
providers, and other similar uses. The second type shall be non-service
permanent encroachments that receive periodic visits for maintenance and
upkeep. These shall include, but not be limited to, signs, landscaping, and
other stationary objects.



   (A)   All permanent encroachments must receive approval by the Board
of Public Works and Safety. The applicant shall be required to sign a
permanent encroachments agreement if the permanent encroachment is approved.
Such agreement shall be recorded at the Hamilton County Recorder’s Office.



   (B)   All permanent encroachments must maintain general liability
insurance that lists the city as an additional co-insured. The minimum
insurance requirement shall be $1,000,000 per occurrence, $300,000 per
person, and $50,000 for legal unless the Board of Public Works and Safety
decides to reduce or increase such amounts. The Board may find in certain
situations a substantial risk of liability and at their discretion may
increase the required insurance amounts equal to those amounts found in the
Indiana Tort Claims Act, currently codified in I.C. 34-13-3-4.



   (C)   Service permanent encroachments shall be required to renew
their permits every year. The application for permit renewal must be
submitted with the proof of general liability insurance.



   (D)   Non-service encroachments shall be good for as long as the
encroachment is in place. The Applicant shall be required to maintain general
liability insurance on the encroachment, and must produce proof of insurance
upon request.



   (E)   Each permanent encroachment shall be kept in a state of good
repair and in neat and clean condition, and free of accumulations of trash,
rubbish, and debris. Each permanent encroachment shall be regularly serviced
so that:



      (1)   It is kept reasonably free of graffiti;



      (2)   It is kept reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling,
and cracked paint or rust and corrosion;  and



      (3)   The structural and functional parts of the permanent
encroachment are not broken or unduly misshapen.



   (F)   If the encroachment is deemed by the Designated Department as
being in a state of disrepair, the Designated Department shall notify the
applicant that the encroachment must be repaired or replaced within 60 days
of receipt of notice.



   (G)   Those service permanent encroachments in place prior to May
12, 2010 shall not be subject to the permit renewal requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.10  FEES.



   Encroachment permit fees. A separate permit application shall be
required for each individual right-of-way cut or encroachment. All fees are
required to be paid prior to the issuance of the encroachment permit.



   (A)   Encroachments shall pay a fee of $50 unless listed below.



   (B)   Encroachments that extend over 100 feet shall pay a fee of $50
plus $0.10 per foot over 100 feet.



   (C)   Pavement surfaced less than 12 months prior to the
encroachment application shall pay a fee of $300 if pavement is cut.



   (D)   Pavement surfaced less than 24 months prior to the
encroachment application shall pay a fee of $200 if pavement is cut.



   (E)   Pavement surfaced less than 36 months prior to the
encroachment application shall pay a fee of $100 if pavement is cut.



   (F)   Any work completed on brick streets, alleys, sidewalks, or any
other brick surface within the right-of-way controlled by the city shall pay
a fee of $100.



   (G)   Public parking spaces located in the central business district
shall require a $10 fee per parking space per day.



   (H)   Blanket permits for aerial work within the right-of-way shall
pay a fee of $1000 each year.



   (I)   Encroachments within the Downtown (DT) zoning district shall
pay a fee of $100 for the first year, and a fee of $50 for each subsequent
year. Any change of use within the space shall require a new approval.



   (J)   Encroachments in the Downtown (DT) zoning district for a
Sandwich Board sign only shall be $25.



   (K)   Service permanent encroachments shall pay a fee of $200 for
the initial application, and a renewal fee of $50 for each subsequent year.



   (L)   Non-service permanent encroachments shall pay a fee of $50.



   (M)   Community Garage Sale Signs located within right-of-way shall
require a fee of $25.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, or any other entity that shall
be in violation of Chapter 94 or any amendments thereto, shall receive a fine
of not more than $500 and costs. Each day an entry or cut is made without the
issuance of a proper permit under this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (B)   Failure to provide notification of an IUPPS number prior to
the start of an encroachment shall result in a $100 penalty fee.



   (C)   A penalty fee of $100 will be enforced by the city with a stop
work order for unauthorized work performed prior to the issuance of a permit.



   (D)   Placing an item in the public right-of-way in the Downtown
(DT) zoning district without an approved encroachment permit will result in a
penalty fee of $100 for each unapproved item placed in public right-of-way.



   (E)   Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or
any interested person may seek an injunction against any person who violates
or threatens to violate any provision of this chapter.



   (F)   In accordance to any other sanction under this chapter, a
person who fails to install or to maintain the approved public improvements
in accordance with the approved construction plan shall be liable to the city
in a civil action for damages in an amount equal to the cost of installing or
maintaining the controls, all engineering fees, court costs, litigation
expenses, and attorney’s fees incurred by the city.



   (G)   Any person, firm, corporation, or any other entity who fails
to secure any service that can cause damage to property or health due to its
failure shall receive a $500 penalty fee for every 24 hour period that
corrections are not made. The 24 hour period will start from the time the
damaged service is reported.



   (H)   Any governing authority that recovers damages in accordance
with this section shall deposit them in a special fund to be used solely for:



      (1)   Correcting, to the extent possible, the failure to
install or maintain the public improvements according to the approved plans
and specifications;



      (2)   Correcting, to the extent possible, the failure to
follow the procedures outlined under permits issued in accordance with this
chapter; and



      (3)   The administration of the construction inspection as per
this chapter.



   (I) The city shall hold the right to secure and/or complete, without
prior notification to the applicant, any and all permit cuts found to be
public safety concerns. Costs incurred by the city, as well as any and all
actions taken by the city, shall be reimbursed by the Applicant as reflected
by the following.



      (1)   Labor      $30/hour.



      (2)   Operator   $45/hour.



      (3)   Backhoe   $120/hour.



      (4)   Loader      $150/hour.



      (5)   Cones      $10each/hour.



      (6)   Barricades   $30/hour.



      (7)   Steel plates   $50/hour.



      (8)   Pickup      $50/hour.



      (9)   Single axle   $85/hour.



      (10)   Tandem   $100/hour.



      (11)   This does not reflect all cost or does not imply
maximum charges that may be incurred with all penalties of this chapter.
Material costs of asphalt and/or concrete are not listed due to price
variations with vendors and quantities.



   (J)   Failure to complete permanent patches within the 20 working
day requirement may result in a fee of $100 per day up to five working days.
In the event the repairs are not made in this time period, the city may
repair the patches subject to the reimbursement rates listed above in
addition to the imposed fines.



(Ord. 36-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



Appendix: Tables and Details




City of Noblesville Comprehensive Master Plan
Thoroughfare Classifications
Table A1




 





 
Limited Access Arterials
 

Primary Arterials

 

Secondary Arterials

 

Major Collectors

 

Minor Collectors

 

Local Streets




Urban

 

Rural



Applicable Streets
 
SR 37
 
SR 32, SR 38, SR 238, SR 19, Allisonville /

10th Street and Little Chicago/Haze l Dell
 

Union Chapel, Cumberland, River Road, Hinkle, 191st, and the 206th/
209th/211th connection

 

As shown on the Thoroughfare Plan map

 

All not otherwise designated on the map and which do not meet the criteria
for a Rural Road

 
See "Notes" below.


Functions
 

Transport s traffic between the community and the surroundi ng region

 
Transports traffic across the community
 
Main feeder street of the system.
 
Provide circulation between local streets and arterials
 
Provide access to individual properties



Distances from similar thoroughfar e

 
Varies
 
1½ - 2 miles
 
3/4 - 1 mile
 
1/4 - 1/2 miles
 
Varies
 

No more than 125 feet to any other thoroughfares



Minimum Right-of- way
 
Regulated by state
 
100 - 120 ft.
 
80 ft.
 
60 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.
 
50 ft.



Maximum Pavement Width (measured from back of curb)

 
Regulated by state
 

60 feet, divided by 25 ft. landscaped median

 
60 ft.
 
44 ft.
 
32 ft.
 
20-32 ft.
 
20 - 24 ft.


Driving Lanes
 

Regulated by state

 
2 - 4 lanes
 
2 lanes
 
2 @ 12 ft.
 
2 @ 12 ft.
 
2 @ 11 ft.
 
2 @ 11 ft.


Parking Lanes
 
Regulated by state
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
2 @ 10 ft.
 
1 @ 8 ft.
 
1 @ 8 ft.
 
Not permitted


Design Speed
 
Regulated by state
 
35 - 45 mph
 
35 - 40 mph
 
30 mph
 
30 mph
 
25 mph
 
25 mph


Curb & Gutter
 

Regulated by state.

 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
*


Sidewalks
 
Regulated by state
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required


Landscaping
 
   -
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required
 
Required




 



Notes:   1)   Rural roads may be permitted in Open Space and
Countryside areas, where average density is no more than one dwelling per
three acres, and where runoff can be handled acceptably by surrounding
topography.



   2)   Alleys may be permitted in higher-density area as described in
the "Neighborhoods" concept.  The right- of-way for alleys should be 16 feet.



*Curb and Gutter required within Noblesville corporate limits or in areas to
be annexed.



(Ord. 13-3-01, passed 3-27-01)




City of Noblesville
Typical Street Sections
(Minimum Standards)
Table A2






Local Streets





(No Trucks Allowed)





   R/W = 50'





Pavement Width = 28' B/C B/C





Curb = 2' Rollback





Min Curb Radius = 20'










MinorCollector





(No Trucks Allowed)





   R/W = 70'





Pavement Width = 32' B/C B/C





Pavement Width w/Parking = 44' B/C B/C





   Curb = 6" Chairback










Major Collector





R/W = 80'





Pavement Width = 44' B/C B/C





Curb = 6" Chairback





Min. Curb Radius = 30'





6" Min. Underdrain Required










Arterial





R/W = 100'





Pavement Width = 60' B/C B/C





No Parking Allowed





   Curb = 6" Chairback





Min. Curb Radius = 30'





6" Min. Underdrain Required










Cross Section





1" Surface = #110/sys (LV) #11





3" Binder = #330/sys (LV) #8





9" Stone = #53 Type "0" Compacted





6" Min. Underdrain Required










Cross Section





1" Surface = #110/sys (LV) #11





3" Binder = #330/sys (LV) #8





9" Stone = #53 Type "0" Compacted





6" Min. Underdrain Required










Cross Section





1" Surface= #110/sys (MV) #11





2" Binder = #220/sys (MV) #8





6" Base #5 = #660/sys (MV)





3" Base 5D = #330/sys (MV) Compacted Subgrade










Cross Section





1 " Surface = #11O/sys (MV) #11 2" Binder = #220/sys (MV) #8





7" Base #5 = #770/sys (MV)





3" Base 5D = #330/sys (MV) Compacted Subgrade




*All asphalt pavements shall require a tack coat per the Standard
Specifications Section 409.



(Ord. 13-3-01, passed 3-27-01)




Encroachment Information
Central Business District
Attachment A3






(This form must be completed before submittal to the Board of Works for
approval)
Not to exceed 30 days from the date of approval.




Insurance Information: Minimum required in § 94.03(E) of this chapter



Company: ______________________________ Exp. Date: _________________________



Coverage: _____________________________ Policy #: __________________________



Bond Amount: __________________________



Diagram of the work zone with pedestrian or traffic control devices  in place



Nature of work: ____________________________________________________________



Any items to be left on the premises over night?  Yes  No



       Dumpster Vehicle/Equipment Other _________________________



Adjacent businesses affected contacted?  Yes       No



   If yes, concerns:_______________________________________________________



Location of Encroachment:



    Sidewalk (see below)    Alley Street



   * Parking Lane Roof   Building Face



Are utilities involved?  Yes   No



   If yes, which ones and why? ____________________________________________



Approval of communication information



Board of Works approval   Date: __________



Police Department approval   Date: __________ Authorized by:
_______________



Fire Department approval   Date: __________ Authorized by: _______________



Additional Requirements



Police  __________________________________________________________________



Fire ____________________________________________________________________



The City of Noblesville Board of Public Works reserves the right in
accordance with City Ordinance No. 58-10-98 to void this permit at any time
if any item of the agreement is not met.  Any and all penalties shall be
enforced according to Ordinance No. 58-10-98 at the time of cancellation of
the same permit.




Costs
Table A4




   The costs shown on this table are subject to change only at the
approval of the city Board of Public Works and Safety.



 


Labor

 
$30.00/hour


Operator
 
$45.00/hour


Backhoe
 
$120.00/hour


Loader
 
$150.00/hour


Traffic Maintenance

  Cones

  Barricades

  Steel Plates
 

$10.00 each/hour

$30.00/hour

$50.00/hour


Vehicles

  Pickup

  Single axle

  Tandem
 

$50.00/hour

$85.00/hour

$100.00/hour



 



   This table does not reflect all costs or does it imply maximum charges
that can incur with all penalties of this chapter.  Material costs of
asphalt and/or concrete are not listed due to price variations with vendors
and quantities.



*A minimum of one hour will be charged on all labor and equipment.



(Ord. 13-3-01, passed 3-27-01)




Detail A5
Trench Backfill - Type II
Flowable fill detail
(Scale: none)















Notes:



   (A)   Trench spoil is to be removed from the work site and disposed
of out of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Flowable fill is to be poured into the trench to serve as
backfill to the dimensions and specifications listed in this detail.



   (C)   The flowable fill mix design shall have been previously
reviewed and approved by the Noblesville Engineering Department.



   (D)   The compressive strength of the flowable fill shall not be
less than 50 PSI nor greater than 100 PSI at 28 days.



   (E)   When type I trench backfill is used, the existing paved
surface is not required to be over-cut two feet minimum each side provide a
vertical, neat saw-cut edge.



   (F)   Flowable fill shal1 be mixed and placed as specified in the
latest Standard INDOT Specifications Section 213.



(Ord. 13-3-01, passed 3-27-01)




Detail A6
Trench Backfill - Type II
Granular fill detail
(Scale: none)















Notes:



   (A)   Saw cut existing pavement so that cut provides a vertical,
neat and uniform edge.



   (B)   Trench spoils to be removed from the work site and disposed of
out of the right-of-way.



   (C)   Trench backfill type II shall only be permitted under the
presence of an independent testing laboratory.  Compaction tests shall be at
the contractor’s expense.  Test results shall be submitted.



(Ord. 13-3-01, passed 3-27-01)



CHAPTER 95:  PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   95.01   Use of public rights-of-way



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      “RESIDENTIAL AREA.” Any portion of the city in which
residential uses are permitted or a lawful residential use that was
established prior to the adoption of Chapter 159, the city’s Unified
Development Ordinance.



      “RESIDENTIAL ASSEMBLY.” The gathering of seven or more
persons within 100 feet of each other within a public street or right-of-way
for any purpose.



      “RIGHT-OF-WAY.” A strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other special
public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established.



      “STREET, PUBLIC.” A street owned and maintained by a unit of
government within an officially dedicated and accepted right-of-way to
provide vehicular and pedestrian access.



      “TRAVELED PORTION OF A PUBLIC STREET.” The part of a street
used for vehicular travel. The traveled portion includes all parts of the
street between the curbs, and if there are no curbs, includes all pavement
contiguous to the traveled portion of the road.



   (B)   No person shall gather, march, or remain upon a right-of-way
as part of a residential assembly, unless the person or another person
participating in the residential assembly possesses a residential assembly
permit issued pursuant to this section.



   (C)   No person participating in a residential assembly shall
linger, stand, or occupy the traveled portion of a public street which would
impede or restrict the flow of traffic within the public street.



   (D)   A residential assembly shall not be permitted before 7:00 a.m.
or sunrise, whichever is later; or after 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is
earlier, based upon the time of sunset or sunrise published by the National
Weather Service at the Indianapolis International Airport.



   (E)   No person participating in a residential assembly shall impede
a sidewalk, multi-use path, driveway, or other access to public property
which results in restricting the use of the walkway or access points by the
general public or a contiguous landowner.



   (F)   This section shall not apply to persons viewing or
participating in parades or processions as authorized by § 71.44 which
parades include, but are not limited to, the Christmas parade, Fourth of July
parade, Homecoming parade, or military parades.



   (G)   Residential assembly permits shall be issued by the
Noblesville Police Department. A person seeking a residential assembly permit
shall apply for the permit in writing at least 48 hours prior to the
beginning of the residential assembly. The application for the residential
assembly shall include the following:



      (1)   The starting and ending time for the residential
assembly;



      (2)   The location or locations of the residential assembly;



      (3)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant.



   (H)   In the event the application is complete, the Noblesville
Police Department shall issue the residential assembly permit within one
business day of the application.



   (I)   There shall be no permit fee charged for a residential
assembly permit.



(Ord. 32-9-10, passed 9-28-10)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates the terms of this chapter for the
first time in a calendar year shall be guilty of a Class C infraction and may
be fined up to $200.



   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter for a second time within
a calendar year shall be guilty of a Class C infraction and may be fined up
to $500.



   (C)   Any person who violates this chapter for a third or subsequent
time within a calendar year shall be guilty of a Class B infraction and may
be fined up to $1,000.



(Ord. 32-9-10, passed 9-28-10)



CHAPTER 96:  WATER CONSERVATION



Section



   96.01   Applicability



   96.02   Definitions



   96.03   Voluntary conservation



   96.04   Declaration of need; notice



   96.05   Mandatory water conservation; exemptions



 



   96.98   Enforcement



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to the use of water from the public water systems
of the Indiana American Water Company, Westfield Utilities, and Citizens
Water that occurs within the city.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)



§ 96.02  WATER CONSERVATION DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ADVISORY CONDITIONS.”  Conditions under which voluntary
conservation measures are appropriate due to decreased supplies in the
Indianapolis Water reservoir, or other circumstances, reducing the amount of
treated water available to customers, as determined by the water companies.



   “CITIZENS WATER.”  Citizens Water of Citizens Energy Group.



   “CUSTOMER.”  An individual, firm, corporation, government agency
or other entity being supplied with water utility service by Citizens Water,
Westfield Utilities, or Indiana American Water at a location within the city.



   “INDIANA AMERICAN WATER.”  The Indiana American Water Company.



   “INDIANAPOLIS WATER RESERVOIR.”  Morse Reservoir.



   “MANDATORY CONSERVATION.”  Compliance with restrictions imposed by
the Mayor, based on recommendations by one or more of the water companies,
which are designed to reduce certain kinds and types of water use.



   “NORMAL CONDITIONS.”  Conditions under which water supply and
treatment capacity are adequate to meet all demands.



   “TREATED WATER.”  Water treated in a manner that it is suitable
for human consumption or for another designated use.



   “VEGETABLE GARDEN.”  A garden where substantially all of the
plants are suitable and grown primarily for human consumption.



   “VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.”  Compliance with one or more of the
water companies’ requests to reduce water use.



   “WATER EMERGENCY.”  An occurrence wherein mandatory conservation
measures are appropriate due to the levels in either: 1) Morse Reservoir
having been reduced to less than its designed drawdown curves or less than an
estimated 25% of their annual drawdown design capacities; 2) groundwater
wells not functioning properly due to reduced groundwater levels; or 3) the
existence of other circumstances that have reduced the amount of treated
water available to customers, as determined by one or more of the Water
Companies.



   “WATER USER.”  A customer or other individual, firm, corporation,
government agency, or other entity using water from one of the water
companies.



   “WATER WARNING.”  An occurrence wherein mandatory conservation
measures are appropriate due to the level in Morse Reservoir being reduced to
less than its designed drawdown curves or less than an estimated 50% of their
annual drawdown design capacities; or groundwater wells of one or more of the
water companies not functioning properly due to reduced groundwater levels,
or the existence of other circumstances that have reduced the amount of
treated water available to customers, as determined by one or more of the
Water Companies.



   “WESTFIELD UTILITIES.”  The Westfield Department of Public Works
Water Utility.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)



§ 96.03  VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.



   During normal conditions and advisory conditions, water users should
follow the voluntary conservation measures as found in the Wise Water Use
Policy adopted by one or all of the water companies.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)



§ 96.04  DECLARATION OF NEED; NOTICE.



   (A)   Upon determining that there is a shortage of one or more of
the water companies, the Mayor may declare the existence of a water warning
or water emergency, whereupon the respective water conservation measures
described in § 96.05 shall apply until the water warning or emergency is
terminated. Whenever the Mayor finds that some or all of the conditions that
gave rise to the declaration of a water warning or water emergency no longer
exist, he or she may declare the water warning or water emergency terminated.
The above declarations may include all or part of the water companies.



   (B)   Notice of the declaration or termination of a water warning or
water emergency shall be made by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation, and by public news releases to all television stations, and
newspapers serving Noblesville. Notice shall be deemed effective upon
publication.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)



§ 96.05  MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   During a water warning or a water emergency, it shall be
unlawful for a water user to cause, permit, allow, do, or engage in any of
the following actions:



      (1)   Sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of grass;



      (2)   Washing cars, trucks, trailers, mobile homes, railroad
cars or any other type of mobile equipment, except as required by applicable
local, state, or federal law for health or safety reasons;



      (3)   Using water to clean sidewalks, driveways, paved areas,
structures, buildings, or other outdoor surfaces;



      (4)   Filling empty swimming pools;



      (5)   Installing new landscaping or new lawn by using sod
until return to normal conditions are declared by the Mayor;



      (6)   Using hydrants except for fire suppression or as
otherwise directed by the water companies; and



      (7)   Operating decorative water fountains that are
non-recycling.



   (B)   In addition to the prohibitions listed in division (A) of this
section, it shall be unlawful during a water emergency for a water user to
cause, permit, allow, do, or engage in any outdoor watering; provided,
however, that vegetable gardens and flowers may be watered every other day by
container or handheld hose equipped with shut-off nozzle along with trees
less than five years old and sod less than three weeks old.



   (C)   The following water users and water uses shall be exempt from
the prohibitions contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
nurseries, provided water use is limited to the amount essential to preserve
inventories.



   (D)   The following water users and water uses may be exempted by
the Mayor from the prohibitions contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section:



      (1)   Automatic commercial car washes, provided a majority of
the water used is recycled;



      (2)   Manual commercial car washes, provided only a handheld
hose equipped with a shut-off nozzle is utilized; and



      (3)   Golf courses, provided tee boxes and greens are watered
only on an every other day schedule that begins on Monday of each week and
fairways are watered only once per week.



      (4)   Any watering of property owned or controlled by the
Noblesville Department of Parks and Recreation as directed by the Mayor where
such watering is necessary to appropriate for asset preservation.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)  Penalty,
see § 96.99



§ 96.98  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter shall be enforced and citations for violations of § 96.05
may be issued by any law enforcement officer of the city and any other
designee of the Director of the Department of Planning.



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)  Penalty,
see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Each property owner and/or person within the city shall be
responsible for compliance with § 96.05 with respect to the premises where
the customer receives water service. If the identity of the water user cannot
be ascertained, the customer shall be prima facie liable for violations that
occur on such premises.



   (B)   A person’s first and second violations admitted in any
12-month period shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first violation
and $150 for the second violation, and $500 every violation thereafter.



   (C)   If:



      (1)   Payment is not made within 60 days of issuance;



      (2)   The violation is not resolved by an admission in the
Noblesville City Court; or



      (3)   The alleged violation is the person’s third or
subsequent violation in a 12-month period;



the offense shall be docketed in the Noblesville City Court and a notice of
hearing issued to the offender. Violations under this division (C) shall be
Class C infractions, and the penalty for each such violation shall not be
more than $500, plus court costs. For purposes of this section, each day of a
violation shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (D)   All fines collected from violation of this chapter shall be
deposited in City Fund 309, the “Sewage Stormwater Fund.”



(Ord. 29-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 29-07-12, passed 7-16-12)



CHAPTER 97:  STREET TREES



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Title



   97.02   Purpose and intent



   97.03   Authority



   97.04   Non-reverting capital fund/budget authority



   97.05   Definitions



Specifications for Planting, Care and Removal of Street Trees



   97.10   Street tree species to be planted



   97.11   High priority tree care



   97.12   Regular tree care



   97.13   Tree preservation



   97.14   Planting/stock requirements



   97.15   New development/construction projects



Tree Board



   97.20   Creation; establishment



   97.21   Composition



   97.22   Appointment; vacancy; compensation; term of office



   97.23   Duties; responsibilities



Urban Forester



   97.30   Establishment



   97.31   Duties



   97.32   Interference with duties unlawful



License administration



   97.40   Licenses required



   97.41   Arborist certification; revocation; performance bond



   97.42   Review by Board of Public Works and Safety



Fees; Grants



   97.50   Fees



   97.51   Grants



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City of
Noblesville’s Tree Ordinance” of the City of Noblesville, Indiana.



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the
regulations of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and
other plants within the city rights-of-way or city-owned property.



   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the Common Council of the City of
Noblesville that the terms of this chapter shall be construed so as to
promote:



      (1)   The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of
desirable trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city rights-of-way;



      (2)   The protection of community residents from personal
injury and property damage, and the protection of the City of Noblesville
from property damage caused or threatened by the improper planting,
maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants located within the
city rights-of-way;



      (3)   The utilization of trees to improve the environmental
quality of the city;



      (4)   The continuation of a City of Noblesville Tree Board;



      (5)   The aesthetics of tree lined streets for a more livable
Noblesville; and



      (6)   To maintain the City of Noblesville as a Tree City USA.



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.03  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It is the intent of the City of Noblesville Common Council
through the establishment and approval of this chapter to grant the Board of
Public Works and Safety authority to exercise the powers and functions to
govern all affairs of this chapter.



   (B)   Implementation of the Board of Public Works and Safety
authority and function shall be carried out through the Urban Forester in
cooperation with the Street Commissioner and Tree Board. All violations
resulting in issuance of fines shall be submitted for review to the Board of
Public Works and Safety for enforcement and to the city’s Legal Department
for collection of fines.



(Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.04  NON-REVERTING TREE FUND/BUDGET AUTHORITY.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall receive and approve all claims for the
disbursement of funds.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall establish a budget with designated
lines and the budget shall be maintained within the budget of the Street
Department. The forestry budget shall be governed under the same authority as
set out by the Clerk-Treasurer and city policy including all federal and
state laws.



   (B)   Upon submittal of the budget to the Noblesville Common Council
and with their approval the Clerk-Treasurer’s office will exercise all
powers and functions in accordance with federal and state laws.



   (C)   All fines, permit fees, grants or other funds accrued through
this chapter shall be managed through the Clerk-Treasurer. Fines and permit
fees will be deposited into the non-reverting tree account.



   (D)   All funds, be it grant monies or budgeted money from the
Common Council, shall be disbursed by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office through
the city’s standard practices of due process. All funds listed in the
non-reverting tree fund shall be submitted to the Common Council for their
approval prior to disbursement and follow the same standard practices.



   (E)   The Urban Forester will request approval of funding for a line
in the Street Department budget for tree planting from the Common Council.



   (F)   An annual budget report of the non-reverting tree fund
expenditures, fines and grants will be submitted to the Board of Public Works
and Safety, Common Council, Street Commissioner and Clerk-Treasurer by the
Urban Forester. This report will also include all projected expenditures for
the following year.



(Ord. 68-11-90, passed 12-10-90; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.”



      (1)   Property within the city limits of the City of
Noblesville:



         (a)   Owned by the city of fee simple absolute;



         (b)   Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for
present or future use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or for
public easements; or



         (c)   Owned by the city and dedicated for the purpose of
utility easements.



      (2)   Subject exclusions:



         (a)   Excluding the real estate owned or controlled by
the Noblesville Parks Department (except for an area on either side of any
paved through streets or roadways within any park or recreational facility
maintained by the Street Department, 15 feet in depth by parallel lines to
the edge of the pavement.



         (b)   Excluding real estate contained within common
areas or entry way median (located entirely within the right-of-way of a
street) which are intended to serve an aesthetic purpose. Such areas are
typically located at the entry (o a subdivision and may include other forms
of decorative plantings in addition to trees. This exclusion shall not
prevent the city from taking such steps as may be necessary to avoid hazards
to the public’s safety and welfare.



   “PERSON.” Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   “PROPERTY OWNER.” The owner of record or contract purchaser of any
parcel of land.



   “SHALL.” Always mandatory and not merely suggestive.



   “SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS.” All vegetation, woody or otherwise,
except lawn grass, trees and flowers less than 24 inches in height.



   “STREET TREE.” A tree located on real estate controlled by the city
as defined above.



   “TOPPING.” The cutting back of the leading shoot or shoots of major
limbs which form the natural canopy of the tree so as to disfigure the
tree’s crown.



   “TREE BOARD MEMBER.” A volunteer resident appointed by the Mayor of
the City of Noblesville or the Noblesville Common Council. The position will
be unpaid.



   “TREE CARE.” The treating, spraying, removal, pruning and any other
tree maintenance or horticultural work intended for the enhancement or
preservation of trees and the removal and prevention of any and all damages
to any street trees caused by tree pests, viruses, or diseases.



   “TREE PLANTING AND TREE PRUNING AND REMOVAL SPECIFICATIONS AND
STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR THE CITY OF NOBLESVILLE (EXHIBIT A,
“ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL”).” A manual prepared by the
Urban Forester pursuant to this chapter containing regulations and standards
for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants
upon city-owned property. A copy of this Manual is available for public
inspection in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer during normal business hours.



   “TREE REPRESENTATIVES.” The Urban Forester of the City of
Noblesville, or a qualified contractor hired by the City of Noblesville
Street Department. The Street Commissioner may designate these duties and
responsibilities as the need arises. The Street Commissioner or his or her
designated person will assume the responsibilities and duties of the Urban
Forester should the position be vacant.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLANING, CARE AND REMOVAL OF STREET TREES



§ 97.10  STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   (A)   The Urban Forester shall provide lists of species, varieties,
and cultivars desirable to be planted in public places in the city so as to
ensure public safety and welfare. No trees other than those included on the
Urban Forester’s list may be planted as street trees without special
written permission of the Urban Forester. The species are classified by their
size at maturity into three groups: small, medium, and large. Details of tree
size classification and planting location sizes can be located in the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual.



   (B)   The Urban Forester shall provide lists of undesirable species,
cultivars, and varieties not to be planted in public places in the city so as
to ensure public safety and welfare. These undesirable trees shall not be
recommended for general planting and their use shall be restricted to special
locations where they can be used to the advantage because of certain
characteristics of adaptability, landscape effect or compatibility with
exiting curb, sidewalks and utility lines. If such special permission is not
granted the cost of removal and replacement of the undesirable trees shall be
charged to the individual or firm who planted the trees.



   (C)   The Urban Forester in consultation with the city’s Tree
Board may add or delete species, cultivars, or varieties as experience
demonstrates their superiority.



   (D)   A resident has several options regarding tree planting in the
right-of-way. Residents can:



      (1)   Fund 100% of the purchase and planting. This includes
purchase of tree and expenses of hiring certified contractor to plant tree.



      (2)   Participate in a cost share program. Resident purchases
tree and city crews plant tree at no additional cost.



      (3)   Request the city plant a tree when funds are made
available with no cost to resident.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.11  HIGH PRIORITY TREE CARE.



   (A)   Except in emergency situations, the Urban Forester shall have
the exclusive right to cause or to approve the removal of any dead, diseased
or otherwise unsafe street tree.



   (B)   The Board of Public Works and Safety or Urban Forester shall
have all the powers with due process and the laws and Constitution of the
State of Indiana, to promote the health, safety and welfare of the city by
removing or causing to be removed through appropriate legal means any tree on
private property within the city which constitutes a threat or menace to the
public safety or the health of other trees, and to seek such legal redress,
including penalties and costs, as may be appropriate.



   (C)   The Street Commissioner or public utilities may act to trim or
remove trees in emergency situations.



   (D)   The State Highway Department may act to trim or remove trees
endangering traffic on state highways within the city limits.



   (E)   In an emergency, when a tree (or trees) have been severely
damaged by storms or other causes or are obstructing utility wires, and the
like, the Street Commissioner or public utilities may, only as a last resort,
use topping or other severe cutting back of the limbs of street trees but
must report all such incidences to the Urban Forester.



(Am. Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.12  REGULAR TREE CARE.



   (A)   The Urban Forester shall have the right to prune or cause to
be pruned any privately owned trees overhanging any street or public
right-of-way or sidewalk: (Refer to the Arboricultural Specifications Manual
for height specifications over sidewalks and streets.)



      (1)   Which constitutes a menace to the safety of the public;



      (2)   Which obstructs the light from any street lamp at the
intersection;



      (3)   Which obstructs the motorist’s view of any street
intersection or any traffic control device or sign; or



      (4)   Which obstructs or endangers passing vehicles and
pedestrians.



   (B)   Within the city limits of Noblesville, the Street Department
budget and the non-reverting tree fund budget, except as provided by
divisions (D) through (G) of § 97.13, shall assume the expense of tree care
as defined in this subchapter.



   (C)   All contracted routine street tree care undertaken by the city
shall be initiated and inspected by the Urban Forester. Contractors shall be
certified arborist, bonded and insured.



   (D)   The owner-occupant shall be responsible for the routine care
of street trees in the right-of-way between their property and the street,
such as watering, raking, and preparing leaves, twigs, and other debris for
removal by the city. No permit is required for such activity.



   (E)   An owner-occupant may hire a certified arborist to perform
routine street tree care. The arborist must secure a permit prior to
performing work from the Urban Forester. (See § 97.40.)



   (F)   Public utilities may trim street tree roots and branches as
necessary for the maintenance of a utility service and as is prescribed by
state law and limited in § 97.13(G). The cost of such tree care is not the
responsibility of the city. (See § 97.40.)



   (G)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to
(i) top, (ii) prune horizontally a branch of more than three inches in
diameter, or (iii) cut limbs within the tree’s canopy back to stubs greater
than three inches in diameter, on any street tree, unless approved by the
Urban Forester.



   (H)   In the process of tree removal, all stumps of street trees
shall be ground eight inches below ground level and seeded as required by the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual.



   (I)   Should an owner-occupant wish to perform routine trimming on a
street tree themselves in the right-of-way between their property and the
street beyond that which is described in § 97.13(D) but not to the extent of
§ 97.13(G), he or she may do so with the proper permitting from the Urban
Forester or paid city representative. Failure to do so can result in fines.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  TREE PRESERVATION.



   (A)   In order to protect existing trees intended for preservation
during the development’s construction the following plans of action must be
adhered to. All developers and construction firms must place substantial
barriers around the tree at or beyond the drip line of enclosed trees. No
machinery, tools, chemicals, or temporary deposits may be permitted within
the barriers nor may any notice or other objects be attached to protected
trees. No burning may take place within 500 feet of preserved trees. The
barriers are to remain in place until after the completion of all heavy
construction on the site. Tree protection procedures and specifications in
the Arboricultural Specifications Manual must be adhered to.



   (B)   Significant changes in grading or water flow which would
adversely affect preserved trees must be avoided or mitigated through
protective measures.



   (C)   The Urban Forester may substitute alternative means in lieu of
the required barriers where appropriate to specialized circumstances.



   (D)   These restrictions shall not be interpreted as applying to the
public utilities or utilities subcontractors doing routine utility work.
However, public utilities and their subcontractors must take reasonable care
to protect trunks, branches, and roots of existing trees and shrubs.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten or attach in any
way to any defined street tree any rope, wire, sign, poster, handbill, or
other object.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any other way to
injure, deface or permit any animal to injure or deface any street tree.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.14  PLANTING/STOCK REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The planting of any street tree must be in accordance with the
requirements in the tree planting and transplanting specifications section of
the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The Urban Forester shall have the
power and authority to vary such limitations as may be necessary and proper,
taking into account the lot width in question, location of fire hydrants,
driveways, curbs or the like. Spacing must be in accordance with the
requirements in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual except in special
plantings designed or approved by the Urban Forester, or except as consistent
spacing with already existing trees dictate. It is not the intention of this
section to prevent the planting of street trees.



   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) through (E) below and §
97.15, the planting of all street trees shall be done according to the city
tree plan, at the expense of the city, with the proper permit.



   (C)   The owner or occupant of property abutting public
rights-of-way may plant street trees at his or her own expense in accordance
with the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, provided he or she secures a
permit approval from the Urban Forester.



   (D)   An owner or occupant who gains a permit to remove a healthy
tree shall be required by the city to replace that tree.



   (E)   Public utilities are not exempt from the responsibility for
the replacement of street trees which must be removed in order to maintain
utility lines. A tree shall be replanted at the expense of the utility if
removal of an existing tree is necessary.



   (F)   Any person planting a street tree is required to receive
approval of all permits as listed in this chapter prior to the commencement
of work.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.15  NEW DEVELOPMENT/CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS.



   (A)   All new subdivisions shall be in compliance with the City of
Noblesville Unified Development Code, this chapter and the Arboriculture
Specifications Manual for all plantings in the city’s right-of-way.



   (B)   All new subdivisions shall have a minimum of a one-year
performance bond for the installation on all new plantings and a minimum of a
three-year maintenance bond from the developer upon the release of the
performance bond.



   (C)   The Urban Forester shall review and approve all plans and
details for tree plantings subject to this chapter; as well as pre- and
post-inspections of all street tree plantings. The developer is required to
provide the Urban Forester with an electronic inventory of street trees,
listing their exact location and species.



   (D)   Street trees to be located within dedicated and accepted
rights-of-way located on provisional plats submitted to the city after the
passage of this chapter will be planted at the expense of the developer in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual except if specified otherwise by the city. Any resident
or property owner who wishes to supply materials and cost for planting in
front of their residence, prior to the developer’s schedule, may do so upon
receiving approval from the city. No reimbursement shall be made to the
resident for such requests.



   (E)   Trees are to be planted only at the preferred or acceptable
planting times in central Indiana. See Purdue University HO-100-W (Attachment
B to Ord. 8-3-09), which is available for public inspection at the office of
the Clerk-Treasurer during normal business hours.



   (F)   The Urban Forester shall impose all fines relating to
infractions by the responsible contractor as a result of failure to comply
with the city’s Unified Development Code relating to tree plantings or any
part of this chapter or Arboricultural Specifications Manual. The Urban
Forester will develop a system of fines to be approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety.



   (G)   Recommendation for release of bonds will not be forwarded to
the Board of Public Works and Safety until the Urban Forester has completed
the final inspection. Failure to comply with this chapter shall result in the
delay in releasing bonds associated with street trees or the use of bond
funds to correct infractions.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



TREE BOARD



§ 97.20  CREATION; ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City
of Noblesville, Indiana, which shall consist of seven members.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.21  COMPOSITION.



   The Board will consist of seven members. Five members will be appointed
by the Mayor and must be residents of the City of Noblesville, one member
shall be the Urban Forester and one member shall be appointed by the Common
Council and must be a resident of the City of Noblesville.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.22  APPOINTMENT; VACANCY; COMPENSATION; TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The Mayor or Common Council may appoint a person to replace
their appointees in the event that a vacancy should occur during the term of
any member. His or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion
of the term.



   (B)   A member of the Tree Board may be removed by the Tree Board,
with approval of the Mayor, if that member fails to attend one-half or more
of the meetings in a year.



   (C)   The Tree Board members shall serve without pay.



   (D)   Tree Board members shall serve a term of three years and will
be allowed to serve a maximum of two consecutive terms.



   (E)   The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, and keep minutes
of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.23  DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   All meetings are to be scheduled through the Urban Forester
and/or Tree Board president, are public and shall be advertised, through the
Clerk-Treasurer, in accordance to the open door law.



   (B)   All meeting minutes are to be recorded in digital form, by the
Tree Board secretary, and copies provided to the Clerk-Treasurer for public
record and the Tree Board.



   (C)   Coordinate efforts with related projects of such groups as the
Park Board, Plan Commission, Common Council and city departments.



   (D)   Consider, investigate, make findings, report, recommend upon,
and keep adequate records of its actions upon any matter or questions coming
within the scope of its work as defined by this chapter.



   (E)   Conduct educational and fund-raising campaigns as necessary
and work with private and public agencies and organizations to establish
programs for the planting and care of street trees.



   (F)   The Tree Board may be requested to advise or consult with the
Urban Forester on any matter pertaining to this chapter and its enforcement
by the Board of Public Works and Safety. The topics under which the advice
and consultation may be given may include, but are not limited to, any of the
following:



      (1)   Policies concerning selection, planting, maintenance,
and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city;



      (2)   Establishment of educational and informational programs;



      (3)   Formulating policies and procedures of urban forestry
relating to the most current standards;



      (4)   Assist with the submittal of information to the Board of
Public Works addressing violations or addendums of this chapter;



      (5)   Maintaining a quorum of Board members for the purpose of
promoting a proactive forestry program;



      (6)   Assist with city development projects pertaining to
urban forestry.



   (G)   Assist the Urban Forester in all efforts to secure funds for
the promotion, planting, and maintenance of trees governed under this chapter.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



URBAN FORESTER



§ 97.30  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The title of city Urban Forester is hereby established to a
position within the Street Department.



   (B)   The Urban Forester shall function under all rules, regulations
and requirements of the City of Noblesville and the Noblesville Street
Department.



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.31  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Urban Forester shall implement the following activities as
listed, but not limited to:



      (1)   Meet at least once each calendar quarter with the Tree
Board, or more often if necessary.



      (2)   Develop an inventory of the city’s street trees
specifying type and condition of the trees.



      (3)   Establish a pattern of orderly, periodic inspection of
the condition of the trees covered under this chapter and fully document that
inspection for maintenance purposes.



      (4)   Develop a master plan with the assistance of the Tree
Board for the care, removal, preservation, pruning, planting, and disposition
of street trees along existing city streets and trees along rivers and
streams outside the city’s park system. This plan, any substantive changes
in it, and any later plans and substantive changes in them must be approved
by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (5)   Annually submit a request to the Mayor for a budget for
inspection and tree care and maintenance. The budget should set aside funds
for emergency need.



   (B)   Other items required for the Urban Forester job
responsibilities are listed but not limited to:



      (1)   Develop an annual written plan for tree care. This plan
shall be presented annually to the Tree Board and Board of Public Works and
Safety and shall constitute the official city Tree Plan for the City of
Noblesville for that year. In addition, owners of property that will be
affected by the proposed plan shall be notified in a manner, reasonably
designed to insure actual notice to them, of the proposed action affecting
their property.



      (2)   Consider, investigate, make findings, report, recommend
upon, and keep adequate records of its actions upon any matter or questions
coming within the scope of its work as defined by this chapter.



      (3)   Coordinate efforts with related projects of such groups
as the Park Board, Plan Commission, Common Council and city departments.



      (4)   Communicate with the State Highway Department as to any
highway projects which would affect the planting area along state highways
within the city limits.



      (5)   Promulgate rules and regulations for the proper
administration of this chapter which shall include methods of good
arboriculture.



      (6)   Review with the Planning Department through the
Technical Advisory Committee, all plans for preserving existing trees and
planting new trees in subdivisions or along new roadways.



      (7)   Review with the City Street Commissioner and/or Board of
Public Works and Safety or their representative all public utility street cut
permits which might endanger existing street trees.



      (8)   Cause or order to be removed any street tree or part
thereof which is an unsafe condition or is infected with any injurious
fungus, insect, or other pest, or which by reason of its nature, is injurious
to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public
improvements.



      (9)   Issue licenses as required by this chapter. (§ 97.40)



      (10)   Govern all aspects of the city’s arborist
certification program. (Section § 97.41.)



      (11)   The Urban Forester in conjunction with the Tree Board
shall develop, and each subsequent year, update the city Tree Plan. The plan
shall outline urban forestry program activities for a minimum of the next
five years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry activities to be
undertaken by the city, the reasons for those activities, the possible
funding sources, the means of accomplishing the activities, the alternatives
available to the city to fund or accomplish the activity, the projected date
of completion, and the consequences if the activity is not completed.
Activities may include, but are not limited to, street free inventory,
planting, tree removal, beautification projects, and educational projects.



      (12)   The Urban Forester shall cause the city Tree Plan and
the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and all revisions and amendments to
them, to be published and promulgated and shall make available to any
interested person copies of this chapter, information about the requirements
of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, and the city tree plan. Notice
that such information or revisions are available for public inspection may be
published in a newspaper for circulation within Hamilton County.



      (13)   The Urban Forester shall administer the city Tree Plan,
this chapter, and all related provisions.



      (14)   The Urban Forester shall perform whatever acts are
necessary, including the planting and maintenance of trees and the removal of
undesirable trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city- owned property,
to ensure that all trees, shrubs, and other plants located on city-owned
property conform with the city Tree Plan, the Arboricultural Specifications
Manual and this chapter. Pursuant to this duty, the Urban Forester, in
accordance with normal city procedures regarding contracts, may participate
in the review, construction and approval process regarding city contractual
agreements prior to submitting to the Board of Public Works and Safety for
approval.



      (15)   The Urban Forester, with assistance from the Tree
Board, shall establish a program of public information and education that
will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees, shrubs, and
other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the city Tree
Plan. Funding for an Urban Forester position and budget shall originate from
the Street Department budget. Other sources such as fines, grants, and permit
fees may also be used when applicable.



      (16)   The Urban Forester shall make all efforts to
participate in any organization offering further education as well as
promoting, expanding, and accrediting urban forestry.



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.32  INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Urban Forester or any paid city representative, or agent hired by the
city, while engaging in inspecting, surveying, planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing any street tree or tree on public
grounds as authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-99, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty, see § 97.22



LICENSE ADMINISTRATION



§ 97.40  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Urban Forester or paid city representative shall issue
such licenses as are required by this chapter and shall obtain, as a
condition prior to the issuance of such license, the written agreement of
each person who applies for such license that he or she will comply with the
requirements of this chapter and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
The Urban Forester shall have the right to inspect all work performed
pursuant to such license. If the Urban Forester or paid city representative
finds the work performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual, the Urban Forester
shall provide written notice of his or her findings to the license applicant.
The notice shall contain a copy of this chapter, and



      (1)   The license shall be null and void;



      (2)   The Urban Forester may issue a written order that the
license applicant cease and desist all work for which the permit was issued;



      (3)   The license applicant shall be subject to penalty under
the terms of this chapter; and



      (4)   The city Urban Forester may take steps to correct the
results of the non-complying work and the reasonable costs of such steps
shall be charged to the license applicant.



      (5)   The Urban Forester shall be granted under this chapter
the authority to administer citations for infractions of this chapter. All
citations will be copied to the Noblesville Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   No person shall plant, treat, prune, remove, or spray a street
free or hire a certified arborist to care for a street tree unless the Urban
Forester or paid city representative has first granted the proper license.
Said license may be issued to a certified arborist.



   (C)   Every license issued by the City of Noblesville Street
Department shall specifically describe the work to be done and be valid until
December 31 of the current year.



   (D)   An annual license may be issued to any public utility for
trimming trees in public rights-of-way. The license shall include trimming
schedules and procedures and be reviewed annually with the city. The utility
subcontractor shall meet the requirement of the Arboricultural Specifications
Manual and this chapter.



   (E)   No person shall cut, remove, cover or constrict a street
tree’s root system as to cause permanent damage or death to a tree.



   (F)   No person shall disturb soils for the purpose of planting,
removal, or grinding a stump without securing proper license/permit from
state and local authorities.



   (G)   The current contact number for underground utility locates
which are required for license applications is 1-800-382-5544 (Indiana
Underground Plant Protection Services).



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty,
see § 97.99



§ 97.41  ARBORIST CERTIFICATION; REVOCATION; PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to work for hire on the
tree care of street trees within the city without a valid arborist’s
certification and required license. Each applicant must provide evidence of
possession of proper insurance, arborist’s certification, and meet the
requirements as stated in the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.



   (B)   Cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy
issued for or in compliance with the provision hereof shall automatically
terminate any license, unless another policy complying with the provisions
hereof shall be provided and in full force and effect at the time such
cancellation or termination becomes effective.



   (C)   The minimum required liability insurance coverage is
$1,000,000 for each occurrence (see Arboricultural Specifications Manual). A
bond in the amount of $10,000 is to be submitted prior to application of
license.



   (D)   The annual license fee shall be $50 paid in advance to the
City of Noblesville. All licenses will expire on December 31 of each year.



   (E)   The Urban Forester may revoke the license when it has evidence
of the contractor’s failure to apply principles of good arboriculture, and
may hear appeals of any person whose application for a license has been
denied.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.42  REVIEW BY BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AND SAFETY.



   The Board of Public Works and Safety, upon the request of any person
who disagrees with the decision of the city, shall hear all issues of
disputes which arise between the city and any such person whenever those
issues involve matters of the interpretation and enforcement of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual, the city Tree Plan, or the
interpretation or enforcement of this chapter, including disputes regarding
the issuance of licenses, or the concurrence or non-concurrence of the city
in licenses required under other ordinance or laws, or the abatement of
nuisances. The decision of a majority of the appointed members of the Board
of Public Works and Safety with regard to such dispute shall be binding upon
all parties involved.



   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the jurisdiction of
any court of law with respect to such disputes.



(Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



FEES; GRANTS



§ 97.50  FEES.



   All funds secured by this chapter shall be appropriated into the
non-reverting tree fund. Funds are to be utilized for the purpose of
fulfilling the obligations of this chapter.



(Ord. 68-11-90, passed 12-10-90; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.51  GRANTS.



   (A)   The Urban Forester shall prepare all information for submittal
to the city grant writer. Approval by the Tree Board, Street Commissioner and
Board of Public Works and Safety shall be required before final submittal of
any grant application is made to the Common Council for final review of
financing.



   (B)   The Urban Forester shall act as the liaison between the
grantor and the city grant writer for the purpose of coordinating the grant
process.



   (C)   All purchases and expenditures will be processed through the
established budget process and submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer’s office
through the Street Department using all policies and procedures implemented
by the Clerk-Treasurer and federal and state laws.



   (D)   The Urban Forester shall maintain all records involving grant
funds for educational programs, maintenance, plantings, disasters or any
other program not mentioned.



   (E)   All funds acquired through grant applications or other sources
shall be kept in a non-reverting tree fund as stated in §§ 97.04 and 97.50,
and disbursed as stated in division (C) of this section.



   (F)   The Noblesville Common Council, when funds are available,
shall make an effort to fund the minimum required to match any grant
obligations for its approval. In the event no grants are offered during a
budget year and grant funds are diminished or unavailable for the next
year’s budget the Common Council would budget funds in the amount of a
minimum $.25 per resident of the City of Noblesville to ensure the success of
the urban forestry program. These funds are to be placed in a line, dedicated
to street tree planting, in the Street Department budget. These funds shall
be compiled using the most current census. The above is dependent on the
availability of funding in the Common Council budget.



(Ord. 68-11-90, passed 12-10-90; Am. Ord. 8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person or entity to remove, trim or
damage any tree, shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property without
obtaining a license to do so. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, upon taking unlawful action, shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $500 per day for each separate offense. Each day during
which any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue
shall be a separate offense. The Board of Public Works and Safety shall
determine the amount of fines based on the findings submitted to them by the
Urban Forester. Fees for the cost of repair or replacement of such tree,
shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property shall be borne by the
party in violation. The replacement value of tree and shrubs shall be
determined in accordance with the latest revision of the Guide for Plant
Appraisal, as published by the International Society of Arboriculture.



   (B)   Loss of city privileges. Any person hired to perform street
tree work within the City of Noblesville who demonstrates the inability to
follow any provision of this chapter and its requirements may lose his or her
license to conduct business in the City of Noblesville.



(Ord. 13-3-90, passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. 17-4-98, passed 5-24-99; Am. Ord.
8-3-09, passed 4-28-09)



CHAPTER 98:  PARKS



Section



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Hours of operation



   98.03   Prohibition and exceptions




Other Public Grounds





   98.15   Riverside Cemetary









   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "PARK OR RECREATION AREA."  Any land or area designated as such in the
1986 Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 48-11-92, passed 11-23-92)



§ 98.02  HOURS OF OPERATION.




   Parks and recreation areas shall be open to the public from 5:00 a.m.
until 11:00 p.m., except for Seminary Park, which will be open to the public
from 5:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m. (A park or recreation area is defined as any
land or area designated as such in the 1986 Comprehensive Park Plan.)




(Ord. 48-11-92, passed 11-23-92; Am. Ord. 49-9-98, passed 9-28-98)



§ 98.03  PROHIBITION AND EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall be permitted to remain in the Parks and Recreation
areas from 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. except:



   (A)   Parks and Recreation Board employees.



   (B)   Law enforcement officers.



   (C)   Persons engaged in activities authorized by the Parks and
Recreation Board.



(Ord. 48-11-92, passed 11-23-92)  Penalty, see § 98.99



OTHER PUBLIC GROUNDS



§ 98.15  RIVERSIDE CEMETERY.



   No person shall enter, loiter or be within the Riverside Cemetery from
sunset to sunrise.



(Ord. 19-5-01, passed 5-29-01) Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall have
committed a Class C Infraction and shall be subject to fines and penalties in
accordance with Indiana law.



(Ord. 48-11-92, passed 11-23-92)



CHAPTER 99:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Intent



   99.03   Nuisance declared



   99.04   Time limits



   99.05   Removal procedures on public and private property



   99.06   Disposal of vehicle



   99.07   Proceeds of sale applied to costs



   99.08   Limitation of costs



   99.09   Proceeds of sale; abandoned vehicle fund



   99.10   Exceptions



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   “ABANDONED-VEHICLE.”



      (1)   A vehicle located on public property illegally;



      (2)   A vehicle left on public property without being moved
for 24 hours;



      (3)   A vehicle located on public property in such a manner as
to constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on a public right-of-way;



      (4)   A vehicle that has remained on private property without
the consent of the owner or person in control of that property for more than
48 hours;



      (5)   A vehicle from which the engine, transmission, or
differential has been removed or that is otherwise partially dismantled or
inoperable and left on public property;



      (6)   A vehicle that has been removed by a towing service or a
public agency upon request of an officer enforcing a statute or an ordinance
other than this chapter if the impounded vehicle is not claimed or redeemed
by the owner or the owner’s agent within 20 days after the vehicle’s
removal;



      (7)   A vehicle that is at least three model years old, is
mechanically inoperable, and j is left on private property continuously in a
location visible from public property for more than 20 days. For the purposes
of this section, a vehicle covered by a tarpaulin or other plastic, vinyl,
rubber, cloth, or textile covering is considered to be visible;



      (8)   A vehicle that was repaired or stored at the request of
the owner; that has not been claimed by the owner; and for which the
reasonable value of the charges associated with the repair or storage remain
unpaid more than 30 days after the date on which the repair work is completed
or the vehicle is first stored. (I.C. 9-13-2-1)



   “APPARENTLY INOPERABLE VEHICLE.”  Missing wheels, motors, tires,
transmission, or other major parts that affect operability. Also may include
a vehicle that is so extensively damaged it cannot be self-propelled or moved
in the manner in which it was originally intended to move.



   “AUTOMOBILE SCRAPYARD.”  A business organized for the purpose of
scrap metal processing, vehicle wrecking, or operating a junkyard. (I.C.
9-13-2-8)



   “BUREAU.”  Unless otherwise indicated, refers to the bureau of
motor vehicles. (I.C. 9-13-2-16)



   “FISCAL BODY.”  The common council. (I.C. 9-13-2-63)



   “JUNK VEHICLE.” Any vehicle including travel trailers, mobile
homes, motor homes, motorcycles, boats, buses, semi-trucks, trucks,
semi-truck trailers, utility trailers, and other similar conveyances, which
meets any of the following criteria:



      (1)   Is an apparently inoperable vehicle;



      (2)   Is without valid registration or current license plates;



      (3)   Is partially dismantled;



      (4)   Is a wrecked vehicle; or



      (5)   Has a fair market value equal only to the approximate
value of the scrap in it.



   “OFFICER.” Any regular member of the city police department. (I.C.
9-22-1-2)



   “OWNER.” The last known record titleholder of a vehicle according
to the records of the bureau under I.C. 9-17. (I.C. 9-13-2-121)



   “PARTS.” Refers to all components of a vehicle that as assembled do
not constitute a complete vehicle. (I.C. 9-13-2-122)



   “PRIVATE PROPERTY.” All property other than public property. (I.C.
9-13-2-136)



   “PUBLIC AGENCY.” A local agency given the responsibility by statute
or ordinance for the removal, storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles.
(I.C. 9-22-1-3)



   “PUBLIC PROPERTY.” A public right-of-way, street, highway, alley,
park, or other state, county, or municipal property. (I.C. 9-13-2-144)



   “TOWING SERVICE.” A person that engages in moving or removing
abandoned or disabled vehicles and, once the vehicles are moved or removed,
stores or impounds the vehicles. (I.C. 9-13-2-179)



   “VEHICLE.” An automobile, motorcycle, truck, trailer, semi-
trailer, tractor, bus, school bus, recreational vehicle, a trailer or
semitrailer used in the transportation of watercraft, or motorized bicycle.



   “WRECKED VEHICLE.”  A Vehicle so extensively damaged that it
cannot be self-propelled or move in the manner in which it was originally
intended to move and/or has missing or extensively damaged window(s), missing
wheels, motors, tires, transmission, or other major parts that affect
operability.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



Statutory reference:



   For definition of “vehicle” under Indiana law, See I.C.
9-13-2-196(d)



§ 99.02  INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to insure the public health, safety,
and general welfare by providing controls on the removal and disposal of
abandoned and junk motor vehicles. Among other reasons, this ordinance is
necessary to prohibit abandoned and junk vehicles from being disposed of by
leaving them on public or private property.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.03  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   Abandoned or junk vehicles are detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public. These vehicles constitute a hazard to the
health and welfare in that such vehicles furnish shelter and breeding places
for vermin and insects. These vehicles constitute a hazard to safety in that
said vehicles can have areas of confinement which cannot be opened from the
inside such as trunk compartments and engine compartments and present
physical dangers to the safety and well being of the citizens. In addition,
such vehicles are a detriment to the economic welfare of the state, by
producing a scenic blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing
development of the municipalities in the state. Such vehicles are declared to
be a public nuisance and safety and health hazard.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.04  TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle on any public property
continuously without being moved for three days, or in such a manner as to
constitute a hazard or obstruction to the movement of pedestrian or vehicle
traffic on a public right-of-way.



   (B)   No person shall abandon a vehicle on private property without
the consent of the owner, or person in control, of that property, for more
than 48 hours.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park, store, leave, or accumulate or
to permit the parking, storing, leaving, or accumulating of any licensed or
unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind which is in a wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled, apparently inoperable, or abandoned condition upon any private
property within the city limits for a period of time in excess of 20 days
unless such vehicle is completely enclosed within a building or stored in
connection with a lawfully operating business.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 99.05  REMOVAL PROCEDURES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Public property.



      (1)   Whenever the Officer finds or is notified of a vehicle
placed or stored upon a public highway, alley, thoroughfare, or other public
property within the city, he or she shall attach in a prominent place a
notice tag in the form required by I.C. 9-22-1-11.



      (2)   The officer shall also make a reasonable effort to
ascertain the person who owns the vehicle or who may be in control of the
vehicle and provide them of written notice.



      (3)   If such vehicle is not removed within three days after
such notice, the officer shall cause said vehicle to be removed by a junk or
salvage yard or wrecker service. The cost and expense of such removal shall
be paid by the owner of the vehicle.



   (B)   Private property without owner’s consent.



      (1)   Upon complaint of a person who owns or controls private
property that a vehicle has been left on for at least 48 hours without the
consent of the person who owns or controls the property, an officer shall
follow the procedures set forth in I.C. 9-22-1-11 through I.C. 9-22-1-14.



      (2)   The person who owns or controls the property may also
follow the procedures set out in I.C. 9-22-1-15 through I.C. 9-22-1-17 to
have the vehicle removed from private property.



   (C)   Private property. If a junk vehicle is found to be in
violation of this chapter, the owner of the property shall be notified of the
violation by certified mail, return receipt requested or personally served
written notice and asked to abate the nuisance within ten days.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.06  DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE.



   The provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-20 et seq., shall govern the disposition
and sale of stored vehicles.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.07  PROCEEDS OF SALE APPLIED TO COSTS.



   (A)   The costs for removal and storage of an abandoned vehicle or
parts not claimed by the person who owns or holds a lien on a vehicle shall
be paid from the abandoned vehicle account under I.C. 9-22-1-30.  The charge
payable by the person who owns or holds a lien on a vehicle for towing,
storing, or removing an abandoned vehicle or parts may not exceed $1,500. 
(See § 99.08)



(I.C. 9-22-1-25)



   (B)   The proceeds of sale of an abandoned vehicle or parts in
accordance with I.C. 9-22-1-23 shall be credited against all costs incident
to the removal, storage, and disposal of such vehicle.  (I.C. 9-22-1-26)



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.08  LIMITATION OF COSTS.



   In no event shall the owner of the motor vehicle be charged for towing
or removing the vehicle in excess of $150, nor shall the cost of storage
exceed the sum of $40 per day.  The storage charge shall be limited to the
number of days of actual storage.



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of procedures by fiscal body; establishment of abandoned
vehicle fund, see I.C. 9-22-1-30



§ 99.09  PROCEEDS OF SALE; ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.



   (A)   This section applies to sales of abandoned vehicles or parts
by a city.



   (B)   The proceeds from the sale of abandoned vehicles or parts,
including charges for bills of sale; and money received from persons who own
or hold liens on vehicles for the cost of removal or storage of vehicles;
shall be deposited in the city’s abandoned vehicle fund by the
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   The costs incurred by the city in administering this chapter
shall be paid from the abandoned vehicle fund.



   (D)   The Common Council shall annually appropriate sufficient money
to the fund to carry out this chapter.  Money remaining in the fund at the
end of a year remains in the fund and does not revert to the General Fund.
(I.C. 9-22-1-27)



(Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



§ 99.10  EXCEPTIONS.



This chapter does not apply to the following:



   (A)   A vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
constructed for operation on privately owned raceways.



   (B)   A vehicle stored as the property of a member of the armed
forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment.



   (C)   A vehicle located on a vehicle sale lot or at a commercial
vehicle servicing facility.



   (D)   A vehicle located upon property licensed or zoned as an
automobile scrapyard.



   (E)   A vehicle registered and licensed under I.C. 9-18-12 as an
antique vehicle.



(I.C. 9-22-1-1) (Ord. 13-05-12, passed 5-29-12)



 



CHAPTER 100:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section




Basic Service Tier and Associated Equipment; Rates





   100.01   Adoption of federal rules and regulations





   100.02   Definition





   100.03   Public hearing; basic service tier and equipment





   100.04   Subscriber rates





   100.05   Period for review of rates





   100.06   Adoption of decision by formal resolution





   100.07   Exceeding rates; rollbacks or refunds





   100.08   Information confidential





   100.09   Violation; penalty




BASIC SERVICE TIER AND ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT; RATES



§ 100.01  ADOPTION OF FEDERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Common Council of the city hereby adopts the rules and regulations
set forth by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to Section 623(b)
of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (47
U.S.C. 543(b)) for the review of the basic service tier of cable television
services and equipment necessary for the provision of such service tier. 
Such rules and regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission are found in Exhibit A attached to Ordinance 46-11-93, passed
11-8-93.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BASIC SERVICE TIER OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES."  A separately
available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any
other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all
signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber,
(except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the
local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is
ultimately received by the cable system) any public, educational and
governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic
tier, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the
basic tier by the cable operator.  Equipment necessary to provide that basic
tier of service shall be defined as those items of associated equipment
necessary for the reception of basic cable service by a subscriber,
including, but not limited to, converter boxes, remote control units,
additional outlets and installations.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.03  PUBLIC HEARING; BASIC SERVICE TIER AND EQUIPMENT.



   The city shall provide the grantee of the cable television franchise,
the public and interested parties with an opportunity to be heard at a public
hearing before the Common Council upon 14 days written notice to the grantee
of the cable television franchise of the time and place of the public
hearing.  The notice shall indicate that the purpose of the public hearing
is to receive the views of the grantee and interested parties on issues
pertaining to regulation of the basic service tier of cable television
service and equipment necessary to provide the basic tier of service.  The
notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of
general circulation at least ten days before the date of this hearing and
that an agenda for the public hearing shall be posted in a public place at
the City Building at least seven days prior to the public hearing.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.04  SUBSCRIBER RATES.



   Upon the adoption of this chapter and the certification of the Common
Council by the Federal Communications Commission, the city shall immediately
notify the cable operator by certified mail, return receipt requested, that
the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service
tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992.  Upon receipt of the notice by the
city, the cable operator shall, within 30 days, file with the city its
current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment along with
any traditional documentation justifying the reasonableness of its rates.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.05  PERIOD FOR REVIEW OF RATES.



   (A)   (1)   The city shall establish that the period for review
of rates of the basic service tier of cable television services and equipment
necessary to provide that basic service shall be 30 days from the submission
by the grantee of the cable television franchise of federal Communications
Commission Form 393.  If the Common Council takes no action within 30 days
from the date the cable operator files its basic cable rates with the city,
the proposed rates will continue in effect.



      (2)   In the event that additional time for review of the
Federal Communications Commission Form 393 submitted by the grantee is
necessary, the Common Council or their designee shall issue a brief written
order prior to the end of the 30-day review period, with a copy of the order
to be sent by certified United States mail to the grantee, providing for an
additional 90-day period for review of rates of the basic service tier and
equipment necessary to provide the basic tier service.  During the extended
review period and before taking action on the proposed rate, the Common
Council shall hold at least one public hearing in which interested citizens
may express their views and record objections.



   (B)   (1)   The city shall establish that the period for review
of the basic service tier of cable television services and the equipment
necessary to provide the basic tier of service shall be 90 days from the
submission by the grantee of information and forms prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission for a showing of cost-of-service, as defined by the
Federal Communications Commission.



      (2)   In the event that additional time for review of the
cost-of-service showing submitted by the grantee is necessary, the city or
their designee shall issue a brief written order prior to the end of the
90-day review period with a copy of that order to be sent by certified United
States mail to the grantee, providing for an additional 150-day period for
review of rates of the basic service tier and the equipment necessary to
provide the basic tier of service.  During the extended review period and
before taking action on the proposed rate, the city shall hold at least one
public hearing in which interested citizens may express their views and
record objections.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.06  ADOPTION OF DECISION BY FORMAL RESOLUTION.



   Upon completion of its review of the proposed rates for the basic
service tier of cable television services and the equipment necessary to
provide the basic tier of service, the city shall adopt its decision by
formal resolution.  The resolution shall indicate the reasons for the
decision.  Upon passage of the resolution, the city shall publish the
resolution in pamphlet form.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.07  EXCEEDING RATES; ROLLBACKS OR REFUNDS.



   (A)   In the event that the cable operator's proposed rates exceed
the reasonable rate standard as established by the Federal Communications
Commission in its rules and regulations attached to Ordinance 46-11-93,
passed 11-8-93, the city may order the rates reduced by rollbacks or refunds
to subscribers, in the manner so prescribed by the Federal Communications
Commission.



   (B)   The city may order the cable operator to refund to subscribers
a portion of previously paid rates under the following circumstances:



      (1)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been
determined to be in excess of the permitted basic cable service tier charge
or above the actual cost of equipment; or



      (2)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid
rate order issued by the city.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.08  INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.



   In considering information provided by the grantee as a part of review
of his rates for the basic service tier of cable television services and the
equipment necessary to provide the basic tier of service, the city shall not
disclose to the public the content of any records, forms, reports,
calculations or other documents as provided which the grantee has indicated
as being of a proprietary interest or constituting a trade secret in
nature.  The municipal officer responsible for administration of the Indiana
Freedom of Information Act shall retain the right to determine the validity
of the grantee's claim of proprietary interest or trade secrecy in accordance
with the provisions of the Indiana Freedom of Information Act.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



§ 100.09  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   Failure of the cable operator to comply with the terms and conditions
established by this chapter, including the attachment to Ordinance 46-11-93,
passed 11-8-93, shall constitute a violation of the Cable Television
Franchise Ordinance.  The penalties for such violation are subject to the
conditions of § 10.99.



(Ord. 46-11-93, passed 11-8-93)



CHAPTER 101:  FAIR HOUSING POLICY



Section



   101.01   Policy statement



   101.02   Definitions



   101.03   Unlawful practice



   101.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   101.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   101.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services



   101.07   Interference, coercion, or intimidation



   101.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   101.09   Exemptions



   101.10   Administrative enforcement



§ 101.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the Common Council to provide, within
constitutional limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits
as provided for under the federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the
federal Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and IC
22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)



§ 101.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "AGGRIEVED PERSON."  Includes any person who (IC 22-9.5-2-2):



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



   "COMMISSION."  (IC 22-9.5-2-3)  The Indiana Civil Rights Commission 
or a local agency designated by an ordinance adopted under  IC 22-9.5-4-1.



   "COMPLAINANT."  (IC 22-9.5-2-6)  A person, including the Commission,
who files a complaint under IC 22-9.5-6.



   "DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE."  An act that is unlawful under §
101.05 through 101.08 or IC 22-9.5-5-5.



   "DISABLED."



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of that person's major life activities,



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment,



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.



      (2)   The term "HANDICAP" shall not include current illegal
use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of
Title 21 of the United States Code, (IC 22-9.5-2-10(b)); nor does the term
"HANDICAP" include an individual solely because that individual is a
transvestite (IC 22-9.5-2-10(c)).



   "DWELLING."  Any building, structure, or part of a building or
structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a
residence by one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure, or
part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended
for occupancy as a residence by one or more families  (IC 22-9.5-2-8).



   "FAMILIAL STATUS."  One or more individuals (who have not attained the
age of 18 years) being domiciled with:



      (1)   A parent or another person having legal custody of that
individual or the written permission of that parent or other person.



      (2)   The protection afforded against discrimination on the
basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained
the age of 18 years.



   "FAMILY."  A single individual (IC 22-9.5-2-9), with the status of
such family being further defined in "FAMILIAL STATUS".



   "PERSON."  (IC 22-9.5-2-11)  includes  one or more individuals, 
corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, associations, labor
organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, trusts,  unincorporated  organizations, trustees, trustees in
cases under Title 11 of the United Stated Code, receivers, and fiduciaries.



   "TO RENT."  (IC 22-9.5-2-13)  includes to lease, to sublease, to let
and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy the premises
owned by the occupant.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)



§ 101.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) of this section, § 101.09
and IC Title 22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth IC Title 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 101.04 shall apply
to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) and IC Title
22-9.5-3.



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) of this section,
nothing in § 101.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house
by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale
or who was not the most recent resident of that house prior to the sale, the
exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period.  The
private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on that owner's behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family
houses at any one time.  The sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from application of this section only if that house is sold
or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent or salesman, or person,
and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 101.04(C), but
nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer this title, or



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and  occupies
one of those living quarters as that owner's residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) of this section, a person
shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if that
person:



      (1)   Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein,



      (2)   Has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of that person's own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or



      (3)   Is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or intended
for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 101.03 and except as exempted by §§
101.03(B) and 101.09, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions,
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of
services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status or national origin.



   (C)   To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or
published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale
or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation,
or discrimination.



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That person;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (3)   For purposes of this subdivision, discrimination
includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford that person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable  to do so, condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification,
reasonable wear and use excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may  be
necessary to afford the affected person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1988, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
those dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all  premises within those dwellings are sufficiently wide to
allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within those dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling:



               b.   Light switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;



               c.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to
allow later installation of grab bars; and



               d.   Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



      (4)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National 
Standard  for  buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people (commonly  cited  as  "ANSI 
A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of division (F)(3)(c)3 of this
section.



      (5)   Nothing in this subdivision requires that a dwelling be
made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct
threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would
result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term "RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION" means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential
real property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or
familial status.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)



§ 101.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers'
organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such a
person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
status or national origin.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION, OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that person having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 101.03, 101.04, 101.05 or 101.06.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat
of force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of that person's race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin and because that person is
or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or
contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchasing, renting, financing or
occupation of any dwelling,or applying for or participating in any service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings; or



   (B)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above; or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate; or



   (C)   Any citizen because that citizen is or has been, or in order
to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding  or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) of this section, or participation lawfully in speech or peaceful
assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
not more than $1,000, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and if
bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned for
not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to
imprisonment for any term of years or for life.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 101.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions as defined or set forth under IC Title 22-9.5-3 et.
seq. shall also be exemptions from the provisions of this chapter and
exemptions shall also include those activities or organizations set forth
under divisions (B) and (C) of this section.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization  operated, supervised  or  controlled by or in conjunction
with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the
sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted
on account of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this
chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns
or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status
shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.



      (2)   As used in this section, "HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS"
means housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state of federal program that
the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the Indiana Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in the state or federal
program); or



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62
years of age or older; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)



§ 101.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commission as set
forth in division (B) hereof shall be vested in the Common Council of the
city.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of IC 22-9.5-4-8, the Common
Council, because of a lack of financial and other resources necessary to
fully administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under
this chapter, herein elects to refer all formal  complaints  of violation
of the articles of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission ("Commission") for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to
IC Title 22-9.5-6 and the Common Council, shall refer all complaints to that
Commission as provided for under division (A) of this section for purposes of
investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided for under IC
22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the Common Council,
shall administer their departments, programs and activities relating to
housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the
purposes of this chapter and shall cooperate with the Common Council to
further such purposes.



   (D)   That Common Council or its designee, shall provide information
on remedies available to any aggrieved person or complainant requesting such
information.



(Ord. 10-3-93, passed 4-14-93)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      111.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



      112.   HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES AND VEHICLES



      113.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



      114.   TAXICABS



      115.   JUNK DEALERS



      116.   PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



      117.   ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS



      118.   HANDBILLS



      119.   EXHIBITIONS



      120.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



      121.   TAXATION



CHAPTER 110:  ALARM SYSTEMS




Section





   110.01      Purpose





   110.02     Definitions





   110.03     Alarm system permit required





   110.04     Application for alarm system permit





   110.05     Issuance of alarm system permit





   110.06     Permit fee, term, suspension and/or revocation





   110.07     Location of permit





   110.08     Prohibited activity





   110.09     Enforcement





   110.10     Schedule of penalties





   110.11     Disposition of monies collected




§ 110.01  PURPOSE.



   It is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to reduce the number
of false alarms activated by private emergency alarm systems within the City
of Noblesville and to thereby, reduce the expenditure of resources, monies
and reduce the risk to the public safety that results from Municipal
Emergency Services personnel responding to the false alarms.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALARM."  An audible, mechanical or electrical signal from a detection
system which indicates a disturbance or a detection system or some other
activity that requires urgent attention from Municipal Emergency Services.



   "ALARM SYSTEM."  Any assembly of equipment which is designed or
functions to provide an audible, mechanical or electrical signal which
indicates a disturbance or some other activity that requires urgent attention
from Municipal Emergency Services.  For the purposes of this chapter, an
"ALARM SYSTEM" shall not include:



      (1)   An alarm installed on a motor vehicle; or



      (2)   A smoke detector not connected to an automatic dialing
device.



   "ALARM USER."  Any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity in ownership of, or control of, or using an alarm system, including
lessors of the systems.



   "AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE."  Any device connected to an alarm system
which automatically sends a prerecorded message, signal or coded signal to a
selected telephone number(s) indicating the need for a response from
Municipal Emergency Services.



   "FALSE ALARM."  An alarm eliciting or causing a response by Municipal
Emergency Services when the situation does not require any the response. 
For the purposes of this chapter, this does not include alarms triggered by
severe and unanticipated or unpredictable atmospheric conditions or other
circumstances not reasonable under the control of the alarm user, owner,
lessor, installer or maintainer.



   "MUNICIPAL EMERGENCY SERVICES."  Services, responses and actions taken
by the Noblesville Police Department, Noblesville Fire Department,
Noblesville Communications Department and any department of the city (such as
the Street Department) that responds to a "false alarm" as defined herein. 
This includes responses by the Hamilton County Sheriff's Department, Indiana
State Police and neighboring Fire Departments that have a "Joint/Mutual Aid"
agreement with the city or who without any agreement, nonetheless responds to
a call for service that results in a "false alarm" as herein defined, within
the city.



   "PERMIT HOLDER."  The individual, corporation, partnership or other
legal entity to whom an alarm system is issued.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.03  ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns or controls
property to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an
alarm system on that property unless a current and valid alarm system permit
has been obtained from the Chief of Police or his or her designee; provided,
however, no permit shall be required for an alarm system located on a private
residence if the only response on the activation of the alarm system is an
external sounding alarm that automatically stops within 15 minutes after
activation.  If, however, Municipal Emergency Services are routinely
notified and dispatched to a private residence to investigate such an
activated alarm, a permit shall be required.



   (B)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a $50
fine unless an alarm system permit is obtained within ten days after
receiving notification of the violation, provided that prior notification of
the violation has not been given.



   (C)   However, any false alarm activation occurring within 30 days
after installment of a new alarm system shall be exempt from any penalties
for "false alarms".



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.04  APPLICATION FOR ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.



   (A)   Application for a permit for the operation of an alarm system
shall be made by a person or legal entity having ownership, a leasehold
interest in, or control over the property on which the alarm system is
installed and operational.  The applications shall be made in writing to the
Chief of Police or his or her designee, within five days following
installation of an alarm system and prior to its operation.  Applications
shall be on a form designated by the city for this purpose.



   (B)   The application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of each person in
possession or control of the property on which the alarm system is installed
and operational.



      (2)   The street address of the property on which the alarm
system is installed and operational.



      (3)   Any business name used for the premise on which the
alarm system is installed and operational.



      (4)   The name, address and telephone numbers of the person(s)
or alarm system business who installed the alarm system.



      (5)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of two 
persons or an alarm system business which are able to, and have agreed to:



         (a)   Receive notification at any time of an alarm by
Municipal Emergency Services; and



         (b)   Come to the alarm premise/site within 30 minutes
after receiving a request from Municipal Emergency Services to do so; and



         (c)   Grant access to the alarm premise/site to
Municipal Emergency Services and to deactivate the alarm system if it becomes
necessary to do so.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE OF ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall issue an
alarm system permit to the person or other legal entity in possession or
control of the property subject to the application's submission in accordance
with this chapter, payment of the permit fee and approval by the Chief of
Police, which shall not be unreasonably denied.  An application may be
disapproved if the Chief of Police, after consultation with the Police
Department, finds that any statement made in the application to be incomplete
or false or it is found that the alarm system is intended to be used in
support of an illegal activity.  All alarm system permits issued shall
contain a registration number and shall be in decal form.



   (B)   After the receipt of the application for an alarm system
permit and payment of the permit fee, the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, shall record the application data for use by Municipal Emergency
Services personnel.  All the information on the application shall be kept
confidential within the city.  However, the information shall be made
available within the city on a "need to know" basis for official business use
only and to other law enforcement and emergency service agencies, on a "need
to know" basis for official business.



   (C)   The permit holder shall promptly notify the Chief of Police,
or his or her designee, in writing of any change in the information contained
in the permit application.  Failure to do so may result in the suspension or
revocation of the permit.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.06  PERMIT FEE, TERM, SUSPENSION AND/OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The fee for an alarm system permit shall be $5.



   (B)   An alarm system permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be personal to the permit holder for a specific location and is not
transferable.



   (C)   An alarm system permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended or revoked pursuant to conditions and procedures established by
this chapter and this code.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.07  LOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The permit holder of an alarm system permit shall display the permit in
a conspicuous manner which is reasonably visible to responding Municipal
Emergency Service personnel responding to the alarm.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.08  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns, operates, leases
or controls property within the city on which an alarm system is installed to
issue, cause to be issued, or permit the issuance of an alarm system that
does not have a valid permit issued in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who owns, operates, leases
or controls property within the city on which an alarm system is installed to
issue, cause to be issued, or permit the issuance of more than four false
alarms in any one calendar year.  Provided however, this section will not
apply to an alarm system which emits a false alarm within 30 days after the
initial installation of the alarm system.



   (C)   This section shall apply to dwellings/premises with alarm
systems installed prior to and after enactment of this chapter.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   If an alarm system issues more than four false alarms in a calendar
year, the person who owns, leases, or controls the property on which such
alarm system is installed shall receive written notice of violation, subject
to the civil penalties set out in § 110.10 of this chapter. Enforcement
shall be by the City Attorney in accordance with the law.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.10  SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.



   Any person violating this chapter shall pay the following civil
penalties:



   (A)   For 5th false alarm in a calendar year:  $50.



   (B)   For 6th false alarm in a calendar year:  $75.



   (C)   For 7th through 10th false alarm in a calendar year:  $100.



   (D)   For 11th and every subsequent false alarm in a calendar
year:  $200.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



§ 110.11  DISPOSITION OF MONIES COLLECTED.



   (A)   Monies generated from permit applications shall be deposited
in an appropriate fund and used by the Noblesville Communications Department
to maintain the alarm system, false alarm program and/or upgrade, replace and
maintain equipment used by the Noblesville Communications Department and/or
provide training required by the personnel of the Noblesville Communications
Department.



   (B)   Monies generated by fines for violation of this section shall
be deposited in an appropriate fund and used as follows:



      (1)   25% of the fund to be used by the Noblesville
Communications Department to maintain the alarm system, false alarm program
and/or upgrade, replacement and maintenance of equipment used by the
Noblesville Communications Department and/or provide training required by the
personnel of the Noblesville Communications Department.



      (2)   75% of the fund to be used by the Noblesville Police
Department to pay for education, training and enforcement material required
by the personnel of the Police Department.



(Ord. 65-8-03, passed 9-9-03)



CHAPTER 111:  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



Section




   111.01   State regulations





   111.02   Authority of local health officers




§ 111.01  STATE REGULATIONS.



   For provisions concerning food establishments particularly with respect
to sanitation regulations, see IC 16-42-5-1 et seq.



§ 111.02  AUTHORITY OF LOCAL HEALTH OFFICERS.



   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing I.C. 16-41-20, 16-41-23,
16-41-24, 16-41-34, or 16-42-5, the local health officers are food
environmental health specialists subordinate to the state department.  (I.C.
16-42-5-24)



   (B)  If upon inspection of a food establishment a local health officer
or food environmental health specialist finds an employer, operator, or other
employee to be violating I.C. 16-41-20, 16-41-23, 16-41-24, 16-41-34, or
16-42-5, the local health officer or food environmental health specialist
shall do at least one of the following:



      (1)   Furnish evidence of the violation to the prosecuting
attorney of the county or circuit in which the violation occurs.  The
prosecuting attorney shall prosecute all persons violating I.C. 16-41-20,
16-41-23, 16-41-24, 16-41-34, or 16-42-5, or rules adopted under those
provisions.



      (2)   Report the condition and violation to the State Heath
Commissioner or the Commissioner’s legally authorized agent.  The State
Health Commissioner may issue an order to the person in authority at the
offending establishment to abate the condition or violation within five days
or within another reasonable time required to abate the condition or
violation.  The proceedings to abate must be in accordance with I.C. 4-21.5.



(I.C. 16-42-5-25)



CHAPTER 112:  HORSE-DRAWN
CARRIAGES AND VEHICLES



Section




   112.01   Regulation and licensing of horse-drawn carriage businesses





   112.02   Licenses required





   112.03   Licenses issued by Clerk-Treasurer





   112.04   Applications for horse-drawn carriage business license





   112.05   Carriage route and operations schedule





   112.06   Operation of horse-drawn carriage businesses





   112.07   Public liability





   112.08   Issuance of horse-drawn carriage business licenses





   112.09   Horse-drawn vehicles





   112.10   Coachman's license





   112.11   Denial, suspensation or revocation





   112.12   Term and renewals





   112.13   Fees










   112.99   Penalty




§ 112.01  REGULATION AND LICENSING OF HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE BUSINESSES.



   To assure the public health and safety of persons using the public
streets and ways, the operation of horse-drawn carriages is regulated; and
the business of conveying persons by horse-drawn carriages is licensed to
defray the costs of regulation and operation required by this chapter.



(Ord. 63-7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.02  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   The operation of any horse-drawn vehicle upon the streets of the city
for the purposes of transporting persons for hire or as a contractual service
is a violation of this code unless operated in accordance with valid licenses
issued pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 63-7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty,
see § 112.99



§ 112.03  LICENSES ISSUED BY CLERK-TREASURER.



   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to issue licenses pursuant to this
chapter as follows:



   (A)   Horse-drawn carriage business licenses;



   (B)   Horse-drawn vehicle licenses; and,



   (C)   Coachmen's licenses.



(Ord. 63-7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.04  APPLICATIONS FOR HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   Applications for horse-drawn carriage business licenses shall
be made to the Clerk-Treasurer on forms provided by the Clerk-Treasurer. In
addition to other information required by this section, the application shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant, and if a
corporation or partnership, the name and address of any person who has an
ownership interest in said business;



      (2)   The number of carriages to be operated pursuant to the
license and the seating capacity, manufacturer and scale drawing or
photograph of each carriage;



      (3)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, if the applicant is an individual; whether any of the partners have
been convicted of a felony, if the applicant is a partnership; and, whether
any of the officers or directors have been convicted of a felony, if the
application is a corporation;



      (4)   A route and operations schedule for the business which
complies with § 112.05;



      (5)   A schedule of rates and charts to be made to passengers
which rates shall not be changed within ten days prior notice to the
Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   The application shall be verified under oath and include a
written agreement by the applicant to operate the business, if licensed,
strictly in accordance with § 112.06 and to indemnify and hold harmless the
city for all judgments, losses and expenses arising out of the operations
permitted by the license.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.05  CARRIAGE ROUTE AND OPERATIONS SCHEDULE.




   (A)   Horse-drawn carriage businesses shall operate only upon routes
and pursuant to schedules approved as provided in this section. The route and
operations schedule filed with the Clerk-Treasurer shall contain the
following:





      (1)   A map of the routes on which the carriages will operate;





      (2)   A schedule of hours of operations, which shall not
include the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., except
on Saturdays, Sundays and City holidays;





      (3)   The location of any areas to be designated as
“stands” for regular pickup and discharge of passengers.





   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall refer all route and operation
schedules to the Chief of the Police Department.  The Chief of Police may 
reject  any  route  and operation schedule that is  an  unsafe  or
inappropriate use of the public streets.  The Director of Planning and
Development may reject any route and operation schedule that is inconsistent
with the zoning ordinances of the city.





   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer, on the recommendation of the Chief of
Police and the Mayor may issue temporary permits to holders of a valid
horse-drawn carriage business license for operation on other routes for
special purposes for periods not to exceed ten days.





   (D)   Any route and operation schedule approval shall be subject to
the right of the Board of Public Works and Safety to prohibit the use of any
route at certain times, when such operation would be inconsistent with other
special events or public safety requirements, by giving 48 hours notice of
such prohibition.




(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see
§ 112.99



§ 112.06  OPERATION OF HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE BUSINESSES.




   Horse-drawn carriages shall be operated only in accordance with the
following regulations:





   (A)   A copy of the horse-drawn carriage license shall be displayed
in all carriages used in such business. The Clerk-Treasurer upon issuance of
the license shall issue that number of duplicates as requested in the
application identifying each carriage identified in the application.





   (B)   Each carriage used in such business shall have a valid
horse-drawn carriage license issued pursuant to this chapter.





   (C)   Each carriage shall be operated by the holder of a valid
coachman's license issued pursuant to this chapter, who shall have such
license and other identification on his person at all times when operating
such vehicle.





   (D)   When carrying persons for hire or by contract, the vehicle
shall be operated only upon the routes and during the hours approved pursuant
to § 112.05 or in accordance with a special ten-day permit issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer.





   (E)   Horse-drawn carriages shall pick up and discharge passengers
only upon the curb lane, while lawfully parked at the curb.





   (F)   Horse-drawn vehicles, when in motion, shall be operated only
in the curb-most traffic lane on any public street and the driver shall obey
all applicable state and local traffic laws, ordinances and regulations.





   (G)   No horse-drawn vehicle shall be operated on a public street
unless a valid bond or public liability insurance policy as specified in §
112.07 is on file with the Clerk-Treasurer.





   (H)   Drivers shall carry rate cards and exhibit them on demand.
Rate cards shall also be affixed to the carriage in a prominent location so
as to advise prospective clientele of the rates and fares. Rate cards shall
bear the name and business address of the license holders, and a complete
schedule of rates and fares which shall be the same as those on file with the
Clerk-Treasurer. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide rate
cards to all drivers and affix same to the carriages.





   (I)   Horse-drawn carriage owners and operators shall maintain their
horses in good health abiding by the rules of good animal husbandry. This
shall include an annual health examination of each animal by a veterinarian
of equine medicine licensed by the State of Indiana. A copy of said
examination shall be submitted to the Clerk-Treasurer to be placed on file
with the permit application.





   (J)   Occupancy of a horse-drawn carriage shall not exceed the rated
seating capacity of the vehicle.





   (K)   No passenger shall be allowed to ride on any part of the
vehicle which in motion except seated inside the vehicle.





   (L)   Drivers are prohibited from smoking while carrying passengers.





   (M)   All horses must be shoed with horse shoes that are either a
rubber compound, a steel shoe with borium, or Drill-Tek on the steel gripping
surfaces or other type of shoe approved for use by the Director of Planning.





   (N)   Each animal pulling a carriage on the city streets shall be
equipped with manure-catching devices to prevent manure from falling to the
street.





   (O)   Each carriage shall be equipped with a chemical to be poured
over horse urine so as to break down and eliminate accumulated agents and
odor and the drivers shall use the chemical each time the horse urinates on
the street surface.




(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98) Penalty, see §
112.99



§ 112.07  PUBLIC LIABILITY.



   (A)   Before a license required by this chapter shall be issued or
renewed, the applicant therefor shall post or maintain with the
Clerk-Treasurer either an indemnity bond or a policy of public liability
insurance, approved as to form by the City Attorney and conditioned
substantially so that the licensee will indemnify and save harmless the city,
its officers, agents, employees and insurers, from any and all loss, costs,
damages or expenses, including attorney fees and costs of defense by reason
of legal liability which may result directly or indirectly from the operation
of a carriage for which a license is issued, and that the licensee will pay
any and all loss or damage that may be sustained by any person resulting from
or arising out of the operation or maintenance of a carriage. The bond or
policy of insurance shall be maintained in its original amount by the
licensee at his expense at all times during the period for which the license
is in effect and shall designate the city as co-insured. In the event two or
more licenses are issued to one licensee, one such bond or policy of
insurance may be  furnished  to  cover  two  or more vehicles and each
bond or policy shall be of a type where coverage shall automatically be
restored after the occurrence of any accident or event from which liability
may thereafter accrue.



   (B)   The limit of liability upon any bond or policy posted pursuant
to division (A) shall in no case be less than $300,000 for death or injury of
one person, $100,000 for total liability for death or personal injury arising
out of any one event or casualty and $50,000 for property damage.



   (C)   Any bond posted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied
by good and sufficient sureties approved by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the licensee under this
section of any claim of which the city has notice, where such claim arises
from the operation of maintenance of any carriage.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.08  ISSUANCE OF HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE BUSINESS LICENSES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application pursuant to § 112.04,
approval of the route and operations schedule pursuant to § 112.05, filing
of bond or insurance as required by § 112.07, and payment of the application
and license fees provided in § 112.13, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a
horse-drawn carriage business license to the applicant, unless the number of
vehicles approved for existing licenses equals or exceeds the number
established in division (B) below.



   (B)   The Common Council determines that to prevent disruption of
the primary public uses of the city streets by pedestrians and motor vehicles
the number of carriages permitted in the downtown area should be limited. At
no time shall the holders of horse-drawn carriage business licenses be
authorized to operate more than 20 vehicles in aggregate within the corporate
boundaries of the city, and no one licensee shall be authorized to operate
more than eight vehicles in such area.



   (C)   Initial licenses shall not be issued until a deadline
established by the Clerk-Treasurer not earlier than May 11, 1998. If by the
deadline applicants have qualified for more licenses than may be issued under
division (B), the Clerk-Treasurer shall select by random applicants until the
maximum is reached.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.09  HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES.



   (A)   No horse-drawn vehicle shall be operated upon the streets of
the city for the transporting of persons for hire or by contract unless
licensed by the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (B)   Only vehicles constructed and equipped as follows may be
licensed:



      (1)   Carriages will have no less than 1¼ inch spoked wheels
with a rubber covering thick enough to protect the streets from damage and to
keep noise to a minimum;



      (2)   All carriages will be equipped with brakes, taillights,
brakelights and turn signals on the rear of the vehicle;



      (3)   Carriages will be equipped with front lights on both
sides that will emit light to the front and side that will be visible from a
distance of 500 feet.



      (4)   Each carriage will be equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle sign approved by the State of Indiana and attached to the rear of the
vehicle;



      (5)   No carriage shall be larger in capacity than to
transport six passengers.



   (C)   Upon application by the owner and after inspection determines
that the vehicle complies with the requirements of this section, the
Clerk-Treasurer shall issue horse-drawn vehicle licenses for such vehicles
upon payment of the fees specified in § 112.13.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see
§ 112.99



§ 112.10  COACHMAN'S LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall drive a horse-drawn vehicle carrying persons
for hire or by contract, unless the  holder of a valid coachman's license
issued pursuant to this section.



   (B)   The application for a coachman's license shall be made under
oath to the Clerk-Treasurer and shall verify or establish that the applicant
is:



      (1)   Able to speak, read and write the English language;



      (2)   The holder of a valid operator's license issued by the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles of the State of Indiana;



      (3)   Free of defective vision, defective hearing and any
other infirmities that would render him/her unfit for safe operation of a
public vehicle;



      (4)   Free of alcohol or drug addiction;



   (C)   The application shall produce written evidence of experience
in driving a horse-drawn carriage, or successful completion of a course in
such driving given by a source approved by the Clerk-Treasurer, or both, and
shall, if requested, demonstrate his/her ability.



   (D)   The Clerk-Treasurer may require the applicant by test or
otherwise to demonstrate his/her knowledge of the requirements of this
section.



   (E)   Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee
provided in § 112.13, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a coachman's license
to the applicant.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see
§ 112.99



§ 112.11  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any person licensed to operate horse-drawn carriages or
vehicles under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances and all laws and regulations of
the state regarding the use and operation of horse-drawn carriages and
vehicles and carriage of persons and baggage for hire as public carriers by
horse-drawn carriages or vehicles, and shall at all times be subject to the
supervision of the Police Department and the Board of Public Works and Safety.



   (B)   The Board may, upon complaint of any person or upon its own
motion, cite and require any such licensee to appear before the Board at such
times as the Board may determine and show cause why the license should not be
revoked or suspended by the Clerk-Treasurer for failure to comply with any
lawful order or command of the Police Department or of the Board of Public
Works and Safety. The Board shall, at the time and place fixed in the
citation, proceed to summarily hear and determine the merits of the
complaint, and shall make such orders as shall be found necessary to remedy
the cause of the complaint, or may order the Clerk-Treasurer to revoke or
suspend the license as shall be found necessary to protect the public
interest. Any violation of this section by the holder of a license issued
hereunder shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license by the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.12  TERM AND RENEWALS.



   All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for a period not less than
six months nor more than 18 months from the date first issued expiring on
June 30. All renewal licenses are valid for one year, expiring on June 30. 
Any license issued hereunder may be renewed prior to expiration upon
application to the Clerk-Treasurer, verifying that the qualifications for the
license are still met, and the payment of the fees specified in § 112.13. 
If the Clerk-Treasurer finds that the applicant remains qualified for the
license and has operated as required by this chapter, the Clerk-Treasurer
shall renew the license for a one-year period ending June 30 of the year
following the expiration of the existing license.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



§ 112.13  FEES.



   The fees for licenses under this chapter shall be as follows:



   (A)   Horse-drawn carriage business license:



      (1)   Initial application and license fee: $100, plus $10 for
each carriage.



      (2)   Annual renewal: $50 plus $10 per carriage.



      (3)   Refund: If the initial license is not issued, $50 of the
application fee will be refunded.



   (B)   Horse-drawn vehicle license:  Initial fee and annual fee: $10
per carriage.



   (C)   Coachman's license:  Initial fee and annual fee: $25



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to the following
provisions:  Any person operating or attempting to operate any horse-drawn
carriage or vehicle without procuring the license or coachman's license
required by this chapter, guilty of a Class B infraction and or operating or
attempting to operate any horse-drawn carriage or vehicle after revocation or
suspension of the license or coachman's license required by this chapter, or
in violation of any lawful order of the Board of Public Works and Safety made
pursuant to this chapter, or in violation of any other provision of this
chapter, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $250.  Upon a second
offense, the court may, in addition to the fine herein provided, revoke or
suspend the license or coachman's license for a period not to exceed six
months.



(Ord. 7-89, passed 8-15-89; Am. Ord. 22-4-98, passed 5-11-98)



CHAPTER 113:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section




   113.01   Definitions





   113.02   Exemptions from this chapter





   113.03   Certification required





   113.04   Operations





   113.05   Inspections





   113.06   Restraining order and injunction





   113.07   Verification of qualifications





   113.08   Complaints










   113.99   Penalty




§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ACCREDITED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE.”  Any school or institution of
learning accredited by the Indiana Commission of Proprietary Education
(ICOPE) or a similar state agency or commission of a state other than Indiana
that requires a course of study not less than 500 hours before a student is
awarded a diploma or certificate of graduation.



   “MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.”  Any building, room, place, or
establishment providing massage for compensation, but does not include
training rooms of any school or institution of learning accredited by the
Indiana Commission of Proprietary Education (ICOPE), training rooms of
recognized professional or amateur athletic teams, and licensed health care
facilities.



   “MASSAGE THERAPIST.”  A person who practices, administers, or
teaches all or any of the subjects or methods of massage therapy.



   “MASSAGE THERAPY.”  A therapeutic system of structured touch,
pressure, holding, and movement of the soft tissue of the body that includes
the use of touch, pressure, percussion, kneading, movement, positioning,
nonspecific stretching, stretching, within the normal anatomical range of
movement and holding, with or without the use of massage devices that mimic
or enhance manual measures, as well as the external application of heat,
cold, water, ice, stones, thermal therapy, lubricants, abrasives and topical
preparations that are not classified as prescription drugs, and which does
not include joint manipulation or spinal adjustment and diagnosis or
prescribing drugs for which a license is required.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 113.02  EXEMPTIONS FROM THIS CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses,
physical therapists and similar professionals licensed or registered to
practice their respective professions under the laws of the State of Indiana;



   (B)   Accredited schools and colleges, and coaches and trainers
employed thereby while acting within the scope of their employment; and



   (C)   Not for profit community supported agencies authorized to
operate in Indiana.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 113.03  CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   Pursuant to I.C. 25-21.8-4, all massage therapists shall be certified
by the State Board of Massage Therapy. No local license is required, but
practitioners are still required to meet the minimum standards of this
chapter for operation.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No massage establishment shall be operated or conducted using
any room or place which is also used for residential purposes. In any case
where the massage establishment is conducted in a building that also includes
living quarters, there shall be no direct connection between the massage
establishment and the residential quarters. No one shall use the business
quarters for a place of habitation.



   (B)   All massage establishments shall be subject to all other city
ordinances, county ordinances, and the laws of the State of Indiana, and to
the regulations of various administrative bodies of the city, county, and
state.



   (C)   Every massage establishment shall be open no earlier than 8:00
a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m.



   (D)   All towels used on a patron shall not be reused until the
towels have been laundered.



   (E)   All massage tables shall be covered with linen which shall be
changed for each patron and the linen shall be laundered before covering the
massage table for another patron.



   (F)   All mechanical items and apparatuses used on a patron shall be
cleansed and sanitized before using same on another patron.



   (G)   All mechanical items and apparatuses, oils, salt, packs, and
other items used in giving a massage shall be kept in a closed sanitation
type cabinet when not in use.



   (H)   All showers and shower stalls, bath stalls, or other such
individual units shall be sanitized on a daily basis with an antiseptic
solution.



   (I)   No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to attend,
visit, or patronize a massage establishment without the express written
consent of a parent or guardian.



   (J)   There shall be continuously available hot and cold running
water.



   (K)   No employee, manager, or owner of a massage establishment
shall have been found in violation of any state statute or local ordinance
pertaining to sex offenses, prostitution, keeping a house of ill fame, or
maintaining a public nuisance.



   (L)   Comply with all other regulations as set out by the State
Board of Massage Therapy in 847IAC.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.05  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Every massage establishment shall be available for random
inspection at any reasonable time during regular business hours. Such
inspection shall be conducted by the Director of Planning or a duly
authorized representative showing proper credentials. It shall be unlawful to
deny such persons entry to such establishments.



   (B)   Noncompliance with or refusal of or interference with the
right to enter and inspect as authorized by this chapter shall result in
remedy as provided below.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.06  RESTRAINING ORDER AND INJUNCTION.



   The Director of Planning or the Board of Public Works and Safety may
institute on behalf of the city a suit for restraining order or an injunction
against any person, firm, partnership, or corporation from violating any
terms or provisions of this chapter. The remedies in this section are in
addition and supplemental to any of the other remedies provided in this
chapter.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 113.07  VERIFICATION OF QUALIFICATIONS.



   Upon request of a duly authorized agent of the city, massage therapists
employed at massage establishments must provide a copy of their massage
therapist’s certification within a reasonable timeframe.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.08  COMPLAINTS.



   All complaints of alleged violation of provisions of this chapter shall
be made in writing to the Director of Planning. Upon receiving such
complaint, the Director of Planning shall conduct an inspection of the
property and refer findings of the inspection along with the written
complaint to the Board of Public Works and Safety, who shall conduct a
hearing thereon. If the Board shall determine enough information and evidence
present of a violation, the matter shall be referred to the City Attorney to
pursue appropriate legal remedy. In addition to the city investigation, the
Director of Planning shall report any complaints and findings to the
appropriate state licensing agency if deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 and no more than $300 per violation. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 35-08-12, passed 9-11-12)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS



Section




   114.01   Taxicab license required





   114.02   Application; contents and fee





   114.03   Certificate of insurance





   114.04   List of approved drivers





   114.05   Vehicles to be maintained in safe condition





   114.06   Operation in compliance with law





   114.07   Suspension of license for violation










   114.99   Penalty




§ 114.01 TAXICAB LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation ("the Applicant") which
desires to drive or operate a motor vehicle, taxicab, or any other motor
vehicle, as a common carrier for passengers for hire within the city, shall
first receive a taxicab license ("a License") to be approved by the Board of
Public Works and Safety and issued by the Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.02 APPLICATION; CONTENTS AND FEE.



   (A)   An application for a license filed with the Clerk-Treasurer
shall include all information required by this chapter and shall be submitted
to the Board of Public Works and Safety for consideration. The application
shall include the street address of the location of the applicant's business
operation.



   (B)   The application shall include a schedule of rates and fares to
be charged for by the applicant.



   (C)   The application shall include the names, drivers licence
numbers, and dates of birth of all persons to be drivers of the taxicabs.
After the granting of the license, the applicant shall continue to provide
the city with the names, drivers licence numbers, and dates of birth of any
additional operators of taxicabs to be operated by the applicant. All drivers
license numbers and dates of birth shall be submitted in a separate sealed
envelope and shall only be used for such background checks as the city deems
appropriate. Such information shall be maintained as a confidential record,
not subject to public disclosure under Indiana law.



   (D)   Each application shall include a non-refundable $100 fee.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.03 CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a license, the applicant shall file
with the Clerk-Treasurer and, continue in force, during the term of the
license, a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance carrier licensed
to do business in the State of Indiana, insuring the applicant and its
vehicles for liability insurance with minimum coverage for a combined single
limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence.



   (B)   The certificate of insurance shall name the City of
Noblesville as an additional named insured and shall further provide that the
city will receive notice of any cancellation of said policy.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.04 LIST OF APPROVED DRIVERS.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall maintain the list of approved drivers under
the applicant's permit. No driver shall operate a taxicab until the city has
determined that the driver:



   (A)   Is the holder of a valid Indiana Chauffeur License;



   (B)   Has not been convicted of a felony; and,



   (C)   Has not been convicted of a misdemeanor, which the Board of
Works and Safety, in its sole discretion, may determine as sufficient to
disqualify the driver from operating a taxi in the best interests of the
citizens of the city.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.05 VEHICLES TO BE MAINTAINED IN SAFE CONDITION.



   All vehicles of the applicant shall be maintained in a safe condition.
In the event that an officer of the Police Department determines that said
vehicle is in a unsafe condition, the Board of Works and Safety may suspend
the right of the applicant to operate the taxicab until adequate repairs are
made.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.06 OPERATION IN COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.



   (A)   All taxicabs shall be operated in compliance with the laws of
the State of Indiana.



   (B)   The applicant, and any drivers operating taxicabs under this
license, acknowledge that the operation of a taxicab is permitted pursuant to
the license issued by the City of Noblesville; that the city has lawful
interest in the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens including the
safe and lawful operation of the taxicabs; and no property right in the
license is vested in the applicant. The applicant agrees that he, and any
drivers operating his taxicabs, waives any right they may have to be stopped
without probable cause to examine the safety of the taxicabs, question the
driver or passenger concerning the safe or lawful operation of the taxicabs,
or to search a taxicab during its operation within the city.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.07 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE FOR VIOLATION.



   Any applicant who violates, or permits a driver to violate, the terms
and conditions of this chapter, shall be subject to the applicant's license
being suspended by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Any notice of
suspension shall be in writing and delivered in person to the applicant's
address. The operator shall have the right to appeal the suspension to the
Board of Public Works and Safety within ten days of the delivery of a written
notice of suspension. The Board of Public Works shall hold a hearing on said
appeal within 20 days of the written request for the appeal, unless an
extension is requested and/or agreed to by the applicant. After the hearing,
the Board shall issue written findings including the facts constituting a
violation of this chapter. If the Board finds that a violation has occurred,
the Board may suspend or terminate the license of the applicant.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any applicant who violates any terms of this chapter, in addition to
the termination provision set out in § 114.07 above, shall be subject to a
fine for a first offense of up to $1,000 and for any second or subsequent
offenses up to $2,500. For the purpose of this chapter, each day of an
offense shall be deemed a separate offense. Any driver who violates the terms
and conditions of this chapter commits an infraction and may be fined up to
$500 for the first offense and $1,000 for any second or subsequent offense.
The above fines are in addition, and supplemental to, any penalties for
violations of any Indiana statute.



(Ord. 22-3-05, passed 3-29-05)



CHAPTER 115:  JUNK DEALERS



Section




   115.01   Junk dealers, license required





   115.02   Application for license; fee





   115.03   Records required





   115.04   Inspection










   115.99   Penalty




§ 115.01  JUNK DEALERS, LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct, maintain, or engage in the business of junk
dealer unless such person shall have first obtained a license to do so from
the mayor as hereinafter provided.  "JUNK DEALER," for the purpose of this
chapter, means and includes any person who operates a junk yard.



(Ord. 487, passed 5-14-26)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE.



   Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate as a junk dealer
shall apply in writing to the clerk-treasurer listing his full name and
address, and that of each officer, partner, or business associate, and the
street and house number of the building in which such person intends to carry
on such business.  The application must also bear the certificate of at
least 10 resident freeholders that the applicant is of good moral
character.  The clerk-treasurer shall forward the application to the mayor
for review.  If it appears that the location of the junkyard is in
compliance with the zoning ordinance, the mayor may authorize the
clerk-treasurer to issue the license upon payment of the prescribed license
fee.  The license fee shall be $50 for each calendar year or part thereof. 



(Ord. 487, passed 5-14-26)



§ 115.03  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   Every person licensed as a junk dealer shall keep a book in which shall
be legibly written in ink, at the time of the purchase, taking, or receiving
of any goods, an accurate account and description in the English language of
the goods, articles, or things purchased, taken, or received; the amount of
money paid; the time of purchasing, taking, or receiving the same; and the
name, residence, age, race, height, and approximate weight of the person or
persons selling or delivering the goods, articles, or things. 



(Ord. 487, passed 5-14-26)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  INSPECTION.



   The records prescribed by § 115.03 shall at all reasonable times be
open to inspection by the chief of police or member of the police department
designated by him. 



(Ord. 487, passed 5-14-26)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $300.



CHAPTER 116:  PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers; license required



   116.03   Application for license; issuance



   116.04   License fee



   116.05   Removal of place of business; fee



   116.06   Records required



   116.07   Inspection



   116.08   Revocation of license



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   “PAWN.” Lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal
property, or purchasing personal property on the condition of selling the
property back again at a stipulated price, with the condition indicated
verbally, in a written agreement, or in any other form indicating that the
seller may repurchase the personal property sold. For purposes of this
chapter, “personal property” does not include general intangibles,
accounts (including deposit accounts), chattel paper, commercial tort claims,
documents, instruments, investment property, letter-of-credit rights, letters
of credit, money, or oil, gas, or other minerals before extraction. (I.C.
28-7-5-2)



   “PAWNBROKERS.”  Any person, partnership, association, limited
liability company, or corporation that engages in the pawn business.  (I.C.
28-7-5-2)



   “SECONDHAND DEALER.”  Any person who loans money on deposit or
pledge, or who purchases secondhand property of any description. (Ord. 368,
passed 2-2-14)



Statutory reference:



   State pawnbroking law, IC 28-7-5-l et seq.



§ 116.02  PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall own, operate, or engage in the business as a pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer within the city without first obtaining a license
therefor and otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license to engage in
business within the city as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall apply in
person to the clerk-treasurer and complete an application in writing listing
his full name and address and that of each officer, partner, or business
associate.  The applicant shall also indicate the location in which the
business is to be conducted.  The application for a license must bear the
certificate of 2 resident freeholders that the applicant is of good moral
character.  The clerk-treasurer shall forward the application to the mayor
for review.



   (B)   If satisfied that the statements contained in the application
are true, the mayor may authorize the clerk-treasurer to issue the license
upon payment of the license fee prescribed in § 116.04. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14)



§ 116.04  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The license fee for licenses issued under this chapter shall
be $50 for the term of one calendar year, or part thereof.



   (B)   The license fee is payable to the clerk-treasurer at the time
that application for a license is made. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14)



§ 116.05  REMOVAL OF PLACE OF BUSINESS; FEE.



   The license issued under § 116.03 shall be valid only for the location
indicated on the license certificate.  Whenever the licensee shall change
his place of business to another location within the city, he shall apply to
the clerk-treasurer for issuance of a new license certificate indicating the
changed location of the place of business and shall surrender his old
certificate.  The fee for issuance of a new license certificate shall be
$1. 



('61 Code, § 44.5)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.06  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall keep a book in which shall
be recorded, at the time of each loan, an accurate account and description,
in the English language, of the goods or article pawned, pledged, or
purchased, the amount of money loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same,
and the name and residence of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the
goods or article.  If the goods or article is sold by weight, a true and
accurate account of the weight thereof shall also be recorded.  No entry in
such book shall be erased, obliterated, or defaced. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.07  INSPECTION.



   The records prescribed in § 116.06, as well as the goods or article
pledged, pawned, or sold, shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection
by the chief of police or member of the police department designated by him. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.08  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under this chapter shall be revoked if the licensee is
convicted of larceny or receiving stolen goods or if the license issued to
such licensee under the Indiana Pawnbroking Law (IC 28-7-5-l et seq.) has
been revoked. 



(Ord. 368, passed 2-2-14) 



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $100.



CHAPTER 117:  ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS



Section



General Provisions




   117.01   Definitions





   117.02   Itinerant merchants and solicitors; license required





   117.03   Exemption





   117.04   Application for license; issuance





   117.05   Selling foodstuffs; physical exam




Door to Door Sales and Solicitations




   117.20   Purpose





   117.21   No other city license or approval required





   117.22   Definitions





   117.23   Exemptions from subchapter





   117.24   Solicitation prohibited





   117.25   Registration of solicitors





   117.26   Application form





   117.27   Fees





   117.28   Execution of application





   117.29   Written disclosures





   117.30   When registration begins





   117.31   Issuance of certificates





   117.32   Form of certificate and identification badge





   117.33   Maintenance of registry





   117.34   Transferability of certificates





   117.35   Denial, suspension or revocation of a certificate of
registration





   117.36   Appeal





   117.37   Deceptive soliciting practices prohibited





   117.38   No solicitation notice





   117.39   Duties of solicitors





   117.40   Time of day restrictions





   117.41   Buyer’s right to cancel










   117.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   "ITINERANT MERCHANT."  Any transient person who shall engage
temporarily in the selling of any kind of goods, wares, or merchandise,
including the selling of photographs, within the city, regardless of whether
such goods, wares, or merchandise are peddled from house to house, sold upon
the streets or other public places, sold or solicited by telephone, or sold
from any room, building, structure, or lot, rented or leased for the purpose
of carrying on such business, and shall include any person selling from house
to house or place to place who does not have a regularly established place of
business in the city.



   "SOLICITOR."  Any person who goes from house to house or from place to
place in the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take
orders for, goods, wares, or merchandise, or any article for future
delivery.  However, this chapter shall apply only to solicitors who demand,
accept, or receive payment or a deposit of money in advance of final
delivery. 



(Ord. 601, passed 6-12-39)



§ 117.02  ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in
the business of itinerant merchant or in the business of solicitor, as
defined in § 117.01, within the city, without first obtaining a license as
hereinafter provided. 



(Ord. 601, passed 6-12-39)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.03  EXEMPTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales to dealers by
commercial travelers nor to sales by producers of farm or dairy products;
however, any person who shall sell or offer to sell any farm or dairy
products which were not actually raised or produced by him or by members of
his immediate family or who shall not have an established place of business
in the city shall be classed as an itinerant merchant. 



(Ord. 601, passed 6-12-39) 



§ 117.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the
business of solicitor or itinerant merchant, as herein defined, within the
city, shall make application in writing to the clerk-treasurer for a license
to do so, which application shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer at least
7 days before the applicant shall be authorized to begin the business.  The
application shall state the name and residence of the applicant, the place
where the business is to be conducted, the kind of goods to be sold, and the
length of time for which the license is desired.



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal
sum of $500 executed by a surety company or 2 responsible freeholders
residing within the city (or in lieu thereof a cash bond of equal amount)
conditioned that all goods, wares, merchandise, or articles sold by the
applicant will be as represented by him and that he will refund the purchase
price of any goods, wares, merchandise, or articles sold by him which are not
as represented.  Any person aggrieved may bring an action on the bond for
the recovery of money or damages or both.  In the event a cash bond is
deposited, the same shall be retained by the city for 90 days after the
expiration of any such license.



   (C)   (1)   Upon the filing of such application and bond, and the
approval of such application and bond by the mayor, a license shall be issued
by the clerk-treasurer to the applicant to begin business not less than 7
days after the date of the filing of the application and bond, upon the
payment of the following fees:



         (a)   1 day      $ 10



         (b)   1 week      $ 30



         (c)   1 month   $ 60



         (d)   1 year      $150



      (2)   All such license fees must be paid in advance and if any
such licensee desires to continue in business after the expiration of such
license, a new license must be secured in the same manner and upon the same
terms as the original license.



   (D)   Any person exempted by the laws of this state from the payment
of the license fees, shall, before beginning the business, present to the
clerk-treasurer his credentials, showing that he is entitled to the
exemption, and shall execute and file a bond as above required, and upon
approval of the bond by the mayor, he shall then receive a certificate from
the clerk-treasurer authorizing him to engage in the business of solicitor or
itinerant merchant within the city for any period not longer than one year. 
If at the end of such period the person desires to continue in the business,
another certificate must be procured from the city clerk. 



(Ord. 601, passed 6-12-39)



§ 117.05  SELLING FOODSTUFFS; PHYSICAL EXAM.



   Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the business of
solicitor or itinerant merchant who sells fruit, vegetables, bread, pastries,
or other foodstuffs, which have not been canned shall, before receiving their
license or certificate as provided in § 117.04, present to the
clerk-treasurer the certificate of a reputable doctor of medicine to the
approval of the mayor certifying that the persons handling the same are free
from all venereal or transmittable diseases and showing that such examination
has been made within 30 days from the date of receiving license, and a new
certificate shall be placed on file with the clerk-treasurer within 30 days
from the date of the first certificate so long as the party shall continue to
do business under the license.  No such person shall transact any business
of selling such foodstuffs in the city under a solicitor's or itinerant
merchant's license unless they shall have such physical examination
certificate which is dated not more than 30 days therebefore. 



(Ord. 601, passed 6-12-39)  Penalty, see § 117.99



DOOR TO DOOR SALES AND SOLICITATIONS



§ 117.20  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their
personal safety, well-being and privacy in their residences as well as their
ability to provide and receive information regarding matters of personal
belief, political or charitable activities and goods and services lawfully in
commerce. The city has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being,
tranquility, personal safety and privacy of its citizens which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential
property. The city also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens
from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal
activity. There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the
city and its citizens and the effect of the regulations in this subchapter on
the rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of
city officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons
and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this Chapter to promote the city’s
substantial interests in:



      (1)   Respecting citizen decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;



      (2)   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;



      (3)   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against
religious belief, political position or charitable activities; and



      (4)   Permitting truthful and non-misleading door to door
solicitation regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate
commerce.



   (B)   The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set
forth in this subchapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the
city interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights
of those regulated.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.21  NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration
need not apply for or obtain any other license, permit or registration from
the city to engage in door to door solicitation.



   (B)   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance
that uses employees, independent contractors or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to
the business shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a certificate
unless otherwise exempt from registration.



   (C)   Those responsible persons or entities associated with
registered solicitors need not apply for or obtain any other license, permit
or registration from the city other than as contained in this subchapter
provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed place of business in the
city.



   (D)   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any
other requirement of federal, state or other local government law regarding
any license permit or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.22  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ADVOCATING.” Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote or
support religious belief, political position or charitable activities.



   “APPEALS OFFICER.”  The City Council or designee of the city
responsible for receiving the information from the city and appellant
regarding the denial or suspension of a certificate and issuing a decision as
required by this subchapter.



   “APPELLANT.” The person or entity appealing the denial or
suspension of a certificate either personally as an applicant or registered
solicitor or on behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.



   “APPLICANT.”  An individual who is at least 16 years of age and
not a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other lawful
entity who applies for a certificate permitting door to door solicitation.



   “APPLICATION FORM.” A standardized form provided by the city to an
applicant to be completed and submitted as part of registration.



   “BUSINESS.” A commercial enterprise having a fixed or temporary
physical location within the city.



   “CERTIFICATE.” A three, ten or 120 day certificate permitting door
to door solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms
of this subchapter.



   “CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES.” Advocating by persons or entities that
either are or support a charitable organization.



   “CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.”



      (1)   Includes any person, joint venture, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation, association, group or other entity that is:



         (a)   A benevolent, educational, voluntary, health,
philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or social welfare, advocacy,
public health, environmental, conservation or civic organization for the
benefit of a public safety, law enforcement or firefighter fraternal
association or established for any charitable purpose; and



         (b)   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of
the Internal Revenue Code and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable purposes.



      (2)   “CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION” includes a chapter branch
area or office or similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions
within the state for a charitable organization that has its principal place
of business outside the city or State of Indiana.



   “COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL.” A person claiming or appearing to be at
least 18 years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to
engage in rational thought, conversation and conduct.



   “COMPLETED APPLICATION.”  A fully completed application form, a
CRC, two copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to
establish proof of identity and the tendering of fees.



   “CRC.” Criminal record check which consists of an original or copy
of both an Indiana State Police limited criminal history and a Hamilton
County Sheriff’s Department local records check which can be dated no older
than 120 days prior to the date of application.



   “CRIMINALLY CONVICTED.”  The final entry of a conviction whether
by a plea of guilty or entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt which has
not been set aside on appeal, a petition for post-conviction relief or writ
of habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense for which the
applicant or registered solicitor was convicted without regard to the reduced
status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation or parole
and charges dismissed under a plea or diversion agreement.



   “DISQUALIFYING STATUS.”  Anything specifically defined in this
subchapter as requiring the denial or suspension of a certificate and any of
the following:



      (1)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been
criminally convicted of:



         (a)   Felony homicide;



         (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting
a minor;



         (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substance;
or



         (d)   Sexual assault/battery of any kind.



      (2)   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
or registered solicitor for:



         (a)   Felony homicide;



         (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting
a minor;



         (c)   The sale or distribution of a controlled
substance; or



         (d)   Sexual assault/battery of any kind.



      (3)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been
criminally convicted of a felony within the last ten years.



      (4)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been
incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five years.



      (5)   The applicant or registered solicitor has been
criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five years involving a
crime of moral turpitude or violent or aggravated conduct involving persons
or property.



      (6)   A final civil judgment been entered against the
applicant or registered solicitor within the last five years indicating that:



         (a)   The applicant or registered solicitor had either
engaged in fraud or intentional misrepresentation; or



         (b)   That a debt of the applicant or registered
solicitor was discharged in bankruptcy.



      (7)   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on
parole or probation with any court, penal institution or governmental entity
including being under house arrest, electronic home monitoring or subject to
a tracking device.



      (8)   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding
arrest warrant from any jurisdiction.



      (9)   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently
subject to a protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.



   “DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION.”  The practice of engaging in or
attempting to engage in conversation with any person at a residence, whether
or not that person is a competent individual, while making or seeking to make
or facilitate a home solicitation sale or attempting to further the sale of
goods and/or services.



   “ENTITY.”  Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability
company or other lawful entity, organization, society or association.



   “FEES.”  The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor
for the issuance of a certificate and identification badge.



   “FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT.”  A civil judgment that would be recognized
under state law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.



   “GOODS.”  One or more tangible items, wares, objects of
merchandise, perishables of any kind, subscriptions or manufactured products
offered, provided or sold.



   “HOME SOLICITATION SALE.”  To make or attempt to make a sale of
goods or services by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door
solicitation regardless of:



      (1)   The means of payment or consideration used for the
purchase;



      (2)   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or



      (3)   The previous or present classification of the solicitor
as a solicitor, peddler, vendor, hawker, itinerant merchant or similar
designation.



   “LICENSING OFFICER.”  The city employee or agent responsible for
receiving from an applicant or registered solicitor the completed application
and either granting, suspending or denying the applicant’s certificate.



   “NO SOLICITATION SIGN.”  A reasonably visible and legible sign
that states, “No Soliciting”, “No Solicitors”, “No Sales or
Salespersons”, “No Trespassing” or words of similar import. These
listed examples are intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.



   “POLITICAL POSITION.”  Any actually held belief or information
for, against or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental or
humanitarian belief or practice.



   “REGISTERED SOLICITOR.”  Any person who has been issued a current
certificate by the city.



   “REGISTRATION.”  The process used by the City Licensing Officer to
accept a completed application and determine whether or not a certificate
will be denied, granted or suspended.



   “RELIGIOUS BELIEF.”  Any sincerely held belief or information for,
against or in conjunction with any theistic, agnostic or atheistic
assumption, presumption, position or religious doctrine, dogma or practice
regardless of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any
other person or public or private entity.



   “RESIDENCE.”  Any living unit contained within any building or
structure that is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the
zoning laws of the city together with the lot or other real property on which
the living unit is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street
or public rights-of-way.



   “RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY.”  That person or entity responsible
to provide the following to an applicant or registered solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is
made or attempted to be made by means of a home solicitation sale.



      (1)   Maintaining a state sales tax number a special events
sales tax number, computing the sales tax owing from any sale of goods or
services, paying the sales tax and filing any required returns or reports;



      (2)   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers
who desire to cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or
law; and



      (3)   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card
charges to those persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable
contractual rights or law.



   “SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES.”  The conduct and agreement of a
solicitor and the competent individual in a residence regarding a particular
good or service that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three
days pursuant to Indiana’s Home Solicitation Sales law found at I.C.
24-5-10 et seq., or any other applicable federal, state or local law.



   “SERVICES.”  Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered,
provided or sold to a competent individual of a residence.



   “SOLICITING” or “SOLICIT” or “SOLICITATION.”  Any of the
following activities:



      (1)   Seeking to obtain Sales or orders for the exchange of
goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind for any kind of
remuneration or consideration regardless of whether advance payment is sought;



      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or
to purchase insurance or subscriptions to publications or periodicals;



      (3)   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other
thing of value for the benefit of any person or entity;



      (4)   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for
goods or services;



      (5)   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a
residence for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of
information regarding religious belief, political position, charitable
conduct or a home solicitation sale; or



      (6)   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted
definition of Soliciting such as hawking or peddling.



   “SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS.”  A person engaged in door to door
solicitation.



   “SUBMITTED IN WRITING.”  The information for an appeal of a denial
or suspension of a certificate submitted in any type of written statement to
the city offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery
confirmation mail, facsimile or hand delivery.



   “SUBSTANTIATED REPORT.”  An oral, written or electronic report:



      (1)   That is submitted to and documented by the city;



      (2)   By any of the following:



         (a)   A competent individual who is willing to provide
law enforcement or other city employees with publicly available
identification of their name, address and any other reliable means of contact;



         (b)   City law enforcement or licensing Officer; or



         (c)   Any other regularly established law enforcement
agency at any level of government;



      (3)   That provides any of the following information regarding
a registered solicitor:



         (a)   Documented verification of a previously
undisclosed disqualifying status of a registered solicitor;



         (b)   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has
committed a disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a
disqualifying status;



         (c)   Documented eyewitness accounts that the registered
solicitor has engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates
failure by the registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this
subchapter; or



         (d)   Probable cause that continued licensing of the
registered solicitor creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health
safety or welfare of any individuals or entities within the city.



   “WAIVER.”  The written form provided to applicant by the city
wherein applicant agrees that the city may obtain a name, date of birth and
CRC (criminal records check) on the applicant for licensing purposes under
this subchapter and which contains an applicant’s notarized signature.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.23  EXEMPTIONS FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   The following are exempt from Registration under this
subchapter:



      (1)   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a
competent individual prior to the time of the person’s arrival at the
residence;



      (2)   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or
registration with the State of Indiana permits them to engage in door to door
solicitation to offer goods or services to an occupant of the residence;



      (3)   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a
previously made order or persons providing services at a residence pursuant
to a previously made request by a competent individual;



      (4)   Persons advocating or disseminating information for,
against or in conjunction with any religious belief or political position
regardless of whether goods, services or any other consideration is offered
or given with or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation,
pledge or purchase; and



      (5)   Persons representing a charitable organization. The
charitable exemption shall also apply to students soliciting contributions to
finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural
programs provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the
school administration and that such student solicitors carry current student
picture identification from the educational institution for which they are
soliciting.



      (6)   A United States military veteran that has been granted a
vending/peddling license by the Hamilton County Auditor’s Office.



   (B)   Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the
duties and prohibitions outlined in §§ 117.37 through 117.41 while
advocating or soliciting.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.24  SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.



   Unless otherwise authorized, permitted or exempted pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this subchapter, the practice of being in and upon a
private residence within the city by solicitors for the purpose of home
solicitation, sales or to provide goods or services is prohibited and is
punishable as set out in this subchapter.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.25  REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS.



   Unless otherwise exempt under this subchapter, all persons desiring to
engage in door to door solicitation within the city prior to doing so shall
submit a completed application to the licensing officer and obtain a
certificate.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.26  APPLICATION FORM.



   The Licensing Officer shall provide a standard application form for use
for the registration of solicitors. Upon request to the Licensing Officer or
as otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail or
facsimile a copy of this application form. Each application form shall
require disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following
information, documentation and fee:



   (A)   Review of written disclosures- an affirmation that the
applicant has received and reviewed the disclosure information required by
this subchapter.



   (B)   Contact information.



   (C)   Applicant’s true, correct and legal name including any
former names or aliases used during the last ten years.



   (D)   Applicant’s telephone number, home address and mailing
address if different.



   (E)   If different from the applicant, the name, address and
telephone number of the responsible person or entity.



   (F)   The address by which all notices to the applicant required
under this subchapter are to be sent.



   (G)   (1)   Proof of identity- verification by the Licensing
Officer of the applicant’s true identity by use of any of the following
which bear a photograph of the applicant:



         (a)   A valid driver’s license issued by any state;



         (b)   A valid passport issued by the United States;



         (c)   A valid identification card issued by any state;



         (d)   A valid identification issued by a branch of the
United States military.



      (2)   Upon verification of identity, the original
identification submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned to
the applicant.



   (H)   Proof of registration with Secretary of State- the applicant
shall provide proof that either the applicant or the responsible person or
entity has registered with the Indiana Secretary of State, if required by law.



   (I)   Special events sales tax number- the applicant shall provide a
special events sales tax number for either the applicant or for the
responsible person or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.



   (J)   Marketing information.



      (1)   The goods or services offered by the applicant including
any commonly known, registered or trademarked names;



      (2)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.



   (K)   CRC background check- the applicant shall provide an original
or a copy of a CRC background check and a signed copy of a waiver whereby
applicant agrees to allow the city to obtain name and date of birth for CRC
background check on applicant for purposes of enforcement of this subchapter.



   (L)   Responses to questions regarding disqualifying status- the
applicant shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following
statements on the application form:



      (1)   Whether the applicant has been criminally convicted of:



         (a)   Felony homicide;



         (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting
a minor;



         (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances;



         (d)   Sexual assault/battery of any kind.



      (2)   Whether any criminal charges are currently pending
against the applicant for:



         (a)   Felony homicide;



         (b)   Physically abusing, sexually abusing or exploiting
a minor;



         (c)   The sale or distribution of controlled substances;



         (d)   Sexual assault/battery of any kind.



      (3)   Whether the applicant has been criminally convicted of a
felony within the last ten years.



      (4)   Whether the applicant has been incarcerated in a federal
or state prison within the past five years.



      (5)   Whether the applicant been criminally convicted of a
misdemeanor within the past five years involving a crime of moral turpitude
or violent, aggravated conduct involving persons or property.



      (6)   Whether a final civil judgment been entered against the
applicant within the last five years indicating that the applicant had either
engaged in fraud, intentional misrepresentation or that a debt of the
Applicant was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy.



      (7)   Whether the applicant is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest, electronic home monitoring or subject to a tracking
device.



      (8)   Whether the applicant has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction.



      (9)   Whether the applicant is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.27  FEES.



   (A)   The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by
the city for the length of certificate requested.



      (1)   A three day certificate shall cost $20 per applicant.



      (2)   A ten day certificate shall cost $50 per applicant.



      (3)   A 120 day certificate shall cost $200 per applicant.



   (B)   In the event an identification badge is lost or stolen or if
the certificate is transferred pursuant to § 117.34, a replacement
identification badge shall cost $10.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.28  EXECUTION OF APPLICATION.



   The applicant shall execute the application form stating upon oath or
affirmation under penalty of perjury that based on the present knowledge and
belief of the applicant the information provided is complete truthful and
accurate.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.29  WRITTEN DISCLOSURES.



   The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures
notifying the Applicant of the following.



   (A)   The applicant submission of the application authorizes the
city to verify information submitted with the completed application including:



      (1)   The applicant’s address;



      (2)   The applicant, responsible person or entity’s state
tax identification and special use tax numbers if any; and



      (3)   The validity of the applicant proof of identity.



   (B)   The city may consult any publically available sources for
information on the applicant including but not limited to databases for any
outstanding warrants, protective orders or civil judgments.



   (C)   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration
is allowed.



   (D)   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by
applicant with a completed application.



   (E)   The applicant must submit a CRC background check with a
completed application.



   (F)   To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the
applicant CRC background check will remain a confidential, protected private
record not available for public inspection.



   (G)   The city will maintain copies of the applicant’s application
form, proof of identity and identification badge. These copies will become
public records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether
or not a certificate is denied, granted or renewed.



   (H)   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial or suspension of
a certificate under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (I)   The applicant shall acknowledge that the city has five
business days to process the completed application and that the applicant may
not conduct door to door solicitation until a certificate and identification
badge are actually issued.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.30  WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS.



   The Licensing Officer shall not begin the registration process unless
the applicant has submitted a completed application. The original
identification submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned
after the Licensing Officer verifies the applicant’s identity. A copy of
the identification may be retained by the Licensing Officer. If an original
CRC background check is submitted by the applicant, the Licensing Officer
shall make a copy of the CRC and return the original to the applicant.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.31  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES.



   The Licensing Officer shall review the completed application submitted
by the applicant and issue a certificate in accordance with the following.
Within five business days of the receipt of a completed application, the city
shall:



   (A)   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the Applicant
including but not limited to those disclosed with the application form; and



   (B)   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible
person or entity, if any, that the applicant either will be issued a three,
ten or 120 day certificate or will not be issued a certificate for reasons
cited in § 117.35.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.32  FORM OF CERTIFICATE AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE.



   (A)   Certificate form. Should the Licensing Officer determine the
applicant is entitled to a certificate, the Licensing Officer shall issue a
certificate to the applicant. The certificate shall list the name of the
registered solicitor and the responsible person or entity if any and the date
on which the Certificate expires. The certificate shall be dated and signed
by the Licensing Officer. The certificate shall be carried by the registered
solicitor at all times while soliciting in the city.



   (B)   Identification badge. With a three, ten or 120 day
certificate, the city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification
badge that shall be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in
the city. The identification badge shall bear the seal of the city and shall
contain the name of the registered solicitor, address and phone number of the
registered solicitor or the name, address and phone number of the responsible
person or entity, a recent photograph of the registered solicitor and the
date on which the certificate expires.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.33  MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.



   The Licensing Officer shall maintain and make available for public
inspection a copy or record of every completed application received and the
certificate or written denial issued by the city. The applicant CRC
background check shall remain a confidential protected private record not
available for public inspection. The Licensing Officer may furnish to the
head of the city law enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those
denied and those issued a certificate.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.34  TRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATES.



   Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and
shall list the responsible party or entity, if any. The certificate shall be
non-transferable. A registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate home solicitation sales with different goods or services or
different responsible person or entity from those designated in the
originally submitted completed application shall submit a written change
request to the Licensing Officer. A new certificate based on the amended
information shall be issued for the balance of time remaining on the
solicitor’s previous certificate before the amendment was filed. Before the
new certificate is given to the registered solicitor the registered solicitor
shall obtain a revised identification badge from the city after payment of
the fee for the identification badge.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.35  DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Denial upon review. The Licensing Officer shall refuse to
issue a certificate to an applicant for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Te application form is not complete;



      (2)   The applicant fails to establish proof of identity,
provide a CRC or pay the fees;



      (3)   The completed application or CRC indicates that the
applicant has a disqualifying status; or



      (4)   The applicant has previously been denied by the city or



Has had a certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
disqualifying status under this subchapter.



   (B)   Revocation or suspension of certificate. The Licensing Officer
may revoke or suspend an issued certificate for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The information submitted by the applicant or registered
solicitor at the time of the granting of the Certificate is found to be
incomplete or incorrect;



      (2)   Since the submission of the completed application, the
applicant or registered solicitor is subject to a previously undisclosed or
unknown disqualifying status;



      (3)   Failure to complete payment of the Fees;



      (4)   Since the submission of the application, the city has
received a substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the
applicant or registered solicitor;



      (5)   Since the submission of the application, the applicant
or registered solicitor has either been criminally convicted or obtained a
civil injunction against the applicant or registered solicitor for violating
this subchapter or other similar federal, state or municipal laws in a manner
rising to the level of a disqualifying status; or



      (6)   Since the submission of the application a final civil
judgment has been entered against the applicant or registered solicitor
indicating that the applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in
fraud or intentional misrepresentation.



   (C)   Suspension or revocation. The city shall either suspend or
revoke a certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial or
revocation of a certificate occurs.



   (D)   Notice of denial, revocation or suspension. Upon determination
of the Licensing Officer to deny an applicant’s completed application or to
revoke or suspend a registered solicitor’s certificate, the city shall
cause written notice to be sent to the applicant or registered solicitor by
the method indicated in the completed application. The notice shall specify
the grounds for the denial, revocation or suspension, the documentation or
information the city relied on to make the decision, the availability of the
documentation for review by applicant upon one business day notice to the
city and the date upon which the denial, revocation or suspension of the
certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the applicant or
registered solicitor shall have ten business days from the receipt of the
notice of denial, revocation or suspension to appeal the same. The revocation
or suspension of a certificate shall be effective no sooner than two calendar
days from the date the notice is sent unless the Licensing Officer determines
that exigent circumstances exist which require the immediate suspension of
the certificate. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and
until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal or determined by a court
to be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a
certificate automatically results in its revocation.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.36  APPEAL.



   (A)   An applicant or registered solicitor whose certificate has
been denied, revoked or suspended shall have the right to appeal to the City
of Noblesville Board of Public Works and Safety or its designee. Any appeal
must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or entity
or legal counsel for either who documents the relationship with the applicant
or responsible person or entity, is licensed or authorized by the State of
Indiana to do so and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The
following procedures and requirements shall apply.



      (1)   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the Office of
the Clerk-Treasurer for the City of Noblesville with a copy to the Licensing
Officer within ten business days of the decision from which the appeal is
taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the
action complained of and the grounds for appeal.



      (2)   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor,
city will make available any information upon which it relied in making the
determination to either deny, revoke or suspend the certificate.



      (3)   The Appeals Officer shall review de novo all written
information submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the
Licensing Officer, any additional information relied upon by the Licensing
Officer as the basis for denial, revocation or suspension and any additional
information supplied by the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any
additional information submitted by any party to the appeal to the Appeals
Officer shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired,
any party shall have three business days to submit rebuttal documentation to
the Appeals Officer regarding the additional information submitted by the
opposing party.



      (4)   The Appeals Officer will render a decision no later than
15 calendar days from the date the appeal was taken unless an extension of
time is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as outlined above, the 15 calendar days shall be
extended to include the additional three days for rebuttal.



   (B)   The denial or suspension of the certificate shall be reversed
by the Appeals Officer if, upon review of the written appeal and information
submitted, the Appeals Officer finds that the Licensing Officer made a
material mistake of law or fact in denying, revoking or suspending the
applicant’s or registered solicitor’s certificate.



   (C)   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that
the Licensing Officer properly denied, revoked or suspended the certificate
of the applicant or registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the
certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the
suspended Certificate is revoked.



   (D)   The decision of the Appeals Officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
Application or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.



   (E)   After the ruling of the Appeals Officer, the applicant or
solicitor is deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the
city.



   (F)   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant,
solicitor or city’s right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.37  DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No Solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.



   (B)   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during
door to door solicitation the name of the solicitor, the name and address of
the entity with whom the solicitor is associated and the purpose of the
solicitor’s contact with the person and competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an
informational flyer.



   (C)   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias or any name
other than his or her true and correct name.



   (D)   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that
the granting of a certificate of registration implies any endorsement by the
city of the solicitor’s goods or services or of the individual solicitor.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.38  NO SOLICITATION NOTICE.



   (A)   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to
refuse solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation” sign which shall be
posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the property line
adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the residence.



   (B)   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to
constitute notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does
not desire to receive and does not invite solicitors.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each
residence for the presence of any such notice.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors
who are exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.39  DUTIES OF SOLICITORS.



   (A)   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each
residence for any no soliciting sign or placard or any other notice or sign
notifying a solicitor not to solicit on the premises such as but not limited
to “No Solicitation” signs. If such sign or placard is posted such
solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or
dwelling and shall immediately depart from such property. Possession of a
certificate of registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this
duty.



   (B)   It is a violation of this subchapter for any person soliciting
or advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a
“No Solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of
engaging in or attempting to engage in advocating a home solicitation sale,
door to door soliciting or soliciting.



   (C)   It is a violation of this subchapter for any solicitor through
ruse, deception or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit or to take
action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.



   (D)   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a
residence or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.



   (E)   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any
physical contact with or touch another person without the person’s consent.



   (F)   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence
without their explicit consent.



   (G)   The solicitor shall not continue repeated Soliciting after a
person and competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally
their lack of interest in the subject goods or services of the solicitor.



   (H)   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.40  TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person whether licensed or not to solicit
at a residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time
unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the resident to do so.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.41  BUYER’S RIGHT TO CANCEL.



   In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor
to provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer’s signature to a
written statement which informs the buyer of his or her right to rescind or
cancel the sale within three business days pursuant to the requirements of
I.C. 24-5-10 et seq.



(Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this subchapter for
which no other penalty is provided shall be fined in any amount of not less
than $10 or more than $100.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   Any person who violates any term or provision of §§ 117.20
through 117.41 shall be guilty of a Class B Local Ordinance Violation and
shall be punished by a maximum fine of $1,000. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



(Am. Ord. 15-05-12, passed 6-12-12)



CHAPTER 118:  HANDBILLS



Section




   118.01   Purpose





   118.02   Definition





   118.03   Distributing handbills; license required





   118.04   Exemption





   118.05   Application for license; issuance





   118.06   License fees





   118.07   Revocation of license





   118.08   Distribution of handbills and solicitation within public
right-of-way prohibited





   118.09   Solicitation upon roadways










   118.99   Penalty




§ 118.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the people against the
unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or
tendencies who represent themselves as solicitors, canvassers, or handbill
distributors, by requiring the registration of all such solicitors,
canvassers, or handbill distributors, together with the name of their
employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising
distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees. 



('61 Code, § 46.1)



§ 118.02  DEFINITION.



   As used in this chapter the following definition shall apply.



   "HANDBILL."  Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature which:



   (A)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity,
service, or thing; or



   (B)   Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; or



   (C)   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or



   (D)   Contains reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private gain of any person so
engaged as advertiser or distributor.  ('61 Code, § 46.2)



§ 118.03  DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in § 118.04, it shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of distributing handbills or to distribute handbills
without first obtaining a license to do so as hereinafter provided. 



(Ord. 584, passed 3-9-36)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.04  EXEMPTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   The distribution of handbills through the United States mail;
or



   (B)   The advertising of merchandise, products, services, business
establishments, meetings, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and the like
in newspapers in general circulation throughout the city; or



   (C)   The distribution of handbills by persons licensed under other
provisions of this code; or



   (D)   The distribution of handbills by or on behalf of persons with
established business locations within the city; or



   (E)   The distribution of handbills in connection with the delivery
of merchandise or execution of services previously sold or contracted for. 
('61 Code, § 46.4)



§ 118.05  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE.



   Any person desiring to obtain a license to distribute handbills or to
engage in the business of distributing handbills shall apply in person to the
clerk-treasurer and complete an application in writing listing his full name
and address and that of each officer, partner, or business associate.  The
applicant shall also list the full names and addresses of all persons by and
on behalf of whom the handbills are to be distributed.  The clerk-treasurer
shall forward the application to the mayor for his review. If satisfied that
the information furnished by the applicant is true and that no fraud or
misrepresentation will be perpetrated upon the residents of the city, the
mayor may authorize the clerk-treasurer to issue the license upon payment of
the fees prescribed in § 118.06  ('61 Code, § 46.5)



§ 118.06  LICENSE FEES.



   The license fee for distribution of handbills or engaging in the
business of distributing handbills shall be $25 for a period of one day, $30
for a period of 2 consecutive days, and $50 for a period of 7 consecutive
days. 



(Ord. 584, passed 3-9-36)



§ 118.07  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   A license issued under this chapter may be revoked for violation of any
provision of this code or any law of the state, for giving any false
information on the application for license, or for any other conduct which
threatens the peace and security of the citizens of the city.  ('61 Code, §
46.7)



§ 118.08  DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND SOLICITATION WITHIN PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.




   No person shall, directly or indirectly, upon any street, public place,
or park in the city, solicit alms or gratuities; or seek donations by silent
or vocal appeal to sympathy through attention to physical or mental
infirmities of such person or of another person; or seek donations by means
of music, singing, selling small articles or any other aids or devices to
accomplish such purpose.





(Ord. 30-5-00, passed 5-22-00)




§ 118.09  SOLICITATION UPON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to sit, stand, or move
within or upon a roadway, walk, or a median between two roadways for:



      (1)   Soliciting, pedaling, advertising, seeking donations, or
distributing any product, property, or service including but not limited to
tickets, handbills, newspapers, or other printed materials to or from an
occupant of a vehicle in a road; or



      (2)   Conversation or discourse with an occupant of a vehicle
in a roadway.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a "ROADWAY" shall mean a portion
of a street or highway improved or unimproved which is designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, and in the case of a roadway which is improved
with curbs, shall mean the entire portion of the roadway from curb to curb.




(Ord. 7-2-03, passed 2-11-03)  Penalty, see § 118.99




§ 118.99  PENALTY.




   Any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a Class B Infraction and may be fined up to $1,000. For purposes of this
chapter, each day upon which a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate
offense.





(Ord. 30-5-00, passed 5-22-00)




CHAPTER 119:  EXHIBITIONS



Section




   119.01   Exhibitions, circuses, carnivals, license required





   119.02   Application for license; issuance





   119.03   License fee and deposit





   119.04   Exemption










   119.99   Penalty




§ 119.01  EXHIBITIONS, CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall sponsor, present, or give any exhibition or theatrical
performance, show, circus, menagerie, carnival, or sideshow, other than a
motion picture show, for which an admission charge is demanded and received,
without first obtaining a license to do so as hereinafter prescribed. 



('61 Code, § 47.1)  Penalty, see § 119.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to license and prohibit public exhibitions,  IC 36-8-2-9



§ 119.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; ISSUANCE.



   Any person desiring a license to engage in an activity specified in §
119.01 shall file a written application, together with the fee and deposit
prescribed in § 119.03, with the clerk-treasurer, listing the name and
address of the applicant and that of each officer, partner, or business
associate, and the nature of, and intended location of, the activity to be
licensed.  The clerk-treasurer shall forward the license application to the
mayor for his review.  If the mayor is satisfied that the location is
suitable for the purpose of the intended activity, that it will safely
accommodate the patrons, that the nature of the performance or exhibition
will not be in violation of any law or ordinance, and that the use of the
location will not throw too great a burden upon the police and fire
department, he may authorize the clerk-treasurer to issue the license applied
for.



('61 Code, § 47.2)



§ 119.03  LICENSE FEE AND DEPOSIT.



   The fee for performing any activity specified in § 119.01 shall be $10
for each day, or part thereof.  In addition thereto, the mayor may order the
deposit of a cash bond of not more than $100, conditioned upon the
restoration and cleaning up of the location of the activity in a manner
satisfactory to him.  In the event the location is so restored and cleaned
up, the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the deposit shall be forfeited
to the city.  ('61 Code, § 47.3)



§ 119.04  EXEMPTION.



   No license under this chapter shall be required for public school
entertainments, lecture courses, or any other exhibition for the benefit of
any benevolent, religious, or nonprofit society. ('61 Code, § 47.4)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $500.



CHAPTER 120:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section




   120.01   Purpose and intent





   120.02   Definitions





   120.03   Permit required





   120.04   Investigation and application





   120.05   Issuance of permit





   120.06   Annual permit fee





   120.07   Inspection





   120.08   Expiration of permit





   120.09   Suspension of permit





   120.10   Revocation of permit





   120.11   Judicial review of permit; denial, suspension or revocation





   120.12   Transfer of permit





   120.13   Employee license





   120.14   Prohibitions regarding minors and sexually oriented
businesses





   120.15   Hours of operation





   120.16   Nudity at sexually oriented business prohibited





   120.17   Regulations pertaining to live entertainment










   120.99   Penalty and injunctive relief




§ 120.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the potentially adverse
secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and related activities to
promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of
the City of Noblesville, and to establish reasonable, informed, and
content-neutral regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitor of sexually oriented entertainment
to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter
to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ADULT CABARET."  A building or portion of a building regularly
featuring dancing and other live entertainment if the dancing or
entertainment that constitutes the primary live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specific
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.



   "ADULT MEDIA."  Magazines, book, videotapes, movies, slides, CD-roms
or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to hard-core material.



   "ADULT MEDIA SHOP."  An establishment that rents and/or sells media,
and that meets any of the following three tests.



      (1)   Forty percent or more of the gross public floor area is
devoted to adult media.



      (2)   Forty percent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of
adult media.



      (3)   It advertises or holds itself in any forum as "XXX",
"adult", "sex" or otherwise as a sexually oriented business other than as an
adult media store, adult motion picture theater, or adult cabaret.



   "ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER."  An establishment emphasizing or
predominantly showing films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities.



   "DISPLAY PUBLICLY."  The act of exposing, placing, posting,
exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or
private, an item in such a manner that is may be readily seen and its content
or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street,
highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any
portion of the premises where items and materials other than adult media are
on display to the public.



   "EMPLOYEE."  A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage, or other compensation by the operator of said business.



   "ESTABLISHMENT."  Any business regulated by this chapter.



   "EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL."  Any hard-core material.



   "GROSS PUBLIC FLOOR AREA."  The total area of the building accessible
or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters,
motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas
visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"),
areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including stage areas), plus aisles,
hallways, and entryways serving such areas.



   "HARD-CORE MATERIAL."  Media characterized by sexual activity that
includes one or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth
of one person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger or male
organ into any orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a
sex toy into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male
ejaculation.



   "LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO."  An establishment or business that
provides the services of live models modeling lingerie to individuals,
couples, or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet either as a
temporary or primary use.



   "MASSAGE STUDIO."  Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities,
or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service
related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas.  The
definition of "sexually oriented businesses" shall not include the practice
of massage in or by any licensed hospital; nor by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath; nor by any nurse or technician working
under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath; nor by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program; nor by any person or
entity licensed pursuant to Chapter 113.



   "MEDIA."  Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of
anything that is or may be used as a means of communication.  "MEDIA"
includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers,
magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-roms, other magnetic media,
and undeveloped pictures.



   "MEDIA SHOP."  A general term, identifying a category of business that
may include sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the special
provisions applicable to adult media shops.  In that context, media shop
means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for consumption off
the premises if any outlet meeting the definition of adult media shop shall
be treated as an adult media outlet.  "MEDIA SHOPS" may contain adult media,
which constitutes less than 10% of the stock in trade and occupies less than
10% of the floor area.



   "NUDE MODEL STUDIO."  Any place where a person, who regularly appears
in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas for money or any
form of consideration and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.



   "NUDITY."  Includes: (1) the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering; (2)
the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any part of the nipple; or (3) the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   "PRIMARY LIVE ENTERTAINMENT."  On-site entertainment by live
entertainers that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if
necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.



   "SEX SHOP."  An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that
meets any of the following tests:



      (1)   The establishment offers for sale items from any two of
the following categories:



         (a)   Adult media;



         (b)   Lingerie; or



         (c)   Leather goods marketed or presented in a context
to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of
such items constitutes more than 10% of its stock in trade or occupies more
than 10% of its floor area.



      (2)   More than 5% of its stock in trade consists of sexually
oriented toys or novelties.



      (3)   More than 5% of its gross public floor area is devoted
to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.



   "SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS."  An inclusive term used to describe
collectively: adult cabaret; adult motion picture theater; adult media shop,
video-viewing booth or arcade; massage studio; and/or sex shop.



   "SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES."  Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or
female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human
genital organs.



   "SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS."  (1) Less than completely and opaquely
covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male genitals in
a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.



   "SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES."  Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, or female breast.



   "TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS." 
Includes any of the following: (1) The sale, lease or sublease of the
business; (2) The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling
interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; (3) The
establishment of a trust, girl or other similar legal devise which transfers
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or
control.



   "VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH."  Any booth, cubicle, stall, or
compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons
and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any
photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media
(including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc,
CD-rom, books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons
therein.  A "VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH" shall not mean a theater, movie house,
playhouse, or a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than
600 square feet.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall conduct, maintain, operate, or cause to be
conducted, maintained, or operated, any sexually oriented business within the
corporate limits of the city without first being licensed under this chapter.



   (B)   The City Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her designee, is
responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and
canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed or existing
sexually oriented businesses.  The City Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her
designee, is also responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually
oriented business for which a permit is being applied complies with all
applicable zoning laws and/or regulations now in effect or as amended or
enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter in the city and the
city's Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   The Police Department shall be, if responsible for providing
information on whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal act during the time set forth.



   (D)   The city's Code Enforcement Department shall be responsible
for inspecting a proposed, permitted or non-permitted sexually oriented
business in order to ascertain whether it complies with applicable statutes
and ordinances.



   (E)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by
the City Clerk/Treasurer.  Any person desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file with the city an original and two copies of a
sworn permit application on the standard application form supplied by the
City Clerk/Treasurer, or his or her designee.



   (F)   The completed application shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, the individual shall state his/her
legal name and any aliases and submit satisfactory proof that he/she is 18
years of age;



         (b)   A partnership, the partnership shall state its
complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;



         (c)   A corporation, the corporation shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation
is in good standing under the laws of the State of Indiana, the names and
capacity of all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and the name
of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office
for service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she
must state:



         (a)   The sexually oriented business's fictitious name;
and



         (b)   Submit the required Indiana registration documents.



      (3)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
listed in the application has, within the two or five year period as
specified in § 120.05 immediately preceding the date of the application,
been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified
criminal act involved, and the date and place of conviction.



      (4)   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals
listed in the application has had a previous permit under this chapter, or
other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or
county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant or any other individuals listed in the application has
been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is permitted under this chapter whose
permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.



      (5)   Whether the applicant or any other individual listed in
the application holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or
other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city, county,
or state and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted
businesses.



      (6)   The single classification of permit for which the
applicant is filing.



      (7)   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.



      (8)   The applicant's mailing address and residential address.



      (9)   A recent photograph of the applicant(s).



      (10)   The applicant's driver's license number, Social
Security number, and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification
number.



      (11)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.  If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented business
collectively with a group of individuals, each individual who has a 10% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as
applicant.  If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity that wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a 10% or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant.



      (12)   If a person wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business which shall exhibit on the premises films, video cassettes, or other
video reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, then said person shall comply with the application
requirements stated at § 120.14 et seq.



      (13)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



      (14)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application by a State of Indiana registered
land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any
established existing uses regulated by this chapter within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 1,000
feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any
residentially zoned area or residential property within 1,000 feet of the
property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time, an
application is submitted.



   (G)   Applicants for a permit under this section shall have a
continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by
this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what
is stated on the application.  The failure to comply with said continuing
duty within 30 days from the date of such change shall be grounds for
suspension of a permit.



   (H)   In the event that the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her
designee determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly
completed the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she
shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten
days to properly complete the application.  (The time for granting or
denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is
allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.)



   (I)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to comply with
health, fire and building codes, and laws.



   (J)   The applicant shall be required to pay a non-refundable
application fee of $100 at the time of filing an application under this
section of this chapter.



   (K)   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any
sexually oriented business defined in this chapter, and as part of any
application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from
the city Department of Planning and Development or its designee a Sexually
Oriented Business Improvement Location Permit that the proposed location and
structure of such business complies with the city Unified Development
Ordinance.  An approved Sexually Oriented Business Improvement Location
Permit by the Department of Planning and Development is contingent upon the
approval of Sexually Oriented Business License and does not guarantee the
approval of such license.



   (L)   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.



   (M)   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant
shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to
the exercise by the City Clerk/Treasurer or its designee, the Police
Department and all other city agencies charged with enforcing the laws,
ordinances and codes applicable in the city of their respective
responsibilities under this chapter.



   (N)   The applicant shall be required to provide the city with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to §
120.13 of this chapter.  This shall be a continuing requirement even after a
permit is granted or renewed.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.04  INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city
and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the City
Clerk/Treasurer shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall
immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the Police
Department and any other city agencies responsible for enforcement of health,
fire and building codes and laws.  Each department or agency shall promptly
conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed,
sexually oriented business in accordance with its responsibilities under law
and as set forth in this chapter. Said investigation shall be completed
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the City Clerk/Treasurer. 
At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall
indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of
the application, date it, sign it, and, in the event it disapproves, state
the reasons.  The Police Department shall only be required to certify the
NCIC records request check mentioned at § 120.05.  The Police Department
shall not be required to approve or disapprove applications.



   (B)   A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it
finds that the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of
any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation, or other law in
effect in the city.  After its indication of approval or disapproval, each
department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the
application to the City Clerk/Treasurer who shall forward the application and
any accompanying materials to the City Clerk/Treasurer for consideration.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.05  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall grant
or deny an application for a permit within 30 days from the date of its
proper filing.  Upon the expiration of the 30th day, unless the applicant
requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant shall
be permitted to begin operating the business for which the permit is sought,
unless and until the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, notifies
the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons(s) for
that denial.



   (B)   Grant of application for permit.



      (1)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall
grant the application unless one or more of the criteria set forth in
division (C) below is present.



      (2)   The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name
of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business.  The permit shall also indicate
that the sexually oriented business shall be subject to prohibitions against
Public Nudity and Indecency pursuant to the Indiana Penal Code I.C.
35-45-4-1.  The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be read easily at
any time.



   (C)   Denial of application for permit.



      (1)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall
deny the application for any of the following reasons:



         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



         (b)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue
on his/her payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed
against him/her or imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented
business.



         (c)   An applicant is residing with a person who has
been denied a permit by the City Clerk/Treasurer to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person
whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within
the preceding 12 months.



         (d)   An applicant has failed to provide information
required by this section or permit application for the issuance of the permit
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.



         (e)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved as complying with health, fire, and building
codes by the department or agency responsible under law for investigating
said compliance.



         (f)   The application or permit fees required by this
chapter have not been paid.



         (g)   An applicant of the proposed business is in
violation of, or does not comply with, any of the provisions of this chapter
or the city Unified Development Ordinance.



         (h)   The granting of the application would violate a
statute, ordinance, or court order.



         (i)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter that
has been suspended or revoked.



         (j)   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified
criminal" act for which:



            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the "specified
criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape
or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including, but
not limited to, distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the "specified
criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape
or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business including but not
limited to distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors,
prostitution, pandering, or tax violations;



            3.   Less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the
later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses for
"specified criminal" acts which are sexual crimes against children, sexual
abuse, rape or crimes connected with another sexually oriented business
including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or materials harmful
to minors, prostitution, pandering or tax violations; offenses occurring
within any 24-month period;



            4.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.



            5.   An applicant who has been convicted of the
above described "specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented
business permit only when the time required above in § 120.05(C)(1)(j) has
elapsed.



         (k)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her
employment, an employee who does not have a valid license as required in §
120.13 of this chapter.



      (2)   If the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee,
denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and
state the reason(s) for the denial within 30 days of proper filing of the
application.



      (3)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular
location within a period of 12 months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an
intervening change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to
lead to a different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the
application shall be denied.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.06  ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $200.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.07  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the
City of Noblesville and Hamilton County to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any
time it is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who refuses to permit any such inspection of the
premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business shall be in
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.08  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 120.08 (for
renewals, filing of original survey shall be sufficient) of this chapter. 
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be affected.



   (B)   When the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, denies
renewal of the permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit under this
chapter for one year from the date of denial.  If, subsequent to denial, the
City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee finds that the basis for denial
of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be
granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial
became final.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.09  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall suspend
a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he/she determines that a
permittee, or an employee of a permittee, has:



      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this chapter;



      (2)   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any
controlled substances while working in the sexually oriented business
premises;



      (3)   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;



      (4)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises;



      (5)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation,
whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on
investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing
said rules or laws.  In the event of such statute, code, ordinance or
regulation violation, the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall
promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow the permittee
a seven-day period in which to correct the violation.  If the permittee
fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven-day period,
the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall forthwith suspend the
permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension;



      (6)   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of
the hours of operation § 120.15; or



      (7)   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid
license as required in § 120.13 of this chapter.



   (B)   The suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of
the statute, code, ordinance or regulation in question has been corrected.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.10  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee shall revoke a
permit if a cause of suspension in § 120.09 of this chapter occurs and the
permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, shall revoke
a permit upon determining that:



      (1)   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the
applicant's opportunity for obtaining a permit;



      (2)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use or sale of controlled substances in or on the premises;



      (3)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly, allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's
permit was suspended;



      (5)   A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal
act" for which the time period required in § 120.05 of this chapter has not
elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed.  The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit;



      (7)   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes
or fees related to a sexually oriented business;



      (8)   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises;



      (9)   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually
oriented business under a single roof; or



      (10)   A permittee has engaged in or attempted to engage in a
transfer of permit in violation of § 120.12 of this chapter.



   (C)   When the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee, revokes
a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall
not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City
Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee finds that the basis for revocation
under § 120.10 of this chapter has been corrected, the applicant shall be
granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date revocation
became effective.  If the permit was revoked under § 120.10 of this
chapter, an applicant may not be granted another permit until the number of
years required under § 120.10 have elapsed.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.11  JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or
permittee may seek judicial review of the administrative action in Hamilton
County Superior or Circuit Court.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.12  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated in the application for permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another
person unless transferee complies with the applicable terms of this chapter.



   (C)   A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another
location.



   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.13  EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Each individual to be employed in a sexually oriented
business, as defined in § 120.02 of this chapter, who engages in the
services rendered by a live performer or entertainer shall be required to
obtain a Sexually Oriented Business Employee License.  Each applicant shall
pay a permit fee of $25.  Said fee is to cover reasonable administrative
costs of the licensing application process.



   (B)   Before any applicant may be issued a Sexually Oriented
Business Employee License, the applicant shall submit on a form to be
provided by the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee the following
information:



      (1)   The applicants name or any other names (including
"stage" names) or aliases used by the individual;



      (2)   Age, date, and place of birth;



      (3)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;



      (4)   Present residence address and telephone number;



      (5)   Present business address and telephone number;



      (6)   State driver's license or identification number;



      (7)   Social Security number;



      (8)   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least
18 years of age;



      (9)   Attached to the application form as provided above, a
color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and
the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department. 
Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;



      (10)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of
the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or
seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country has
ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked
or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked, or suspended.  In the event of any such denial, revocation, or
suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction,
and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. 
A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to
the application;



      (11)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a
"specified criminal" act as defined in § 120.05(C)(1) of this chapter. 
This information shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or
plea of nolo contendere and identifying the convicting jurisdiction; and



      (12)   The City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee shall
refer the Sexually Oriented Business Employee License Application to the
Police Department for an investigation to be made of such information as is
contained on the application.  The application process shall be completed
within ten days from the date the completed application is filed.  After the
investigation, the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee shall issue a
license unless the report from the Police Department fords that one or more
of the following findings is true:



         (a)   That the applicant has knowingly made any false,
misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for
a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the sheriffs
department or other department of the city;



         (b)   That the applicant is under 18 years of age;



         (c)   That the applicant has been convicted of a
"specified criminal act" as defined in § 120.05(C)(1) of this chapter;



         (d)   That the Sexually Oriented Business Employee
License is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or
state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by particular
provisions of this chapter;



         (e)   That the applicant has had a Sexually Oriented
Business Employee License revoked by the city within two years of the date of
the current application.



   (C)   Renewal of license:



      (1)   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be
subject to annual renewal by the City Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee
upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the City
Clerk/Treasurer or his or her designee and the Police Department that the
applicant has not been convicted of any "specified criminal act" as defined
in § 120.05(C)(1) of this chapter or committed any act during the existence
of the previous license period which would be grounds to deny the initial
permit application.



      (2)   The renewal of the license shall be the same as the
initial application fee.



   (D)   A copy of employee licenses as defined by this section shall
be available on the premises of the business of which the employee is
employed for inspection by law officers or code enforcement officers or other
designated enforcement officials. The employee license is not required to be
posted.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



§ 120.14  PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   It shall be unlawful for a person who operates or causes to be operated
a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued for said business under this chapter, to knowingly or with reasonable
cause knows, permits, suffers, or allows:



   (A)   Admittance of a person under 18 years of age to the business
premises.



   (B)   A person who is under 18 years of age to work at the business
premises as an employee.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented
business to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance at
all times during such sexually oriented businesses' regular business hours. 
It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any person under the age of
18 years from entering the establishment.  It shall be presumed that an
attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless the attendant asked
for and was furnished:



      (1)   A valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's
license; or 2. A valid personal identification certificate issued by the
State of Indiana reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.15  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be
operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and allows such
business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage in
a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
of any particular day.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person while working as an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a
permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, to engage in a
performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a
service, or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
of any particular day.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.16  NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall allow public nudity in any sexually oriented business.
Any sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section
shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of § 120.09.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.17  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, "live entertainment" is defined
as a person who appears nude, semi-nude, or a performance that is
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by
"specified sexual activities."



   (B)   No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) of a
sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least 18
inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at
least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patron(s).  No patron shall
be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by a
performer.



   (C)   No entertainer, either before, during, or after a performance,
shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical
contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a performance. 
This subsection shall only apply to physical contact while in or on the
premises of the establishment.



   (D)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer.  A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer
shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located
separately from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical
contact between a patron and a performer.  No performer shall solicit any
gratuity from any patron.



   (E)   No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment
shall cause or allow a performer to engage in any entertainment such as a
"couch" or a "straddle" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment
premises.  No performer shall contract to or engage in a "couch" or
"straddle" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. 
For purposes of this subsection, "couch" or "straddle" dance is defined as an
employee of the establishment intentionally touching or coming within ten
feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any "specified
anatomical area," or any specified sexual activity."  For purposes of this
subsection, "employee" is defined as it is in § 120.02.



   (F)   Section 120.17 shall not apply to an employee of an
establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bar
tender, comes within ten feet of a patron.  No employee shall engage in any
"specified sexual activity" or display or expose any "specified anatomical
area" while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bar tender.



   (G)   Compliance with this section:



      (1)   For purposes of this section, establishment is defined
as it is in § 120.02 of this chapter.  No establishment shall be in
compliance with this section until the city's designated agent(s) have
inspected and approved of the establishment's compliance.  The city shall
have ten days from the date it receives written notice from the operator that
the establishment is ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of
compliance required by this section.  Failure to approve or disapprove of
compliance within ten days shall constitute a finding of compliance under
this section.



      (2)   The operator of an establishment, that has been
providing live entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit,
shall have the time periods listed below in which to bring the establishment
into compliance with this section.  Failure to do so while continuing to
provide live entertainment shall cause the establishment's permit to be
suspended under § 120.09 of this chapter. The permit shall remain suspended
until the establishment is approved by the city's designated agent(s) as
being in full compliance with this section.



      (3)   The operator of establishment, that has been operating
under a valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business
and who wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall
apply for and receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation
of an establishment providing live entertainment before any live
entertainment is provided at that establishment.  No live entertainment
permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



      (4)   The applicant for a permit to operate a new
establishment, who wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and
receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is
provided.  No live entertainment permit shall be issued until the
establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this section and
all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Compliance with division (B) must occur within 60 days
from the date this section becomes effective.



      (6)   Compliance with division (C) must occur within 90 days
from the date this section becomes effective.



      (7)   Compliance with division (D) must occur within 90 days
from the date this section becomes effective.



      (8)   Compliance with division (E) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



      (9)   Compliance with division (F) must occur within 60 days
from the date this section becomes effective.



      (10)   Compliance with division (G) must occur upon the date
this section becomes effective.



      (11)   Compliance with subsection (H) must upon the date this
section becomes effective.



   (H)   Any person having a duty under this section commits a
misdemeanor if she/he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500 for each violation.  Each day of
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   In addition to seeking penalties against individuals who
violate provisions of this chapter, the City Attorney or his/her designated
representative may commence legal action seeking injunctive relief against
any individuals violating the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 58-9-04, passed 9-28-04)



CHAPTER 121:  TAXATION



Section




Food and Beverage Tax




   121.01   Imposition of tax; application



   121.02   Tax to be imposed in same manner as state gross retail tax



   121.03   Food and Beverage Tax Fund



   121.04   Council may repeal tax ordinance; termination




Entertainment Facility Admissions Tax




   121.15   Imposition of tax



   121.16   Events to which tax does not apply



   121.17   Ticket Tax Fund



   121.18   Remittance of taxes; forms; payment and collection of tax



   121.19   Effective date; termination



FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX



§ 121.01  IMPOSITION OF TAX; APPLICATION.



   (A)   The Noblesville Food and Beverage Tax (City Food and Beverage
Tax) is hereby imposed on food and beverage transactions at the rate of 1% of
the gross retail income of the food and beverage transactions occurring
anywhere in the city.



   (B)   The City Food and Beverage Tax shall apply to food and
beverage transactions occurring after the last day of the month succeeding
the month in which this section is adopted.



(Ord. 44-6-05, passed 6-28-05)



§ 121.02  TAX TO BE IMPOSED IN SAME MANNER AS STATE GROSS RETAIL TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 6-9-35-11, the City Food and Beverage Tax
shall be imposed, paid, and collected in the same manner that the state gross
retail tax is imposed, paid, and collected under I.C. 6-2.5.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer, shall, upon passage, immediately send a
certified copy of Ordinance 44-6-05 to the Commissioner of the Department of
State Revenue.



(Ord. 44-6-05, passed 6-28-05)



§ 121.03  FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a City Food and Beverage Tax Fund
into which the Clerk-Treasurer shall deposit all tax revenues from the City
Food and Beverage Tax (city tax revenues) received monthly from the Treasurer
of State.



   (B)   Revenues in the City Food and Beverage Tax Fund shall be used
by the city for any purpose permitted under I.C. 6-9-35-14, including the
pledge of city tax revenues to the payment of bonds, leases, or other
obligations in accordance with I.C. 5-1-14-4.



(Ord. 44-6-05, passed 6-28-05)



§ 121.04  COUNCIL MAY REPEAL TAX ORDINANCE; TERMINATION.



   (A)   If there are no outstanding obligations of the city for which
a pledge of the city tax revenues has been made pursuant to I.C. 6-9-35-14;
the Common Council may adopt an ordinance, after December 31, 2009 and before
December 1, 2010, or any year thereafter, to repeal this subchapter.



   (B)   The city food and beverage tax terminates on January 1 of the
year immediately following the year in which the last payment required of the
Capital Improvement Board for project obligations is made, for any project
obligations that existed on July 1, 2006.



   (C)   Pursuant to I.C. 6-9-35-5(d), if:



      (1)   The City-County Council of Indianapolis and Marion
County does not adopt all the ordinances required to be adopted by it under
I.C. 5-1-17-4-25; and



      (2)   The Hamilton County Council does adopt an ordinance to
impose the Food and Beverage Tax in Hamilton County; on or before June 30,
2005, this subchapter shall no longer be in effect.



(Ord. 44-6-05, passed 6-28-05)



ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY ADMISSIONS TAX



§ 121.15  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   There is hereby imposed, pursuant to I.C. 6-9-34, an entertainment
facility admissions tax of $.50 for each paid admission to the Verizon Music
Center owned by Deer Creek Amphitheater Concerts, L.P. located at the
northeast corner of 146th Street and Boden Road in the City of Noblesville,
Hamilton County, Indiana ("the Facility").



(Ord. 85-11-05, passed 11-29-05)



§ 121.16  EVENTS TO WHICH TAX DOES NOT APPLY.



   The tax shall not apply to the following events held at the facility:



   (A)   An event sponsored by an educational institution or an
association representing an educational institution;



   (B)   An event sponsored by a religious organization;



   (C)   An event sponsored by an organization that is considered a
charitable organization by the Internal Revenue Service for federal tax
purposes;



   (D)   An event sponsored by a political organization;



   (E)   An event for which tickets are sold on a per-vehicle or
similar basis and not on a per-person basis.



(Ord. 85-11-05, passed 11-29-05)



§ 121.17  TICKET TAX FUND.



   There is hereby created the City of Noblesville Ticket Tax Fund. The
fund shall be maintained by the Clerk Treasurer and all investment earnings
in the fund shall be retained as part of the fund. The fund shall be used
solely for the purpose of payment of part of the lease rental payments toward
the Noblesville Redevelopment Authority Economic Development Lease Rental
Bonds of 2003, dated July 29, 2003.



(Ord. 85-11-05, passed 11-29-05)



§ 121.18  REMITTANCE OF TAXES; FORMS; PAYMENT AND COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   The property owner, or its successor in title to the Verizon
Music Center, located at 146th Street and Boden Road, in the City of
Noblesville, Indiana, shall remit all taxes collected to the Clerk Treasurer
of the city not more than 20 days after the end of the month during which the
event occurred.



   (B)   The Clerk Treasurer shall prepare remission forms to be
provided to the property owner for the remission of the tax.



   (C)   The tax shall be paid by each person who pays the price for
admission to the facility, unless excluded under § 121.16 of this subchapter.



   (D)   The person who collects the price of the ticket shall collect
the tax at the same time the price for admission to the facility is paid.



(Ord. 85-11-05, passed 11-29-05)



§ 121.19  EFFECTIVE DATE; TERMINATION.



   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be effective for all
tickets purchased after December 31, 2005, and shall terminate for any event
held at the facility after December 31, 2027.



(Ord. 85-11-05, passed 11-29-05)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   CURFEW; MINORS



      131.   MISDEMEANORS



CHAPTER 130:  CURFEW; MINORS



Section



   130.01   Curfew hours for children 15, 16 or 17 years of age



   130.02   Curfew hours for children younger than 15 years of age



   130.03   Application



   130.04   Enforcement



   130.05   Curfew; responsibility of parent, guardian or custodian



 



   130.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Curfews, see I.C. 31-6-4-2



§ 130.01  CURFEW HOURS FOR CHILDREN 15, 16, OR 17 YEARS OF AGE.



   It is unlawful for a child 15, 16, or 17 years of age to be in a public
place in the city at any time during the following curfew hours:



   (A)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;



   (B)   After 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday; or



   (C)   Before 5:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or
Friday.



(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  CURFEW HOURS FOR CHILDREN YOUNGER THAN 15 YEARS OF AGE.



   It is unlawful for a child 15 years of age to be in a public place in
the city after 11:00 p.m. or before 5:00 a.m. on any day.



(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  APPLICATION.



   Sections 130.01 and 130.02 of this chapter do not apply to a child who
is:



   (A)   Accompanied by the child's parent, guardian, or custodian;



   (B)   Accompanied by an adult specified by the child's parent,
guardian, or custodian; or



   (C)   With the consent of the child's parent, guardian, or
custodian, either participating in, going to, or returning from:



      (1)   Lawful employment;



      (2)   A school-sanctioned activity; or



      (3)   An expressive, religious, or associational activity
protected by federal or state law, including but not limited to the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.



(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A child who commits a curfew violation under this chapter is
subject to the enforcement procedures provided in I.C. 34-28-5-1. Whenever a
complaint is filed against a child for violation of this chapter, the city
shall direct a copy of the complaint to the Noblesville City Court, and to
the child's parent, guardian, or custodian, if such person is known or can be
identified by a reasonable inquiry.



   (B)   In addition to the imposition of fines as provided in §
130.99, the court, upon request, may order such injunctive relief as is
appropriate and necessary to prevent a child from committing further
violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  CURFEW; RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT, GUARDIAN, OR CUSTODIAN.



   It is unlawful for a parent, guardian or custodian of a child under the
age of 18 years knowingly to allow that child to commit a curfew violation
under this chapter.



(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than:



 

First offense:
 
up to $50


Second offense within a year:
 
up to $100


Third offense within a year:
 
up to $250


Fourth and subsequent offenses within a year:
 
up to $500








(Ord. 46-9-00, passed 10-10-00)



CHAPTER 131:  MISDEMEANORS



Section



   131.01   Discharge of dangerous projectiles prohibited; discharge of
firearms



   131.02   Sleeping in public places unlawful



   131.03   Undesirable persons in public places



   131.04   Begging prohibited



   131.05   Posting of handbills unlawful



   131.06   Spitting prohibited in certain places



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DISCHARGE OF DANGEROUS PROJECTILES PROHIBITED; DISCHARGE OF
FIREARMS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
discharge within the limits of the city any dangerous projectile.  Dangerous
projectiles such as prohibited by this section shall include, but shall not
be limited to, projectiles discharged by air (including air pistols and
rifles); by gas (including pellets); by powder (including all firearms); or
projectiles propelled by other mechanical means.  (Ord. 775, passed
4-27-59) 



   (B)   (1)   Discharge of firearms within the Noblesville city
limits will be permitted on property meeting the following geographic
standards:



         (a)   Bound by Interstate-69, Olio Road, East 146th
Street, and Atlantic Road;



         (b)   Parcels of five acres or more in area.



      (2)   The following restrictions are placed on the properties
meeting the conditions set forth in division (B)(1) above:



         (a)   No discharge of firearms within 500 feet of a
property line;



         (b)   Discharge of firearms limited to hunting and
protection of farm animals with no target practice or sport shooting allowed;



         (c)   Discharge of high-powered rifles are not permitted
in any circumstance;



         (d)   Individuals are responsible for line-of-fire.



      (3)   Any officer of the Police Department and any other duly
authorized state or county law enforcement officer shall enforce this section.



      (4)   Absent any legislative action to the contrary, this
division (B) shall expire ten years after its adoption.



(Ord. 2-1-05, passed 2-14-05)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.02  SLEEPING IN PUBLIC PLACES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to be found lying or sleeping upon
any public street, alley, park, or other public places, or in any stable,
barn, building, warehouse, shed, railroad yard or depot railroad car, or in
any other public place without having the permission of the owner or occupant
of such place to sleep or to be in such place. 



(Ord. 366, passed l-19-14)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.03  UNDESIRABLE PERSONS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person having the reputation of or known
as a confidence man, thief, or felon to be found in any park, cemetery,
street, alley, or any other public place, or to be found pressing or elbowing
his way through any crowd or collection of people, or to interfere or attempt
to interfere with the free passage of any person or persons upon or along any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place, without being able to give a
satisfactory account of himself. 



(Ord. 366, passed 1-19-14)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  BEGGING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall solicit subsistence, lodging, money, or charity in his
own behalf or that of a companion person upon the streets or other public
places within the city. 



(Ord. 366, passed 1-19-14)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  POSTING OF HANDBILLS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, or persons, to deface any
telegraph pole, electric railway pole, electric light pole, fire alarm pole,
telephone pole, or guy pole by tacking, posting, or pasting bills,
advertisements, cards, or signs of any description whatever within the city.



(Ord. 237, Sec. l, passed 6-23-02)  Penalty, see § 131.99



Cross-reference:



   Posting of handbills on trees, see § 93.17



§ 131.06  SPITTING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to spit or expectorate
any saliva, mucus, or other discharges as the result of coughing, hawking, or
cleaning of the air passages, upon any sidewalk, in any cellar or basement
under any sidewalk, in any cellar way, or in any public building or entrance
thereto within the city. 



(Ord. 296, Sec. l, passed 7-30-06)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§ 131.02 through
131.04 shall be fined not more than $25.



   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not less
than $5 nor more than $100.



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   MASTER PLAN



      151.   ROAD IMPROVEMENTS



      152.   ANNEXATION POLICY



      153.   IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT CODE



      154.   BUILDING CODE



      155.   THOROUGHFARE PLAN CODE



      156.   HOUSE NUMBERING PLAN



      157.   FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION



      158.   HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



      159.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT



CHAPTER 150:  MASTER PLAN



Section



   150.01   Master plan adopted by reference



§ 150.01  MASTER PLAN ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Master plan of the City of Noblesville is adopted by reference as
if fully set out herein.  Two copies of this code shall be on file in the
office of the clerk-treasurer.  (Ord. 1028, passed 7-9-74; Am. Ord. 1432,
passed 2-22-82; Am. Ord. 41-8-98, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 55-9-98, passed
10-12-98; Am. Ord. 29-07-02, passed 8-13-02; Am. Res. RC-38-03, passed
8-26-03; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Res. RC-35-05, passed
10-25-05; Am. Res. RC-52-05, passed 12-27-05)



CHAPTER 151:  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR ROAD IMPROVEMENTS



Section



   151.01   Purpose and authority



   151.02   Right-of-way widths



   151.03   Construction plans and specifications



   151.04   Traffic control signage and maintenance of traffic



   151.05   Construction sureties



   151.06   Construction observations for dedicated public improvements



   151.07   Enforcement



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain, and
enhance the public's health, safety, and general welfare by establishing
minimum standards for construction of all required public improvements and
procedures to control, review, and approve the construction of these public
improvements as well as procedures for the control and maintenance of the
city rights-of-way.



   (B)   The city is responsible for maintaining all streets, roads,
and structures accepted within the city's rights-of-way and easements, and it
is therefore necessary to set minimum standards for the construction of all
improvements for which the city will be responsible in order to avoid
assuming unnecessary maintenance costs and inconvenience to the citizens and
businesses of the city.



   (C)   All improvements intended for public use, which are to be
constructed in a city right-of-way or easement must conform to the
Noblesville Standards and shall conform to or exceed the standards as set
forth in this chapter.



   (D)   The standards set forth in this chapter are intended to be
minimum standards. Variances and/or waivers from these standards may be
considered by the Board of Public Works and Safety, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, and/or the Plan Commission and Council regarding planned
developments when deemed appropriate, upon written application to the said
above noted city boards, commission and/or Council citing unusual conditions
justifying changes based upon sound engineering practices. Proposed variances
and/or waivers shall have been reviewed by any applicable agency of
jurisdiction and the Technical Advisory Committee, before consideration by
the Board of Public Works and Safety, Board of Zoning Appeals, and/or Plan
Commission and Council regarding a planned development.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passes 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS.



   All streets and roads shall have right-of-way widths equal to or
greater than the widths shown in the attached Noblesville Standards.  All
new roads not specifically identified shall be classified as determined by
the City Engineer using the definitions as set forth in the Noblesville
Comprehensive Master Plan and Chapter 159 of this code.  For a primary
arterial, as designated by the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan, the City
Engineer may require additional right-of-way, up to 200 feet in total width.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.03  CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All construction plans and specifications shall be prepared
and certified in accordance with Indiana law by a professional engineer or
registered land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of Indiana. Change
orders shall be initiated by the design professional who certified the plans,
and subject to the written approval of the City Engineer or his or her
designated representative. All construction plans shall be 24" x 36" with a
scale of 1" = 20', 30', 40', or 50'. Cross-sectional profiles may be required
upon request by the City Engineer.  All plans shall include the Noblesville
Standards, as issued by the Department of Engineering.



   (B)   The cover sheet of the plans shall include a project location
map, project name, project owner, all utility contacts, table of contents of
plan pages, and summary table of infrastructure being constructed as part of
the project. Plan sheets, including profiles and cross-sections, shall show
all existing and proposed items of the following in all plan drawings:
property/parcel, easements, utilities, contours, structures, regulated
drains/waterway, floodway, wetlands, and other improvements. Plan sheets
shall show all existing property owners and easements owners. Plans shall
show the following for both property owners and easement owners: deeded
owner, instrument numbers, dimensions, and bearings. Existing structures and
existing structures shall be depicted as black or gray dashed fine line work
on plan drawings. Proposed structures and proposed improvements shall be
depicted as bold solid black line work on plan drawings. Plan drawings shall
show a legend depicting all lines, symbols, and abbreviations used in the
drawing.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAGE AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Traffic control signage for new development shall be in
accordance with Chapter 159 of this code and the Noblesville Standards, and
most recent version of the Indiana Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD). Street identification sign and traffic control proposals shall be
submitted to the Traffic Committee for their review. The proposal shall
identify the location of all traffic control devices and shall require
approval by the Common Council, via recommendation from the Traffic
Committee. All signage shall be placed within five days of placement of the
traversable pavement material, such as binder asphalt or concrete pavement.



   (B)   Work within the public right-of-way and/or travel way shall
have appropriate traffic control and be in accordance with INDOT Work Zone
Safety Handbook.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
38-10-99, passed 11-22-99; Am. Ord. 58-12-01, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord 2-1-03,
passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07, passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed
12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.05 CONSTRUCTION SURETIES.



   (A)   Construction of all public improvements to be dedicated to the
city shall require sureties as set forth in Chapter 159 of this code and
shall be required to be accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety. 
In addition, the construction of sidewalks and private drive approaches shall
also require sureties as set forth in Chapter 159 of this code and shall be
required to be accepted by the Board of Public Works and Safety. Upon
expiration of the posted maintenance sureties, sidewalks shall become the
responsibility of the adjoining property owner.



   (B)   Sureties are required for the following infrastructure items,
if being constructed: erosion control, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, curb
underdrains, stone base, curbs, binder asphalt, surface asphalt, regulatory
signs, NAT Trail, sidewalk, monumentation, street lights, and street trees.
"Off-site" infrastructure items shall be itemized separately. A surety may
combine items in any combination for any one development section. A single
bond covering multiple sections will not be accepted. Other infrastructure
items may be required on an as need basis as determined by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passed 1-29-01; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.06  CONSTRUCTION OBSERVATIONS FOR DEDICATED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Types of inspections/observations.  Construction of all
public improvements shall be observed by the Department of Engineering. The
Department of Engineering shall be notified a minimum of 48 hours prior to
the scheduled inspection/observation unless otherwise authorized by the City
Engineer or his or her duly authorized representative.



   (B)   Inspection frequency and reports.



      (1)   Streets and curbs.



         (a)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the
approved construction plans on site;



         (b)   On all sites with dedicated rights-of-way, the
permittee shall request the Department of Engineering to inspect work
completed at the stages of construction specified below to ensure compliance
with the approved construction plans, Chapter 159 of this code and this
chapter:



            1.   During placement of engineered fill, if
applicable;



            2.   During off-site road improvements,
accel/decal, passing blisters, widening, overlay;



            3.   During the lime modification efforts;



            4.   Upon preparation of the subgrade (following
lime modification);



            5.   Upon the preparation of the subbase;



            6.   During the placement of the subsurface drains
prior to the backfilling;



            7.   Upon the completion of the curb forms or
prior to placement of concrete if using a curb machine;



            8.   During the construction of the curbs prior to
the backfilling;



            9.   During placement of the street stone prior to
the placement of the base or binder course;



            10.   During the construction of base course, if
applicable, (asphalt quantities to be verified by the Department of
Engineering);



            11.   During the construction of the binder
course, (asphalt quantities to be verified by the Department of Engineering);



            12.   During the construction of the surface
course, (asphalt quantities to be verified by the Department of Engineering);



            13.   During placement of pavement markings,
signage, street lights, and monumentation;



            14.   In the event concrete pavement is used, the
City Engineer shall establish an inspection scheduled for each phase of a
development.



         (c)   The Department of Engineering shall notify the
on-site personnel or the owner/developer when apparent violations are being
observed, describing the nature of the violation.



      (2)   Storm sewers.



         (a)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the
approved construction plans on site.



         (b)   The Department of Engineering shall observe
placement of the storm sewer system as it is being constructed. All phases of
the storm sewer construction shall be inspected. All construction shall
comply with the construction plans, Chapter 159 of this code, and the
Noblesville Standards.



         (c)   The Department of Engineering shall notify the
on-site personnel or the owner/developer when apparent violations are being
observed, describing the nature of the violation.



      (3)   Sanitary sewers.



         (a)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the
approved construction plans on site.



         (b)   The Department of Engineering shall observe
placement of the sanitary sewer system as it is being constructed. All phases
of the sanitary sewer construction shall be inspected. All construction shall
comply with the construction plans, Chapter 159 of this code, and the
Noblesville Standards.



         (c)   The Department of Engineering shall notify the
on-site personnel or the owner/developer when apparent violations are being
observed, describing the nature of the violation.



      (4)   Miscellaneous improvements within the right-of-way
and/or public easements adjacent to new development.



         (a)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the
approved construction plans on site and approved permit, if required.



         (b)   The inspection of all public improvements as
required by Chapter 159 of this code and not previously covered in this
section shall be done so in accordance with all the applicable city
requirements as determined by the City Engineer.



         (c)   The Department of Engineering shall notify the
on-site personnel or the owner/developer when apparent violations are being
observed, describing the nature of the violation.



   (C)   Inspection fees.



      (1)   The inspection fee schedule shall be instituted for the
administration and management of the required inspections as set forth in
this chapter.



      (2)   Received funds shall be deposited in the City General
Fund.



   (D)   Construction plan review fee.



      (1)   Construction plans, reviewed by the Department of
Engineering, shall require a fee, as follows:



 

Number of Sheets
 
Review Fee


1 to 20
 
$1,325.00


21 to 40
 
$1,590.00


41 to 60
 
$1,855.00


61 to 80
 
$2,120.00


Each additional 20 sheets
 
$265.00



 



$400 of the above stated fee covers the review by MS4 from the Wastewater
Utility. Review fee includes initial review and two revisions.  An
additional charge of $120 per revision will be charged for each revision
beyond the second.



      (2)   Received funds shall be deposited in the City General
Fund.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   All enforcement of violations shall conform to Chapter 159 of this
code, this chapter, and under the authority of I.C. 36-1-3-6.



   (A)   Enforcement procedures.



      (1)   When the Department of Engineering determines that a
violation of the approved construction plans has occurred, the inspector
shall notify the on-site personnel, the permittee, and/or the owner/developer
of the violation.



      (2)   If the violation persists after the date specified for
corrective action in the notice violation, the Department of Engineering
shall have the authority to stop work on the site. The Department of
Engineering shall determine the extent to which work is stopped, which may
include all work on the site except that work necessary to correct the
violation.



      (3)   If reasonable efforts to correct the violation are not
undertaken by the permittee, the Department of Engineering shall refer to the
violation for legal action.



      (4)   The Department of Engineering may deny the issuance of
any permits to an applicant when it determines that the applicant does not
comply with the provisions of a building permit, Improvement Location Permit
(ILP), Noblesville Standards, or approved construction plans.



      (5)   Any step in the enforcement process may be taken at any
time, depending upon the severity of the violation.



      (6)   If a person is working without a permit, the Department
of Engineering and/or the Department of Planning and Development shall stop
work on the site until such time that all the applicable fees have been
rectified and all the violations have been addressed to the satisfaction of
the respective city agency. A person working without a permit and/or approved
construction drawings shall be subject to fines up to $500 per day, payable
to the City General Fund.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
58-12-01, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07,
passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in a court of competent
jurisdiction is subject to a fine not exceeding $500 per day for each
violation with costs imposed in the discretion of the court. Each day upon
which the violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   Any agency whose approval is required under this chapter or
any interested person may seek an injunction against any person who violates
or threatens to violate any provision of this chapter.



   (C)   In accordance to any other sanction under this chapter, a
person who fails to install or to maintain the approved public improvements
in accordance with the approved construction plans and/or the Noblesville
Standards shall be liable to the city in a civil action, for damages in an
amount equal to double the cost of installing or maintaining the work.



(Ord. 7-3-97, passed 3-24-97; Am. Ord. 24-5-98, passed 6-8-98; Am. Ord.
38-10-99, passed 11-22-99; Am. Ord. 58-12-1, passed 1-29-02; Am. Ord. 2-1-03,
passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 15-2-07, passed 2-27-07; Am. Ord. 68-12-07, passed
12-11-07)



CHAPTER 152:
ANNEXATION POLICY



Section



   152.01   Annexation policy adopted by reference



§ 152.01  ANNEXATION POLICY ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The annexation policy for the City of Noblesville is adopted by
reference as if fully set out herein.  Two copies of this policy shall be on
file in the office of the clerk-treasurer.



(Res. RC-47-16, passed 1-10-17)



CHAPTER 153:  IMPROVEMENT
LOCATION PERMIT CODE



Section



   153.01   Improvement location permit code adopted by reference



§ 153.01  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The improvement location code of the City of Noblesville is adopted by
reference as if fully set out herein.  Two copies of this code shall be on
file in the office of the clerk-treasurer.



(Ord. 1030, passed 7-9-74)



CHAPTER 154:  BUILDING CODE



Section




General Provisions




   154.01   Title



   154.02   Purpose



   154.03   Scope



   154.04   Adoption of rules by reference



   154.05   Use of property within sewer easements




Building Permits




   154.15   Permit required



   154.16   Application for permits



   154.17   Review of application



   154.18   Compliance with other ordinances; fees



   154.19   Records to be kept



   154.20   Commencement of work




Administration and Enforcement




   154.30   Administrative authority



   154.31   Certificate of occupancy



   154.32   Inspections; assistance



   154.33   Right of entry



   154.34   Acceptable standards and practices



   154.35   Stop work order



   154.36   Right of appeal



   154.37   Remedies



 



   154.98   Violations



   154.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  TITLE.



   This chapter, and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Noblesville, Indiana, may
be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as this code.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, health, environment, public safety, and general welfare,
and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.03  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations,
repair, use, occupancy, maintenance, and additions to all buildings and
structures, other than industrialized building systems, as defined in IC
22-12-1-14, and mobile structures, as defined in IC 22-12-1-17, which are
certified pursuant to IC 22-15-4, in the city.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.04  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   Building rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building
Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of Title 675 of the
Indiana Administrative Code are hereby incorporated by reference in this code
and shall include later amendments to those Articles as the same are
published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana Administrative Code with
effective dates as fixed therein:



      (1)   Article 13 - Building Codes:



         (a)   Fire and Building Safety Standards



         (b)   Indiana Building Code



         (c)   Indiana Building Code Standards



         (d)   Indiana Handicapped Accessibility Code



      (2)   Article 14 - One and Two Family Dwelling Codes:



         (a)   Council of American Building Officials One and Two
Family Dwelling Code



         (b)   CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; Amendments



         (c)   Standard for Permanent Installation of
Manufactured Homes



      (3)   Article 16 - Plumbing Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Plumbing Code



      (4)   Article 17 - Electrical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Electrical Code



         (b)   Safety Code for Health Care Facilities



      (5)   Article 18 - Mechanical Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Mechanical Code



      (6)   Article 19 - Energy Conservation Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Energy Conservation Code



         (b)   Modifications to the Model Energy Code



      (7)   Article 20 - Swimming Pool Codes:



         (a)   Indiana Swimming Pool Code



   (B)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes, and standards are on
file in the office of Clerk-Treasurer.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.05  USE OF PROPERTY WITHIN SEWER EASEMENTS.



   (A)   This section shall be deemed the city Sewer Easement Ordinance.



   (B)   This section shall restrict the use of land within any sewer
easement dedicated, acquired, or purchased by the city.



   (C)   Any landowner who owns real estate which is burdened by a
sewer easement of the city, his successors and assigns, may use the real
estate included within the easement for the following purposes:



      (1)   Yard, green space;



      (2)   Any agricultural purposes other than structures;



      (3)   Parking lots;



      (4)   One drive way per residence;



      (5)   Placement of small mini barns, storage sheds, or other
portable buildings which can be drug or moved from place to place;



      (6)   Fences;



      (7)   Any other use approved by the Noblesville Board of Works
and Safety.



   (D)   Any landowner who owns real estate which is burdened by a
sewer easement of the city, his successors and assigns, shall not place any
permanent building or structure within any part of a sewer easement.



   (E)   In the event it becomes necessary for the city to enter a
sewer easement to perform maintenance, the city shall be responsible for
restoring any improvements constructed or installed within the easement as
long as the improvements are permitted under division (C) above.



   (F)   Any person seeking the approval of any land use within a sewer
easement of the city not specifically covered by this section may apply to
have such use approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.  The
application shall be obtained from the Department of Planning and shall set
forth in detail the use proposed by the owner.



   (G)   The Board of Public Works and Safety shall consider any
application filed pursuant to division (F) above within 25 days of filing.



(Ord. 20-5-96, passed 5-13-96)



BUILDING PERMITS



§ 154.15  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alteration,
repair, or demolition of any building or structure, using application forms
furnished by the Director, and all fees required by this code shall be paid
to the Clerk-Treasurer.  Application fees shall be determined in accordance
with Ordinances 1513 and 1522, as amended.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)  Penalty, see  154.99



§ 154.16  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless
the application for a permit is accompanied by a plat or sketch of the
proposed location showing lot boundaries, and by plans and specifications
showing the work to be done.  In addition, a copy of a design release,
issued by the State Building Commissioner and the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to IC 22-15-3-1, shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before
issuance of a permit for construction covered by such design release.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.17  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Director of Planning
shall:



   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding.



   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within
the flood plain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair uses construction materials and utility equipment that are
resistant to flood damage, and uses construction methods and practices that
will minimize flood damage.



   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the flood plain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes) is protected against flood damage, is designed (or modified)
and  anchored  to  prevent  flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure, flood damage, and uses construction methods and practices that
will minimize flood damage.



§ 154.18  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES; FEES.



   All work done under permit shall be in full compliance with all other
ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to the fees for permits, there
shall be paid the fee prescribed in such ordinances.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.19  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   All applications, descriptions, permits, certificates, and other
supporting documents pertaining to building permits or certificates of
occupancy shall be filed by the Director of Planning and become a permanent
record of the city.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.20  COMMENCEMENT OF WORK.



   The work or use authorized by a building permit shall commence within
six months of the date of issuance of such permit.  Otherwise, the same
shall lapse and become null and void.  All work so authorized shall be
completed within 24 months from the date of issuance of the permit unless
good cause for extending the completion time is shown the Director of
Planning.  Upon issuance of the certificate of occupancy the applicant shall
have or cause to be occupied within 30 days, the structure so certified.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 154.30  ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY.



   The Director of Planning for the city is hereby authorized and directed
to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code.  Said Director
may be aided by his staff of inspectors in this effort.  Whenever is this
code it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject
to the direction of the Director or any other officer of the city, this shall
be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether
this code has been complied with; and no such provision shall be construed as
giving any officer discretionary powers as to what this code shall be, or
power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce this
code in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner.  Any variance from adopted
building rules, as defined in IC 22-13-1-2, is subject to review by the
Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, pursuant to IC
22-13-2-7 (b), and said variance is not effective until approved by the
Commission.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.31  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected,
altered, or repaired after the adoption of this chapter shall be issued
unless such building or structure was erected, altered, or repaired in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  It shall be unlawful to
occupy any such building or structure unless a full, partial, or temporary
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Director of Planning. 
Application for certificate of occupancy shall be made and all fees paid, at
the time of application for building permit, on forms furnished by the
Director.  The fee schedule for a certificate of occupancy can be found in
Ordinance 1513, as amended.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.32  INSPECTIONS; ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   After the issuance of any building permit, the Director of
Planning shall make, or shall cause to be made, inspections of the work being
done as are necessary to insure full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the terms of the permit.  Reinspections of work found to be
incomplete or not ready for inspection are subject to assessment of
reinspection fees as prescribed in Ordinance 1522, as amended.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department, or his designated
representative, shall assist the Director in the inspection of fire
suppression, detection, and alarm systems and shall provide reports of such
inspection to the Director.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.33  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Director of Planning or
his duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this code.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.34  ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS AND PRACTICES.



   All work on the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.35  STOP WORK ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
code, the Director of Planning may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Director to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.36  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Planning Director's
decision first through the Board of Zoning Appeals for the city, and then to
the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of Indiana in accordance
with the provisions of IC 22-13-2-7 and IC 4-21.5-3-7.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.37  REMEDIES.



   The Director of Planning shall in the name of the city bring actions in
the circuit or superior courts of the county, for mandatory and injunctive
relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any order made by
the Director, and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be
joined with an action to recover the penalties provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



§ 154.98  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sub-lessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the city or cause or permit
the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this
code.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   If any person, firm, or corporation shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter, or shall do any act prohibited herein, or shall fail to
perform any duty lawfully enjoined, within the time prescribed by the
Director of Planning, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any lawful
order given by the Director in connection with the provisions of this chapter
for each such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm, or
corporation shall be fined up to and including the maximum penalty prescribed
by state statute.  Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by
the first sentence of this section shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 1664, passed 5-4-88)



CHAPTER 155:  THOROUGHFARE PLAN CODE



Section



   155.01   Thoroughfare plan code adopted by reference



   155.02   Amendments to thoroughfare plan code; comprehensive
development plan maps



§ 155.01  THOROUGHFARE PLAN CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The thoroughfare plan code of the City of Noblesville is adopted by
reference as if fully set out herein.  Two copies of this code shall be on
file in the office of the clerk-treasurer.



(Ord. 1032, passed 7-9-74; Am. Res. RC-36-05, passed 9-27-05)



§ 155.02  AMENDMENTS TO THOROUGHFARE PLAN CODE; COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT
PLAN MAPS.



   Section 65.2, the comprehensive development plan maps of the
thoroughfare plan code, shall be amended as follows:



 


ORD NO.

 

DATE

 

STREET

 

DESCRIPTION





1205
 
4-24-78
 
Buttonwood Dr.
 
Collector street to residential street


1226
 
6-26-78
 
Elderberry Rd.
 
Collector street to residential street


1299
 
8-27-79
 
Proposed S.R. 234 and S.R. 238
 
State highway to collector street


1581
 
4-30-86
 
8th St.
 
Local street to minor collector from Cherry St. to the proposed southern
by-pass


1582
 
4-28-86
 
Greenfield Pike
 
Minor to major collector from the proposed southern by-pass to 10th St.


 
 
Stoney Creek Rd.
 
Major to minor collector between S.R. 37 and its proposed intersection with
Greenfield Pike


1583; 1597
 
4-30-86; 8-26-86
 
a new major collector
 
Established from west end of Logan St. bridge to S.R. 38




 



CHAPTER 156:  HOUSE NUMBERING PLAN



Section



   156.01   House numbering plan



   156.02   Displaying numbers



   156.03   Removing numbers



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  HOUSE NUMBERING PLAN.



   Generally, and as nearly so as practicable, buildings shall be numbered
in the following uniform manner:



   (A)   Conner Street shall be the line dividing all streets running
north and south.



   (B)   The numbering of buildings on all streets running north and
south shall begin at the intersection of Conner Street with such streets
running north and south.



   (C)   Tenth Street shall be the line dividing all streets running
east and west.



   (D)   The numbering of buildings on all streets running east and
west shall begin at the west end of such streets and run in sequence to the
east ends thereof.



   (E)   Buildings on the north side of streets running east and west
and buildings on the east side of streets running north and south shall be
numbered with even numbers.



   (F)   Buildings on the south side of streets running east and west
and buildings on the west side of streets running north and south shall be
numbered with odd numbers.



   (G)   There shall be one number alloted to each 6 lineal feet, that
is, one hundred numbers to each block. 



(Ords. 236 and 451)



§ 156.02  DISPLAYING NUMBERS.



   The owner of a building shall cause the proper number of such building
to be placed and continuously maintained in a conspicuous place on or in
front of such building.  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.03  REMOVING NUMBERS.



   No person shall remove, alter, or deface any house number properly
assigned and placed on or near any building.  Penalty, see § 156.99



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not more than $10.



CHAPTER 157:  FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION



Section



   157.01   Flood damage protection regulations adopted by reference



§ 157.01  FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The flood damage protection regulations of the City of Noblesville are
adopted by reference as if fully set out herein.  Two copies of these
regulations shall be on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. 



(Ord. 1389, passed 2-23-81)



CHAPTER 158:  HOUSING
AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



Section



   158.01   Housing and property maintenance code adopted by reference



§ 158.01  HOUSING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The housing and property maintenance code by the City of Noblesville is
adopted by reference as if fully set out herein.  Two copies of this code
shall be on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer. 



(Ord. 1382, passed l-26-81; Am. Ord. 1431, passed 2-8-82; Am. Ord. 15-3-03,
passed 3-25-03; Am. Ord. 20-4-03, passed 4-29-03; Am. Ord. 45-11-13, passed
11-26-13; Am. Ord. 46-11-13, passed 11-26-13; Am. Ord. 06-01-14, passed
1-14-14; Am. Ord. 41-09-15, passed 9-15-15; Am. Ord. 42-09-15, passed 9-15-15)



CHAPTER 159:  UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT



Section




Title, Purpose and Effect




   159.001   Title



   159.002   Authority



   159.003   Policies of the city



   159.004   Purposes



   159.005   Jurisdiction of the Commission




Definitions; Word Usage




   159.015   Word usage



   159.016   Definitions




Administrative Bodies and Officials




   159.025   Summary of authority



   159.026   Common Council



   159.027   Board of Zoning Appeals



   159.028   Plan Commission



   159.029   Director of Planning and Development



   159.030   Technical Advisory Committee



   159.031   Architectural Review Board



   159.032   Pre-construction Committee



   159.033   Compensation




Zoning Applications and Approvals




   159.040   Applications and hearings



   159.041   Site plan review



   159.042   Conditional use permits



   159.043   Interpretations, appeals, and variances



   159.044   Amendments



   159.045   Permits and certificates of approval



   159.046   Pre-filing application conference




Subdivision Procedure




   159.060   General provisions



   159.061   Subdivision application and approval process



   159.062   Provisions for satisfactory completion and maintenance of
improvements




Site Design and Improvement Standards




   159.075   General requirements



   159.076   Monuments



   159.077   Development block and lot layout



   159.078   Transportation system



   159.079   Drainage facilities



   159.080   Sewerage facilities



   159.081   Water facilities



   159.082   Other utilities



   159.083   Preservation of existing natural features and amenities



   159.084   Erosion control plan



   159.085   Soil preservation, grading, and seeding



   159.086   Nonresidential subdivisions and developments



   159.087   Street trees




Plans, Maps, and Zoning Districts




   159.095   Official plan and maps



   159.096   Zoning districts




Zoning Districts




   159.105   General requirements



   159.106   Residential districts



   159.107   Commercial districts



   159.108   Industrial districts



   159.109   Special districts




General Regulations




   159.120   General regulations



   159.121   Accessory uses and structures



   159.122   Home occupations



   159.123   Residential care homes



   159.124   Manufactured homes, individual



   159.125   Bed and breakfast establishments



   159.126   (Reserved)



   159.127   Temporary uses



   159.128   Mobile food vehicles



   159.129   Wireless telecommunications service facilities



   159.130   Sexually oriented business uses



   159.131   Public service facilities



   159.132   Small cell networks and facilities




Off-street Parking and Loading




   159.140   Purpose



   159.141   Scope and application



   159.142   Required off-street parking standards



   159.143   Design and improvement standards for parking lots



   159.144   Parking spaces accessible to the disabled



   159.145   Pedestrian access



   159.146   Parking as a principal use



   159.147   Programs and incentives to reduce parking requirements



   159.148   Required off-street loading




Signs




   159.160   Purpose



   159.161   Definitions



   159.162   Sign permits



   159.163   Sign calculations standards



   159.164   Sign design, installation, and maintenance



   159.165   Other sign provisions



   159.166   Permanent signs



   159.167   Temporary signs



   159.168   Miscellaneous signs



   159.169   Exempt signs



   159.170   Prohibited signs



   159.171   Non-conforming signs



   159.172   Designation and ground sign bulk requirements




Landscaping and Screening




   159.180   Purpose



   159.181   Application



   159.182   Definitions



   159.183   Design standards and guidelines



   159.184   Parking lot landscaping



   159.185   Building base landscaping



   159.186   Landscape buffer yards



   159.187   Screening



   159.188   Street trees



   159.189   Inspection



   159.190   Change to an approved landscape plan



   159.191   Installation and maintenance



   159.192   Natural area protection




Environmental Performance Standards




   159.200   Performance standards (general)



   159.201   Lighting



   159.202   Glare and heat



   159.203   Noise



   159.204   Odors



   159.205   Smoke and particulate matter



   159.206   Vibration



   159.207   Noxious or toxic materials



   159.208   Fire and explosive hazards



   159.209   Solid waste and water materials



   159.210   Electrical disturbance




Non-conforming Uses and Structures




   159.220   General regulations



   159.221   General standards of applicability



   159.222   Non-conforming lots



   159.223   Non-conforming uses of land



   159.224   Non-conforming structures



   159.225   Non-conforming uses of structures or of structures and
land in combination



   159.226   Nonconforming characteristics of use



   159.227   Non-conforming uses in the Flood Hazard (FH) District



   159.228   Nonconforming signs



   159.229   Non-conforming status for R1 and R1/PD Subdivisions




Enforcement




   159.240   Authority



   159.241   Complaints regarding violations



   159.242   Persons liable



   159.243   Right of entry



   159.244   Procedures upon discovery of violations



   159.245   Stop work orders



   159.246   Revocation of development approvals



   159.247   Appeals



   159.248   Private remedies reserved



 



   159.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses



   Appendix B:   Applications



   Appendix C:   Schedule of Uses



   Appendix C-1: Schedule of Uses - Federal Hill Planned Development



   Appendix D:    Procedures for Applications



   Appendix E:   Fire Department Access and Water Supply and Fire
Hydrant Specifications



   Appendix F:   Noblesville Standards



   Appendix G:    Central Core Map



   Appendix H:   City of Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual



   Appendix I:   Historic Demolition Area



   Appendix J:   Former County Zoning Sites



   Appendix K:   Pervious Concrete Pavement Design Standards



 




LIST OF TABLES



Table
 
Title
 
Location


Table 1
 
Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths
 
159.078


Table 2
 
Pavement Surfacing
 
159.078


Table 3
 
Illumination Guidelines
 
159.078


Table 4
 
Zoning District Equivalency Table
 
159.096


Table 5
 
Summary of Residential Bulk Requirements
 
159.106


Table 6
 
Summary of Commercial Bulk Requirements
 
159.107


Table 7
 
Summary of Industrial Bulk Standards
 
159.108


Table 7a
 
Development Standards and Prohibitions by Land Use and Overlay Zoning District
 
159.109


Table 8
 
Calculating Parking for Bars and  Restaurant Combinations
 
159.142


Table 9
 
Required Parking Spaces
 
159.142


Table 10
 
Off-Street Parking Dimensions
 
159.143


Table 10.0.5
 
Accessible Parking Spaces Required by the ADA
 
159.144


Table 12
 
Schedule of Mixed Use Parking Calculations
 
159.147


Table 13
 
Schedule of Off-Street Loading Requirements
 
159.148


Table 13.4
 
    Sound Limits
 
159.203


Table 14a
 
Permitted Signs—Commercial Districts
 
159.166


Table 14b
 
Permitted Signs—Industrial Districts
 
159.166


Table 14c
 
Permitted Signs—Institutional Uses in Residential Districts
 
159.166


Table 12.0.4.B.
 
Additional Permitted Landscape Materials
 
159.183


Table 12.0.5.C.1.
 
Interior Parking Lot Landscape Requirements
 
159.184


Table 12.0.5.D.2.
 
Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements
 
159.184


Table 12.0.6.
 
Building Base Landscaping Requirements
 
159.185


Table 12.0.7.E.
 
Landscape Buffer Yard Requirements
 
159.186


Table 12.0.12.D.
 
Tree Preservation Credits
 
159.191


Table 12.0.12.E.j.
 
Tree Preservation Replacement Requirement
 
159.191




 



Cross-references:



   Illicit discharge and connection, see §§ 52.01 et seq.



   Stormwater runoff associated with construction and post-construction
activities, see §§ 52.30 et seq.



TITLE, PURPOSE AND EFFECT



§ 159.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known and cited as the Unified Development
Code of the City of Noblesville, Indiana.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.002  AUTHORITY.



   These regulations are authorized by I.C. 36-7-4, Public Law 211, Acts
of 1980, and all acts amendatory thereto.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)



§ 159.003  POLICIES OF THE CITY.



   (A)   Components.  The Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Noblesville, as amended from time to time, establishes the policies for land
use which are the underlying policies of this chapter.  The Comprehensive
Plan is adopted pursuant to state law.  It contains officially adopted
policy statements as well as maps, including the Land Use Thoroughfare Plan
Map.  These maps and policies shall be consulted when land use decisions
pursuant to this chapter are being made, and used as criteria in making
decisions upon land use requests.



   (B)   Key Policies.



      (1)   Encourage compact growth.



      (2)   Protect and preserve flood hazard areas.



      (3)   Increase the amount of open space for passive recreation
and aesthetic use, and use this open space as a distinguishing mark of
community character and identity.



      (4)   Expand business opportunities in Noblesville.



      (5)   Promote the extension and/or improvement of public
rights-of-way as designated by the Thoroughfare Plan element of the
Comprehensive Plan.



      (6)   Allow for a variety of housing types.



      (7)   Preserve Noblesville's natural features.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.004  PURPOSES.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and development of
land within the jurisdiction of the City of Noblesville.  It is designed to
protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and more
specifically, to:



   (A)   Guide future growth and development in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan policies stated above.



   (B)   Secure adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety
from fire, flood, and other dangers.



   (C)   Lessen or avoid congestion in public ways.



   (D)   Restrict development in areas prone to flooding.



   (E)   Protect the historic and architectural heritage of the
community.



   (F)   Restrict the kind and intensity of uses.



   (G)   Provide for performance standards for the emission of noise,
gases, heat, vibration, or particulate matter into the air or ground or
across lot lines.



   (H)   Protect and conserve the value of land, building, and other
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of
land and building.



   (I)   Guide public and private policy and action in order to assure
adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
drainage, and other public requirements and facilities.



   (J)   Avoid scattered and uncontrolled subdivision of land that
would result in an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of
community services.



   (K)   Establish reasonable standards of design and minimum
requirements for the creation, installation, and improvement of physical
facilities which are, or will be, maintained for the benefit of the general
public.



   (L)   Establish reasonable standards and procedures for subdivisions
and re-subdivisions, in order to further the orderly layout and use of land;
and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.



   (M)   Prevent the pollution of air and water; provision of drainage
facilities and the safeguarding of the water table; and the encouragement of
wise use and management of natural resources in order to preserve the
integrity, stability, natural beauty and topography, and the value of land.



   (N)   Administrate these regulations by defining the powers and
duties of administrative bodies and officials; and the manner and form of
making, filing, and processing of any application.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.005  JURISDICTION OF THE COMMISSION.



   The jurisdiction of the Commission is the territory in which the Plan
Commission has statutory authority to adopt a Master Plan and to enforce the
Building, Zoning and Subdivision Regulations, a part of the Unified
Development in the following geographical areas. The city and the
unincorporated territory contiguous to the city located in Delaware, Fall
Creek, and Noblesville Townships described as follows:



   (A)   Delaware Township, an area bounded on the west by the railroad
tracks, Delaware/Noblesville Township Line on the north, on the east by State
Road No. 37, and on the south by the north right-of-way line of East 141st
Street;



   (B)   Fall Creek Township, an area bounded on the north by the Fall
Creek/Noblesville Township line, on the east by the Hamilton/Madison County
line and on the south by Interstate 69 and East 136th Street between the
Hamilton/Madison County line and Marilyn Road, also East 141st Street between
Marilyn Road and Howe Road; thence northerly following Howe Road to the
southeast corner of a Parcel (Deed #2001-7191); thence westerly on and along
the south line to the southwest corner of said parcel; thence northerly on
and along the west line of said parcel to a point on the Fall
Creek/Noblesville Township line; thence west to intersect with Cumberland
Road. As delineated on a map entitled "Town of Fishers, City of Noblesville
Joinder Agreement Map" filed with the Recorder of Hamilton County as an
exhibit of the Interlocal Agreement of November 23, 2004 between the Common
Council and the Town of Fishers Town Council modifying the previous Joinder
Agreement between the city and the Townships of Delaware and Fall Creek,
passed by the Common Council on September 11, 1973 and filed in the
Miscellaneous Records on January 17, 1974 to transfer the planning and zoning
jurisdiction in the unincorporated areas of Fall Creek and Delaware Townships
excluding areas described above to the Town of Fishers; and



   (C)   Noblesville Township, all of the land within two miles of the
corporate limits of the city as per County Resolution 6-12-95 (8).



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)



DEFINITIONS; WORD USAGE



§ 159.015  WORD USAGE.



   (A)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers,
abbreviations, terms, words, and phrases used herein shall be used,
interpreted, and defined as set forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   Whenever any words and phrases used herein are defined in the
State laws regulating the creation and function of various planning agencies,
such definition shall apply to such words and phrases used herein, except
when the context requires otherwise.



   (C)   For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and
phrases used herein shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   The word "person" includes an individual, firm,
association, organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other legal entity.



      (2)   The masculine includes the feminine.



      (3)   The present tense includes the past and future tense;
the singular number includes the plural.



      (4)   The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement; the word
"may" is a permissive requirement; and the word "should" is a preferred
requirement.



      (5)   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words
"intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."



      (6)   The word "lot" includes the words "plot, parcel, and
tract."



   (D)   All other words not defined shall be defined according to any
recent edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (1985 edition or newer).



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 15-3-00, passed 4-10-00)



§ 159.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “360° ARCHITECTURE.”  Use of same materials, colors, architecture
elements around all four sides.



   “ABANDONMENT.”  The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property for a continuous period of one year.



   “ABUTTING.”  Bordering.



   “ACCESS CONNECTION.” Any driveway, street, road, turnout or other
means of providing for the movement of vehicles to and from a roadway system
or between abutting sites. This includes any pedestrian crosswalks not
adjacent to an intersection and intersecting with vehicular movements.



   “ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU).”  A secondary suite or living unit
within the principal building that may have accommodations for cooking,
eating, sanitation, and sleeping.



   “ACCESSORY USE.” A secondary use on a property that is incidental
and subordinate to a primary use located on the same property, and which does
not alter or change the character of the premises.



   “ACRE.”  A unit of land that measures 43,560 square feet.



   “ACTUAL EMISSIONS.”  Any emissions which occur over a specified
period of time based upon emission monitoring, stack testing, emission
factors or other acceptable measurements.



   “ADDITION.” An extension or increase in the floor area or height of
a building or structure.



   “ADJACENT PROPERTY.”  Any property adjacent to or directly
diagonal to the subject property. Properties across a public or private
right-of-way are also considered adjacent.



   “ADMINISTRATOR.”  The Director of Department of Planning or his or
her designee who administers and enforces the provisions of the Unified
Development Ordinance or Building Codes.



   “ADULT CABARET.”  A building or portion of a building regularly
featuring dancing and other live entertainment if the dancing or
entertainment that constitutes the primary live entertainment is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibiting of specific
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.



   “ADULT MEDIA.”  Magazines, book, videotapes, movies, slides,
CD-roms or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to hard-core material.



   “ADULT MEDIA SHOP.”  An establishment that rents and/or sells
media, and that meets any of the following three tests.



      (1)   Forty percent or more of the gross public floor area is
devoted to adult media.



      (2)   Forty percent or more of the stock-in-trade consists of
adult media.



      (3)   It advertises or holds itself in any forum as “XXX”,
“adult”, “sex” or otherwise as a sexually oriented business other
than as an adult media store, adult motion picture theater, or adult cabaret.



   “ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.”  An establishment emphasizing or
predominantly showing films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
or by specified sexual activities.



   “AGGREGATE SIDE YARD.”  The minimum yard area between two
principal structures on adjacent lots.



   “AGRICULTURE.”  The science, art, or practice of cultivating soil,
producing crops, and raising livestock.



   “AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING, ACCESSORY.”  The use of land and
buildings for agricultural processing on the same lot with, and of a nature
incidental and subordinate to, the principal agricultural use.



   “AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING, PRIMARY.”  An establishment primarily
engaged in performing services on crops, subsequent to their harvest. with
the intent of preparing them for market or further processing.



   “AGRICULTURAL USES.”  The use of land for farming, pasturage,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and the necessary accessory uses for
packing, treating, or storing the resulting product provided, that the
operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to the normal
agricultural activities. The term agriculture does not include chemical
storage, the sale of resulting products to the general public except from
temporary roadside stands, or manufacturing of products associated with
agriculture.



   “AIR CONTAINMENT.”  Any solid, liquid or gaseous matter, or any
combination thereof, that may be emitted into the ambient air in any manner
which may cause or contribute to air pollution.



   “AIR CONTAINMENT EMITTER OR AIR CONTAINMENT SOURCE.”  Any vehicle,
process facility or other device that emits or is capable of emitting air
contaminants, which are privately or publicly owned or operated. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, this term includes all type of
business, commercial, industrial plants; workshops and stores; heating and
power plants and power stations; and buildings and other structures of all
types including but not limited to single-family, two-family, and
multi-family residences; office buildings; public buildings; commercial uses;
industrial uses, all types of vehicles; portable fuel burning equipment;
incinerators of all types; refuse dumps and piles, and all stack and other
chimney outlets from any of the foregoing.



   “AIR POLLUTION.”  The presence or threatened discharge from
whatever source, of solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous matter or any
combination thereof, in the ambient air in sufficient quantities and of such
characteristics and duration which:



      (1)   injures or threatens to injure human, plant, or animal
life;



      (2)   Damages or threatens to damage property; or



      (3)   Unreasonably interferes with the comfortable enjoyment
of life and property.



   “AIRPORT.”  Any location either on land, water, or structure which
is designed or used for the landing and taking-off of aircraft, including all
necessary buildings and facilities, if any.



   “AIRPORT (PUBLIC USE).”  Any area, site or location, either on
land, water or upon any building, which specifically adopted and maintained
for landing and taking off of aircraft, and utilized or to be utilized in the
interest of the public or such purposes. The term does not include private
use airport or landing field, or any military airport solely occupied by any
federal branch of government using that airport for military purposes.



   “ALLEY.”  A public or private right-of-way intended to provide
secondary access to the rear or side of lots or to buildings in urban areas
and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.



   “ALTERATION.”  Any change, addition, or modification in
construction, or any change in the structural members of a building, such as
load bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.



   “AMEND” or “AMENDMENT.”  Any repeal, modification, or addition
to a regulation; any new regulation; any change in the number, shape,
boundary, or area of a district, or any repeal or abolition of any map, part
thereof, or addition thereto.



   “AMENITY AREA.”  An outdoor facility that may include a clubhouse
that is owned and maintained by the owner’s association or property
owner(s) for the primary use and benefit of the residents of the residential
development. The term may include swimming pools, basketball courts, soccer
fields, tennis courts, and indoor recreational facilities.



   “AMPHITHEATER.”  Any land, semi-enclosed structure, or combination
thereof, designed for concerts, the enactment of the performing arts or other
entertainment of the customer.  The uses shall include miniature golf
courses, batting cages, and similar uses.  See also “SPORTS AND RECREATION
PARKS.”



   “AMUSEMENTS, OUTDOOR.”  A commercial use of land which is
primarily outdoors and which is conducted primarily for the entertainment of
the customer.  Such uses shall include miniature golf courses, batting
cages, and similar uses.  See also “SPORTS AND RECREATION PARKS.”



   “ANNUALS.”  A plant that dies at the end of a growing season both
above and below ground.



   “ANTENNA.”  Any communications equipment that transmits or
receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of wireless
communication service.



   “ANTENNA ARRAY OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY.”  One
or more rods, panels, discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or
receptions of radio frequency signals, which may include omni-directional
antennas (whip), direction antennas (panel), and parabolic antennas but
excluding any support structure.



   “ANTENNA OR SATELLITE DISH.”  Any device designed to transmit or
receive wave signals to or from any source whatsoever.



   “APARTMENT HOUSE.”  A building that includes self-contained
housing units used or intended to be used as the residence of three or more
families living independently of each other, and typically for lease or rent.



   “APPEAL.” A request for a review of an interpretation by the
Director of Planning and Development of any provision of this chapter.



   “APPELLANT.”  A person filing for an appeal.



   “APPLICANT.”  The owner, owners, or legal representative of land
who makes application to the city.  Written consent shall be required from
the legal owner of the premises.



   “APPLICATION.”  The completed form or forms, together with any
other materials, exhibits, and fees as required of an applicant pursuant to
this chapter.



   “APPLIED TRIM.”  Supplemental and separate decorative strips
applied to the face or sides of a frame.



   “AQUATIC BUFFER.  Any area in and around a water feature including
lakes, ponds, detention and retention areas, legal drains, and rivers that
are generally vegetated and separate the water resources from adjacent land
providing numerous functions including water quality, fish and wildlife
habitats, and wildlife travel corridors.



   “ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL.”  Any project, relief, cornice, column,
change of building material, window, or door opening on any building.



   “ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES.”  The guidelines established by the
Architectural Review Board for reviewing detached single-family, attached
single-family, and multi-family structures as a part of the Preliminary
Development Plan Process.



   “ARCHITECTURAL PLANE.”  A two-dimensional surface defined by width
and length.



   “ARCHITECTURAL PLANE (PRIMARY).”  That two-dimensional surface
fronting along a street.



   “ARCHITECTURAL PLANE (SECONDARY).”  All two-dimensional surfaces
of a building other than the primary architectural plane.



   “ART GALLERIES AND MUSEUMS.”  Public or semipublic uses whose
primary use is to enhance the appreciation of its visitors for past and
present cultural practices and events, through the use of exhibits, tours,
demonstrations, audio-visual technologies, and similar communications media.



   “ARTERIAL.”  See “STREET.”



   “AS-BUILT CONSTRUCTION PLANS.”  Drawings made after the completion
of improvements which identify how the improvements were constructed on site.



   “ASSEMBLY OF FINISHED GOODS.” The process of assembling and
packaging pre-manufactured items into a single final product.



   “ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.” A residential facility where limited
health care is provided including assistance with daily activities such as
dressing, grooming and bathing, and/or taking medicines are provided for the
aged or any other reasonably independent person in need of nursing care.
These facilities do not contain equipment for surgical care or treatment of
disease or injury and are not primarily designed for patients with mental
illness or alcohol or drug addiction. “ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES” have
private rooms that are not shared by non-related persons.



   “AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM).”  An electronically operated
device used to conduct financial transactions on site by means of direct
computerized access.



   “AUTOMOTIVE FUEL STATION.”  Any land, building, structure, or
premises used for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuels, oils or accessories.



   “AUTOMOTIVE RENTAL.”  Any land, building, structure, or premises
used for the rental of motor vehicles on a temporary basis, and including any
incidental storage thereof.



   “AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR/BODY SHOP.”  Any land, building, structure, or
premises used for the general repair of automobiles including but not limited
to engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; engine steam
cleaning; transmission welding or rebuilding and installation; collision
service such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair; and painting
of motor vehicle after a collision, fire damage, water damage, or other
natural disaster or for the purpose of restoration. “AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR/BODY
SHOPS” may also include “AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE”, as defined.



   “AUTOMOTIVE SALES.”  Any land, building, structure, or premises
used for the sale or lease of new or used motor vehicles.  Automotive sales
may include automotive repair and automotive service.  See also
“AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR” and “AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE.”



   “AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE.” Any land, building, structure, or premises
used for the routine maintenance of automobiles and limited servicing of
automobiles including but not limited to the sale and installation of oil,
lubricants, filters, batteries, tires, brakes, belts and other similar
activities or for installing or repairing parts and accessories, but not to
include “AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR/BODY SHOP” as defined.



   “AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT).”  The estimated daily average number
of vehicular travelers on a street in a 24-hour period.



   “BALLAST.”  A heavy substance placed in such a way as to improve
the stability and control of an object.



   “BANDING.”  A continuous series of moldings projecting slightly
from the architectural plan.



   “BAR,” “TAVERN,” or “LOUNGE.”  Premises used primarily for
the sale and dispensing of liquor by the drink for on-site consumption and
where food may be available for consumption on the premises as accessory to
the principal use.



   “BARE-BULB (ILLUMINATION).”  See “ILLUMINATION, BARE-BULB.”



   “BASE FLOOD.” The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   “BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.”  The elevation of the one-percent annual
chance of a flood.



   “BASE STATION.”  A station located at a specific site that is
authorized to communicate with mobile stations. The term includes all radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other electronics
associated with a station.



   “BASEMENT.”  That portion of the building that is underground but
having at least half its clear height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.  See also “CELLAR.”



   “BASEMENT.” (for flood purposes only) That portion of a structure
having its floor below ground level on all sides.



   “BASEMENT FINISH.”  Completion or construction of new walls,
heating, electrical, and the like, so as to make the below ground area
habitable.



   “BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT.”  An owner-occupied dwelling
unit providing overnight accommodations and breakfast to the public for
compensation for ten or more days in a 12-month period.



   “BERM (MOUND).”  A man-made landscape feature used for screening
in which earth is piled up in irregular, round, oblong shapes. “BERMS” do
not have consistent crest elevations but are irregular creating a more
natural landscape feature.



   “BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).”  The utilization of the natural
environment, artificial structures, scheduling, and/or prohibition to ensure
the long-term operation and maintenance of features that control erosion
and/or the discharge of polluting elements.



   “BEVERAGE BOTTLING.”  Art establishment engaged in manufacturing,
processing, and bottling or packaging of beverages for wholesaling and
distribution.



   “BIORETENTION FACILITIES (RAIN GARDENS).”  A stormwater management
system that uses soil and plants to absorb stormwater runoff and to capture
pollutants.  These are small landscaped basins intended to provide water
quality management by filtering stormwater runoff before release into a storm
drain system.



   “BIOSWALE.”  A bioswale is a shallow depression created in the
earth to accept and convey stormwater runoff. A bioswale uses natural means,
including vegetation and soil, to treat stormwater by filtering out
contaminants being conveyed in the water.



   “BLOCK.”  A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of
waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.



   “BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES).” See “BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES.”



   “BOARD.”  The Noblesville Board of Zoning Appeals.



   “BOARD OF WORKS.”  The Noblesville Board of Public Works and
Safety is in charge of approving City contracts and accepting public
improvement projects.



   “BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS (BZA).”  The City of Noblesville’s
Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals or any division thereof and its designees.



   “BOARDING HOUSE.”  A building, not available to transients, in
which only meals and lodging are regularly provided for compensation for at
least three but not more than 12 persons.



   “BOND.”  Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety
bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the Board of Works or County Commissioners.  All bonds shall
be approved by the Board of Works or County Commissioners whenever a bond is
required by these regulations.



   “BORROW PIT.” An area of land from which earth is removed for use
on another site and a permanent or temporary irregular terrain is created.



   “BRANCH.” An outgrowing shoot, stem or twig that grows from the
main stem or trunk.



   “BREWPUB.” A commercial use which brews ales, beers, meads, and/or
similar beverages on site and serves those beverages on site.



   “BRICK.”  A solid or hollow masonry unit of clay mixture with
sand, and molded into a rectangular-shape while in a plastic state, then
baked in a kiln.



   “BUFFER LANDSCAPING.”  Any trees, shrubs, walls, fences, berms/
mounds, space or related landscaping features required under the UDO for
buffering lots, parcels, etc., from adjacent properties or public
rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing visual shielding or other aspects
of privacy or aesthetics.



   “BUFFER YARD (PERIPHERAL).”  See “LANDSCAPING BUFFER YARD.”



   “BUFFERING.”  Any means of protecting an area of land from the
adverse visual and suitable effects of another area, which may include trees,
shrubs, walls, fences, berms/mounds, space or related landscaping features
required under this chapter for buffering lots, parcels, etc., from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing visual
shielding or other aspects of privacy or aesthetics.



   “BUILD-TO-LINE.” A line appearing on the development plan stated as
the setback dimension from the right-of-way which a building facade must be
placed.



   “BUILDING.”  Any structure designed, built, and used for the
shelter, protection, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property, and which
is permanently affixed to the land.  A building is also a structure.



   “BUILDING AREA.”  The horizontal square footage, under roof, of a
building or structure.



   “BUILDING CODE.”  The Indiana Building Code that establishes and
controls the standards for constructing all forms of permanent structures and
related matters. Also referred to as the Noblesville Building Code.



   “BUILDING, DETACHED.”  A building that has no structural
connection with the primary building or any other building or structure.



   “BUILDING ENVELOPE.”  The setback lines that establishes an area
on a lot in which a building and related activities can occur.



   “BUILDING FRONTAGE.”  The length of an outside building wall on a
dedicated public or private street.



   “BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.”  See “HEIGHT, BUILDING.”



   “BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.”  A building in which is conducted the main
or principal use of the lot in which said building is situated.



   “BUILDING PERMIT.”  A permit signed by the Director of Planning
and Development stating that a proposed improvement complies with the
provisions of this chapter and such other parts of the City Code as may be
applicable.



   “BUILDING SEPARATION.”  The least distance between the walls of
two structures regardless of whether they are located on the same lot or
parcel.



   “BUILDING SETBACK LINE (FRONT).”  The line nearest the front of
and across a lot establishing the minimum open space to be provided between
the front line of a building or structure and the front lot line. Said
building setback line shall be parallel to a street.



   “BUILDING, SINGLE-TENANT.” A building in which all space is
occupied by one tenant and is not a part of a larger unified development.



   “BUSINESS, GENERAL.”  Commercial uses which generally require
locations on or near major arterials and/or their intersections which tend to
serve day-to-day needs of the neighborhood and supply the more durable and
permanent needs of the whole community.



   “BUSINESS, LOCAL.”  Commercial establishments which cater to and
can be located in close proximity to residential districts without creating
excessive congestion, noise, or other objectionable influences.  Uses in
this classification tend to serve the day-to-day needs of the neighborhood.



   “BUS.”  A motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for
carrying more than ten persons.



   “BUS PASSENGER TERMINAL.”  Any land, structure, or building which
serves as a point of arrival or departure for passengers of commercial
busses, including any ticket sales areas, reception areas, bus parking and/or
refueling areas, and retail sales accessory thereto. “BUS PASSENGER
TERMINALS” shall not include the storage, cleaning, or repair of busses.



   “CALIPER.”  The American Association of Nurserymen Standard for
trunk measurement of nursery stock.  Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six
inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper sizes, and
12 inches above the ground for larger trees.



   “CAMOUFLAGED.”  Any telecommunications facility that is designed
to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of “CAMOUFLAGED”
facilities may include architecturally screened roof mounted antennas,
building mounted antennas painted to match the existing structure, antennas
integrated into architectural elements, towers made to look like trees and
antenna structures designed to resemble light poles or flag poles.



   “CAMPGROUND.”  An area of land on which two or more recreational
vehicles, including campers, tents, RV’s, or other similar temporary
recreational structures, are regularly accommodated with or without charge,
including any building, structure, or fixture or equipment that is used or
intended to be used in connection with providing such accommodations.



   “CANE.” A primary stem which starts at a point not higher than 1/4
the height of the plant.



   “CANOPY COVER.” The percent of a fixed area covered by the crown of
an individual plant species or delimited by the vertical projection of its
outermost perimeter. Small openings in the crown are included.



   “CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.”  A schedule of all proposed public
improvement projects in order of construction priority together with cost
estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.  All major
projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual
municipal operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement
of the physical assets for the community are included.



   “CART CORRAL.”  A structure within a parking lot that is designed
and designated for patrons to deliver shopping carts.



   “CAR WASH.”  A building or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing one or more automobiles simultaneously, using production line
methods such as a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other
mechanical devices, or providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the
complete or partial cleaning of such automobiles, whether by operator or by
customer.



   “CELLAR.”  A portion of the building partly underground, but
having half or more of its clear height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.



   “CELLULAR ON WHEELS (COW).”  A mobile cell site that consists of
an antenna tower and electric radio transceiver equipment on a truck or
trailer to provide expanded cellular network coverage and/or capacity at
major special events or disaster areas and designed to be a part of the
cellular network.



   “CEMETERY.”  Land used or intended to be used for the burial of
human or animal dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including
crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries if operated in connection with and
within the boundaries of such cemetery for which perpetual care and
maintenance is provided.



   “CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.”  A certificate issued by the Director
of Planning and Development or his or her designee stating that the plans
submitted for an improvement location permit including grading and pad
elevations, sign permits, landscape plans, and miscellaneous permits that
comply with the approved plans, provisions of the Unified Development
Ordinance, and commitments as required by the Plan Commission, Board of
Zoning Appeals, Common Council, Board of Public Works, or the Director of
Planning and Development. A Certificate of Compliance is not a substitute for
a Certificate of Occupancy for occupying a building/structure.



   “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.”  A certificate signed by the Director
of Planning and Development stating that the occupancy and use of land or
building or structure referred to therein complies with the provisions of
this Code.



   “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CONDITIONAL).”  A certificate with a
specific expiration date issued by the Director of Planning and Development
or his or her designee, that at the time of issuance, the occupancy and use
of the building or structure does not fully comply with the provisions of all
applicable codes including but not limited to the Unified Development
Ordinance, Building Codes, Electrical Codes, Fire Codes, Mechanical Codes,
and all other state and federal codes and ordinances, but may be occupied for
the specified period subject to the conditions stipulated on the certificate.



   “CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (TEMPORARY).”  A certificate with a
specific expiration date issued by the Director of Planning and Development
or his or her designee, that at the time of issuance, the occupancy and use
of the building or structure does not fully comply with the provisions of all
applicable codes including but not limited to the Unified Development
Ordinance, Building Codes, Electrical Codes, Fire Codes, Mechanical Codes,
and all other state and federal codes and ordinances, but may be occupied for
the specified period subject to the conditions stipulated on the certificate.



   “CHANGE OF ZONING.”  See “REZONING.”



   “CHANGEABLE COPY.” Letters, numeral, or other copy that may be
manually or mechanically affixed to and/or removed from a sign. “CHANGEABLE
COPY” is only permitted when incorporated into a permanent sign structure
as permitted by this chapter.



   “CHANNEL.”  A natural or artificial water course of perceptible
extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or
periodically flowing water.



   “CHANNEL LETTERS.” Three-dimensional individually cut letters or
figures, the depth of which is a minimum of two inches, illuminated or not
illuminated, and affixed to a structure. Open-face “CHANNEL LETTERS” are
prohibited.



   “CHEMICAL PROCESSING.”  An establishment engaged in producing
basic chemicals, or in manufacturing products by predominantly chemical
processes.



   “CHILD CARE CENTER.”  A place where at least 17 children receive
child care from a provider while unattended by a guardian, for regular
compensation and, and for a period of at least four, but no more than 24,
consecutive hours in each of ten consecutive days per year, excluding
intervening weekends and holidays.



   “CHILD CARE HOME.”  A dwelling unit in which at least six children
not including the children for whom the provider is a parent, stepparent,
legal guardian, custodian or other relative that receives child care from a
provider while unattended by a parent, stepparent, legal guardian or
custodian, for regular compensation and for a period of more than four hours
and less than 24 hours, consecutive hours in each of ten consecutive days per
year, excluding intervening weekends and holidays. Any child who is at least
14 years of age that does not require child care and any child who is at
least seven years of age for whom a provider of care in the child care home
is a parent, stepparent, legal guardian or custodian does not count toward
determining the limit set forth regarding the number of children. The term
“CHILD CARE HOME” shall refer to Class I Child Care Homes and Class II
Child Care Homes.



   “CHILD CARE HOME, CLASS I.”  A Child Care Home that serves any
combination of full-and part-time children, not to exceed 12 children at any
one time.



   “CHILD CARE HOME, CLASS II.”  A Child Care Home that serves more
than 12 children but not more than any combination of 16 full-time and
part-time children at any one time.



   “CHURCH.”  See “PLACE OF WORSHIP.”



   “CINEMA OR THEATER.”  Any building designed for the enactment of
dramatic performances and/or showing of motion pictures. For the purposes of
this chapter, a drive-in theater shall be deemed a separate and distinct use.



   “CITY.”  The city having jurisdiction over the parcel of land
under consideration.  The City of Noblesville, Indiana.



   “CITY ENGINEER.”  The City Engineer of the City of Noblesville.



   “CLINIC.”  See “OFFICE, MEDICAL.”



   “CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE.”  An association organized and operated
on a non-profit basis for persons who are bona fide members paying dues,
which association owns or leases premises, the use of which premises is
restricted to such members and their guests, and which manages the affairs of
such association by and through a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members. Food, meals and beverages may be served
on such premises, provided adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities
are available. This includes fraternities and sororities.



   “CLUBHOUSE.”  A building or portion thereof, accessory to a
residential subdivision or multi-family development, and used primarily by
the residents and their guests for recreational and entertainment purposes.
Such uses shall not include retail or food sales or services except on a
temporary and occasional basis.



   “CLUSTER BOX UNIT.”  A freestanding, pedestal-mounted mailbox
containing eight, 12, 13 or 16 individually locked mailboxes and parcel
compartments.



   “COFFEE HOUSE.”  A restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea, and
other beverages that are typically sold at a counter or drive-up window for
motor vehicles.



   “COLLECTOR.”  See “STREET.”



   “COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY.”  A public or private institution
providing full-time or part-time education beyond the high school level and
including any lodging rooms or housing for students or faculty.  A business
or trade school is not considered a college or university.



   “CO-LOCATION.” A space on an existing or proposed telecommunication
tower that can be used for the installation and/or mounting of antennas or
radio or cellular communication equipment that operates on a different
frequency from the initial user.



   “COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.” Any image, logo, or words that advertise a
business conducted, services rendered, activities conducted, or goods
produced and/or sold.



   “COMMISSION.”  The Noblesville City Plan Commission.



   “COMMITMENT.”  A recordable written agreement or covenant
concerning the use or development of a parcel of real property which is made
in writing by the owner of that parcel that may include a site plan and/or
other pertinent drawings that sets forth any binding limitations of use or
development for that particular parcel. This may be made either voluntarily
or in accordance with an order or request of the Plan Commission.



   “COMMUNITY EVENT.” An activity in Noblesville that is open to the
general public and sponsored by a public, private not-for-profit, or
religious organization that is educational, cultural, or recreational in
function. Charitable events sponsored by for-profit organizations are also
considered community activities.



   “COMMUNITY GATEWAY.”  A corridor, expressway, or arterial that
citizens or visitors of Noblesville travel in high numbers which represents
the character of the community. These gateways include the State Road 37
corridor, the 146th Street corridor, the State Road 32 corridor, the State
Road 38 corridor, and the Corporate Campus.



   “COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS).”  A program developed by the
Federal Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities
participating in the regular program of the National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) that have included provisions beyond the minimum floodplain management
regulations to develop extra measures providing additional protection(s) from
flooding.



   “COMPATIBLE.”  A structure, planned development, and/or use that
is capable of existing together in harmony with its surrounding structures,
planned developments, and/or uses forming a homogeneous mixture that neither
separates from nor alters its surroundings causing attention to be drawn to
the proposed structure, planned development, and/or use.



   “COMPOSITION.”  The manner in which parts are combined or related
to form a united whole. It includes scale, site relationship, space, volume,
texture, proportion, reflection, rhythm, repetition, pattern, ornamentation,
mass, form, harmony, depth, color, contrast, and balance.



   “COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.”  A plan adopted by the Plan Commission and
Common Council, pursuant to State law, and including any part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.  The
document shall include:



      (1)   A statement of objectives for the future development of
the jurisdiction.



      (2)   A statement of policy for the land use development of
the jurisdiction.



      (3)   A statement of policy for the development of public
ways, public places, public lands, public structures, and public utilities.



   “CONCEPT PLAN.”  A plan for the development of land brought by the
applicant/petitioner to a pre-submittal meeting that shows in general terms
the proposed land use, circulation, natural characteristics and typical
development of the area including the affected adjacent properties and
traffic.



   “CONDITION.”  A restrictive or modifying factor that is essential
to the occurrence of something else.



   “CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.”  Stipulations or provisions attached to an
approval issued by any governmental entity that are a prerequisite for a
final certificate of occupancy.



   “CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR).”  A document that
illustrates FEMA's comment on a proposed project that would, upon
construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a
flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing
regulatory floodway, the effective Base Flood Elevation (BFE), or the Special
Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). The letter does not revise an effective NFIP map
but indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be recognized
by FEMA. Building permits cannot be issued based on a CLOMR because a CLOMR
does not change the NFIP map.



   “CONDITIONAL USE.”  A use permitted within a district other than a
use permitted "by right", and requiring approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals because of its unusual nature. “CONDITIONAL USES” that may be
allowed in each district are listed in the Official Schedule of District
Regulations.



   “CONDOMINIUM.”  The individual ownership of a dwelling unit within
a multiple family dwelling, together with an interest in the common land and
building areas and the underlying land as per I.C. 32-25. Real property is
not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common elements are
vested in the unit owners.



   “CONFINED FEEDING OPERATION.”  The raising of animals for food,
fur or recreation in an area where they are confined, fed and maintained for
at least 45 days during any year, and where there is no ground cover or
vegetation present over at least half of the confinement area. This shall be
any animal feeding operation that houses at least 300 cattle, or 600 swine or
sheep, or 30,000 or more fowl.



   “CONIFER.” Cone-bearing tree.



   “CONSERVATION.” Protection, improvement, and wise use of natural
resources according to principles that will assure utilization of the
resource to obtain the highest economic and social benefits.



   “CONSTRUCTION PLANS.”  The maps, drawings, and textual description
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed or
constructed.



   “CONTRACTOR’S OFFICES.”  Any land, building, or structure used
as the permanent place of business for a general contractor or tradesman,
including the incidental storage of construction equipment and materials and
company vehicles.



   “CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR REST HOME.”  An establishment for the
care or assisted living of the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those
suffering bodily disorders. Such home does not contain equipment for surgical
care or for the treatment of disease or injury.



   “CONVENIENCE STORE.” An establishment where food stuffs, patent
medicines, periodicals, and other similar items of household convenience are
kept for retail sale to the public.



   “CONVERSION.” A change of a building's use to another use.



   “COPY.”  The wording, logo, shapes, or object content of a sign in
either permanent or removable letter media.



   “CORE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.” The area beginning at the
intersection of Clinton Street and 10th Street, running thence south along
10th Street to the intersection with Maple Avenue, running thence west along
Maple Avenue to a point where Maple Venue would intersect with White River,
if Maple Avenue were continued upon its western course; running thence north
along the meandering thread of White River to the intersection of a line
which would represent the extension of Clinton Street to the west to its
intersection with White River; thence east to Clinton Street and along
Clinton Street to the point of beginning.



   “CORNER BREAK.” The position at which two architectural planes meet
and form relief creating a third dimension.



   “CORNICE.”  A molded ornamental projection that crowns or finishes
the top of the building or wall to which it is affixed.



   “COUNCIL.”  The Common Council of the City of Noblesville.



   “COUNTY.”  Hamilton County, Indiana.



   “COVENANT (DEED RESTRICTION).”  Private and legal restrictions of
various kinds on the usage of lots, typically within a subdivision and
applied by the subdivider. In the case of public health, safety, and welfare,
covenants may be applied by the Plan Commission that are recorded with the
plat and deed. Covenants can also be placed on commercial and industrial
developments. Unless specifically agreed to, covenants are not enforceable by
the Plan Commission or its designees; however, they are enforceable in civil
court by interested or affected parties.



   “CRITICAL FACILITY.”  Any use of land for which even a slight
chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are
not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire, and
emergency response installations, or installations which produce, use, or
store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.



   “CRITICAL ROOT ZONE.” The area of undisturbed natural soil around a
tree that must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root
mass to give the tree a reasonable chance of survival defined by a horizontal
circle drawn at grade with the center being the center of the trunk of the
tree and a radius equal to the distance from the trunk to the outermost
portion of the drip line.



   “CROWN.” The portion of the tree comprising the branches.



   “CROWN FORM (SHAPE)” The configuration crown of a standing tree or
shrub - circle, triangle, parabola, rectangle, or horizontal ellipse.



   “CROWN WIDTH (DIAMETER).” The span of the crown of a tree or shrub.



   “CUL-DE-SAC.”  See “STREET,” “CUL-DE-SAC.”



   “CULVERT.”  A drain pipe that channels water under a bridge,
street, or driveway.



   “CURB.”  A concrete boundary marking the edge of a street or other
paved area and providing for a change in grade between the street surface and
the adjacent unpaved portions of the street right-of-way.



   “CURB CUT (DRIVEWAY CUT).”  A permit issued by the Department of
Engineering providing for vehicular ingress/egress between property and the
abutting street.



   “CURB RADIUS.”  The curved edge of a street, driveway, or other
paved area at an intersection with another street driveway, or other paved
area.



   “CUT.”  An excavation. The difference between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final
grade.  Also, the material removed in excavation.



   “CUT AND FILL.”  The modification of a lot or parcel by excavating
in one location and subsequently moving the excavated material to another
location on the same site.  See also single words “CUT” and “FILL.”



   “CUT AND FILL.” (for flood purposes only)  To build up the level
of low lying land in the Special Flood Hazard Area (floodplain) using
material from within the same watershed floodplain to cause a permanent
increase in existing ground elevations. The intent of this method is to
provide an area of compensatory storage to offset the impact of the fill area.



   “DEAD END.”  See “STREET, DEAD END.”



   “DECIBEL.”  A unit of measurement of the intensity of loudness of
sound. Sound level meters are used to measure such intensities and are
calibrated in decibels.”



   “DECIDUOUS.” Plants that shed their leaves annually.



   “DEDICATION.”  The setting apart of land or interests in land for
use by the public or municipality by ordinance, resolution, or entry in the
official minutes as by the recording of a plat.



   “DEMOLITION.”  The act of doing away with a structure by
destroying it to the ground.



   “DENSITY.”  A unit of measurement; the number of dwelling units
per acre of land.



   “DENSITY, GROSS.”  The number of dwelling units per acre of the
total land to be developed, including public rights-of-way.



   “DENSITY, NET.”  The number of dwelling units per acre of land
when the acreage involved includes only the land devoted to residential uses,
excluding public rights-of-way, floodplains, wetlands, and other public lands.



   “DETENTION AREA.”  An area that is designed to capture specific
quantities of stormwater and to gradually release the stormwater at a
sufficiently slow rate to avert flooding. This area normally is eventually
dry.



   “DEVELOPED AREA.” Land that has been substantially improved by
making it more useful to humans including the erection of buildings or
increasing its value by cultivation.



   “DEVELOPER.”  The owner or his or her legal representative of land
proposed to be subdivided, or residentially, commercially, or industrially
utilized.  Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.



   “DEVELOPMENT.” Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to construction, reconstruction, or
placement of a structure, an addition to a structure, installation of a
manufactured home, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or culverts, construction of
roads, erection of walls and fences, utility installation, construction of
flood control structures, storage of materials, drilling operations, or any
other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood
or surface waters located within the area of special flood hazard. This does
not include activities such as the maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities such as painting, re-roofing, resurfacing roads, gardening,
plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling,
grading, excavation, construction of elevated beds, or the construction of
permanent structures.



   “DEVELOPMENT PLAN.”  A scale drawing, including a legal or site
description, of the real estate involved which shows the location and size of
the following, both existing and proposed: all buildings, structures, and
yards; topographic map; location and dimension of building lines and
easements; widths and lengths of all entrances and exits to and from said
real estate; location of all adjacent or adjoining streets, service
facilities; and other improvements such as planting areas.



   “DEVELOPMENT PLAN, DETAILED.”  The construction drawings
incorporating all amendments and plans adopted at the Preliminary Development
Plan hearing that sets the stage for approval of the Secondary Plat(s) as
evidenced in a development plan.



   “DEVELOPMENT PLAN, PRELIMINARY.”  The initial development plans as
proposed for a Planned Development following approval by the Plan Commission
and adoption by the Common Council of said drawings and Planned Development
(PD) ordinance including any waivers from the underlying zoning district
regulations and commitments by the developer for said real property.



   “DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.”  The official in charge of
the Department of Planning and Development and authorized to administer and
enforce the Unified Development Code including his or her designees.



   “DISC GOLF COURSE.”  An area of land laid out with a series of
targets in which a player throws discs at a target.



   “DISPLAY PUBLICLY.”  The act of exposing, placing, posting,
exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or
private, an item in such a manner that is may be readily seen and its content
or character distinguished by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street,
highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others, or from any
portion of the premises where items and materials other than adult media are
on display to the public.



   “DISTRICT (ZONING).”  Specific areas within the jurisdiction of
the Plan Commission for which uniform regulations governing the use, height,
area, size, and intensity of use of buildings and land, parking, open space
and similar bulk standards that are established by this chapter. (See
individual zoning districts).



   “DNR.”  The Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



   “DOMESTIC PETS.”  Animals commonly used as household pets,
protection, companions, and for assistance to disabled persons. Domestic pets
shall include animals that are cared for and treated in a manner acceptable
for pet dogs, cats, and birds. Domestic pets shall include, but not be
limited to, dogs, cats, parakeets, parrots, finches, lizards, spiders, guinea
pigs, hamsters, gerbils, rats, mice, rabbits, aquarium fish, ferrets, and
snakes if cared for in the manner described above.



   “DOWNTOWN MIXED-USE RESIDENTIAL.”  Any single-family,
two-family,  or multi-family dwelling unit(s) located above a
non-residential use in the same building.



   “DRAINAGE.”  The outflow of water or other fluids from a site
through natural or artificial means.



   “DRAINAGE CONCENTRATION.” The diversion of the natural flow of
water, directed to a point or an area that creates a greater than natural
flow at that point or area.



   “DRAINAGE SYSTEM.”  All facilities, channels and areas which serve
to convey, filter, store and/or receive stormwater, either on a temporary or
permanent basis.



   “DRINKING PLACE.”  An establishment whose primary use is the sale
of beverages such as coffee or juice.  A “DRINKING PLACE” shall not
include a bar unless the sale of alcoholic beverages is also permitted in the
district in which the drinking place is located.  See also “BAR, TAVERN,
OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE.”



   “DRIP LINE.”  The vertical line encompassing the outermost
portions of the tree canopy extending to the ground.



   “DRIVE-IN” or “DRIVE-UP FACILITY.”  A small scale
establishment developed so that its retail or service character is dependant
on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as
to serve patrons, while remaining in their motor vehicles, rather than within
a building or structure.



   “DRIVE-IN THEATER.”  A cinema which is also a drive-in
establishment.  See also “CINEMA OR THEATER” and “DRIVE-IN OR
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT.”



   “DRIVE-THRU SERVICE.”  An opening or openings in the wall of a
building or structure designed and intended to be used to provide for sales
and/or service to patrons, who remain in their vehicles, of products that are
used or consumed off-site.



   “DRIVEWAY.” Access for vehicular movement to egress/ingress between
the right-of-way of private or public streets and the required building
setback line.



   “DRIVEWAY, LEADING EDGE.” The edge of the driveway located behind
the street right-of-way.



   “DRIVING RANGE.”  A tract of land equipped with distance markers
for practicing golf shots.



   “DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT WITH ON-SITE PLANT.”  An establishment
or business maintained for the pickup and delivery of dry cleaning and/or
laundry with an on-site plant and the maintenance or operation of any laundry
or dry cleaning equipment on the premises.



   “DWELLING.”  A building or structure or portion thereof used
exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family,
and multi-family; however, excluding hotels, motels, and boarding houses.







 



   “DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.”  A building consisting of three or more
dwelling units, including condominiums, with varying arrangements of
entrances and party walls.



   “DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED.”  A building consisting of two
or more dwelling units, each of which occupies a separate platted lot.



   “DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.”  A building consisting of a
single dwelling unit only, separated from other dwelling units by open space.
“SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS” shall include modular homes and may include
mobile homes.  (See definitions.)



   “DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.”  A building consisting of two dwelling
units which may be attached either side-by-side or one above the other, and
each unit having a separate or combined entrance or entrances.  Includes
condominiums.



   “DWELLING UNIT.”  A room or group or rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as living quarters for only one family and including
provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities.  The term
shall include manufactured and mobile homes but shall not include
recreational vehicles.



   “EASEMENT.”  An authorization or grant by a property owner to
specific person(s) or to the public to use land for specific purposes.



      “DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.” These easements are for watercourses,
drainage swales, streams, or buried storm water pipes or other structures
that traverse the parcel, subdivision, or planned development. These
easements shall be exclusive to that use and separate from the dedication of
other utility easements.



      “PERMANENT UTILITY EASEMENTS.” These easements shall be
provided where it is necessary to accommodate utilities that serve the
parcel, subdivision, or planned development allowing for utility service in
and through the parcel, proposed subdivision or planned development.



      “TEMPORARY UTILITY EASEMENTS.” These easements shall be
provided where necessary to accommodate the installation of utilities that
serve the parcel, subdivision, or planned development and typically expire
after the initial installation of the required utilities.



   “EASEMENT, NO ACCESS.”  A public easement along right-of-way
across which the access to the property is not permitted.



   “EIFS.”  External Insulation Finish System.



   “ELDERLY HOUSING.”  Any dwelling units occupied 90% or more by
persons 60 years of age or older.



   “ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION TOWER.”  A structure that physically
supports high voltage overhead power lines. The term does not include a
utility pole.



   “ELEVATION (BUILDING).”  A scaled-drawing of any side of a
building or structure.



   “ELEVATION CERTIFICATE.”  A certified statement that verifies the
existing grade, pad, footings and/or structure elevation.



   “EMPLOYEE.”  The regular working staff, (paid, volunteer or
otherwise) at maximum strength and in full-time equivalent numbers necessary
to operate, maintain or service any given facility or use under normal levels
of service.



   “ENCROACHMENT.”  The advancement or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a sensitive
natural environment, such as a floodplain or wetland areas. Such encroachment
may impede or alter the natural systems in place in those areas, including
altering the flow capacity of a floodplain. Shall also be defined as any
work, equipment, construction material, merchandise, furniture, or other
related items that are located in public right-of-way.



   “ENTERTAINMENT RELATED FACILITIES AND USES.” Any use which is
typically or commonly associated with permitted entertainment uses which may
include but are not limited to:



      (1)   Amphitheater facilities.  These accessory uses and
structures can include but are not limited to stage houses, pavilion seating,
lawn seating, sound amplification systems, lighting towers, hospitality
rooms, guest rooms and suites, dressing rooms, firework displays.



      (2)   Concession and merchandise stands.  This includes
stands for the sale of food, alcohol and beverages; stands for the sale of
event related merchandise; stands for the rental of customer convenience
items such as lawn chairs or strollers; and other vendor kiosks or stations.



      (3)   Entrance/ticket facilities.  These include entry
plazas, bridge and ticket gates, and box office.



      (4)   Merchandise buildings.  These include office, storage,
warehouse, and sales administration related to merchandise tracking,
preparation and on-site sales.



      (5)   Plaza areas.  These areas include plaza stage, party
plaza shelters and VIP club and plaza.



      (6)   Property management facilities.  These include property
management/grounds office buildings, maintenance buildings, storage
buildings, workshops, and parking operations house.



      (7)   Restrooms and related accommodations including
port-o-lets.



      (8)   Specialty lights for individual productions, concerts,
and shows.



   “EPA.”  The Environmental Protection Agency of the United States.



   “EQUIPMENT COMPOUND.”  The area that:



      (1)   Surrounds or is near the base of a wireless support
structure; and



      (2)   Encloses wireless facilities.



   “EROSION.”  The removal of surface materials by the action of
natural elements.



   “ESCROW.”  The arrangement for the handling of instruments or
money not to be delivered until specified conditions are met.



   “ESSENTIAL SERVICES.”  The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance of gas, electrical, communication facilities, steam, fuel, or
water transmission or distribution systems, collection, supply, or disposal
systems.  Such systems may include: poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and similar accessories, but shall not include buildings which are
necessary for the furnishing of such services.



   “ESTABLISHMENT.”  Any business regulated by this chapter.



   “EVERGREEN.”  A plant having green leaves or needles throughout
the entire year.



   “EXCAVATION.”  An operation for the movement, placement, or
removal of earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material in or on the
ground by use of tools or mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives,
including auguring, backfilling, boring, digging, ditching, drilling,
driving, grading, jacking, plowing in, pulling in, ripping, scraping,
trenching, and tunneling.



   “EXCLUDED EVENT OR LOCATION.”  An area, location, or event where
the operation of a mobile food vehicle is prohibited as stated in this
chapter unless permission is received from the event organizer or Noblesville
Park Board.



   “EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.”  A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, tire installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of this chapter.



   “EXISTING STRUCTURE.”  Does not include a utility pole or an
electrical transmission tower.



   “EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.”
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   “EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL.”  Any hard-core material.



   “EXPOSITIONS, INDOOR.”  A public exhibition or show located
entirely within an enclosed building which may include conventions, trade
shows, auctions, flea markets, swap meets, or other types of exhibition. 
Expositions are typically a temporary use lasting no more than a weekend, a
holiday weekend, or a maximum of one week period time.



   “EXPOSITIONS, OUTDOOR.”  A public exhibition or show not located
entirely within an enclosed building which may include conventions, trade
shows, or other types of exhibition. Expositions are typically a temporary
use lasting no more than a weekend, a holiday weekend, or a maximum of one
week period time.



   “FACADE.”  An exterior wall or face of a building.



      “PRIMARY FACADE.”  The front exterior wall or face of a
building that contains its main entrance and/or fronts a street.



      “SECONDARY FACADE.”  The exterior wall or face of a building
that does not contain the its main entrance and/or does not front a street.



   “FACADE VARIATION.” Shifts in the plane of walls, setbacks,
reveals, overhangs, and details in order to create fluctuation in the
building's facade.



   “FAIR MARKET VALUE.”  The value of land, structures, or both as
determined by one or more professional real estate appraisers under the
provisions of this chapter.



   “FAIRGROUNDS.”  The Hamilton County (Indiana) Fairgrounds.



   “FAMILY.”  An individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, guardianship, or legal adoption living together as a single
housekeeping unit within a dwelling unit, plus no more than two domestic
servants.  A “FAMILY” may also consist of not more than three unrelated
persons.



   “FARM.”  See “AGRICULTURAL USES.”



   “FBFM.”  Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.



   “FEMA.”  Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   “FENCE.” A freestanding structure, made of metal, masonry,
composition, or wood, or any combination thereof, resting on or partially
buried in the ground, rising above ground level designed and constructed for
enclosure, confinement, protection, or screening.



      (1)   “DECORATIVE FENCE.” An open ornamental (metal) fence
which main purpose is to decorate or enhance the appearance of the existing
lot and principal structure and is not being used as a visual enclosure or
barrier.  Columns for this type of fencing may include masonry, stone,
wrought iron, brick, or a combination thereof.  Fences consisting of
chain-link mesh, welded or woven wire, barbed wire, or sheet metal fences,
and metal pipe materials are excluded from this definition.



      (2)   “OPEN FENCE.”  A fence that is a minimum of 60%
transparent as viewed from the outside of the fence. This type offence
includes but is not limited to chain-link or vinyl-link without slats,
split-rail or post and rail, picket, and wrought-iron.



      (3)   “SOLID/VISION BLOCK FENCE.”  A fence that is a
minimum of 50% opaque as viewed from the outside of the fence. This type of
fence includes but is not limited to wooden or vinyl shadowbox, stockade,
concave, dog-ear cut, convex, panel and/or masonry materials such a brick or
stone.



   “FESTIVALS.” A program of cultural performances, exhibitions, or
competitions which include fairs, carnivals, haunted houses, as well as other
seasonal celebrating activities such as holiday light shows. Festivals may
include amusement rides and games. Festivals are typically a temporary use
lasting no more than one week at a time or in some instances seasonal
festivals may last the duration of the season.



   “FILL.”  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.  The
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.  Also, the material
used to make a fill.



   “FILL.” (for flood purposes only) To build up the level of low
lying land with material from any source placed inside the Special Flood
Hazard Area (floodplain) causing a permanent increase in existing ground
elevations.



   “FINAL PLAT.”  See “PLAT, SECONDARY.”



   “FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.” Any business that the primary occupation
is concerned with federal or state regulated businesses such as banking,
savings and loans, loan companies, and investment companies.



   “FINISHED GOODS, ASSEMBLY AND PACKAGING.”  An establishment
engaged in the assembly and/or packaging of finished goods for the purpose of
wholesaling or distribution.



   “FIRM.”  Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   “FLAG.”  A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that
is or represents an official symbol of a nation, state, municipality, or the
legal entity that occupies the property.



   “FLOOD.”  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   “FLOOD, REGULATORY.”  The flood having a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and
procedure that is acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
The "Regulatory Flood" is also known by the term "Base Flood”, "One-percent
Annual Chance Flood", and "100-year Flood."



   “FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).”  An official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   “FLOOD FRINGE.” Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.



   “FLOOD HAZARD AREA.”  Any area subject to inundation by the
regulatory flood, including the floodplain, floodway, and floodway fringe
districts.  These areas are generally identified as such on the FIRM map(s).



   “FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).”  A map or maps prepared under
the National Flood Insurance Program by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), for the City of Noblesville and Hamilton County.



   “FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).” The official hydraulic and
hydrologic report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as
well as the FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.



   “FLOOD-PRONE AREA.”  Any land area acknowledged by a community as
being susceptible to inundation by water from any source.



   “FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE.” A form used to certify compliance for
non-residential structures as an alternative to elevating structure to or
above the flood protection grade. The form must be completed by a registered
engineer or architect.



   “FLOOD-PROOFING (DRY).”  A method of protecting a structure that
ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, is watertight to the flood-proofed design elevation with walls
that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural
components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   “FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG).”  The elevation of the regulatory
flood plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA.



   “FLOOD PROOFED BUILDING.”  A building designed to exclude
floodwaters from the interior of that building or otherwise preclude the
possibility of flood damage.  All such flood proofing shall be adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces
and other factors associated with the regulatory flood, as certified by a
registered professional engineer or an architect licensed to practice in the
state.



   “FLOOD WATERS.”  The water of any lake, stream, creek, drainage
ditch or watercourse that is above its banks and/or outside of the channel
and banks of said lake, stream, creek, drainage ditch or watercourse.



   “FLOODPLAIN.”  The channel proper and the areas adjoining any
wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regulatory flood. The “FLOODPLAIN” includes both the floodway and the
floodway fringe districts. The “FLOODPLAIN” is shown on the FIRM map(s).



   “FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.”  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing the natural resources in the floodplain, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.



   “FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.” This chapter, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of
police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term
describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   “FLOODWAY.”  The channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   “FLOODWAY FRINGE.”  Those portions of the Flood Hazard Areas lying
outside the floodway as shown on the FIRM map(s).



   “FLOOR AREA, GROSS.”  The sum, in square feet, of the floor areas
of all roofed portions of a building, as measured from the interior walls. 
It includes the total of all space on all floors of a building, except for
porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar when said basement or
cellar space is used for storage or other such incidental uses.  The
“GROSS FLOOR AREA” is generally applied in residential use.



   “FLOOR AREA (FOR THE PURPOSE OF PARKING CALCULATIONS).” The total
horizontal areas of the one or several floors of the building or portion
thereof devoted to the use, from the exterior face of exterior walls, but
excluding any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet.



   “FLOOR AREA, NET.”  The gross floor area of the specified use
excluding stairs, washrooms, elevator shafts, maintenance shafts and rooms,
display windows, fitting rooms, etc.  The “NET FLOOR AREA” is generally
applied in non-residential use.



   “FLOOR AREA RATIO.”  The net floor area of the building divided by
the area of the lot(s) on which such building is located.



   “FOOD PRODUCTION.”  An establishment engaged in manufacturing,
processing, and/or packaging of food products for wholesaling and
distribution.



   “FOUNDATION.”  The supporting member of a wall or structure.



   “FOUNDATION, PERMANENT.”  A structural support system for
transporting loads from a structure to the earth at a depth below the frost
line without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.



   “FREEBOARD.”  A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above
the base flood elevation (BFE), which is applied for the purposes of
floodplain management. It is used to compensate for the many unknown factors
that could contribute to flood heights greater than those calculated for the
base flood.



   “FRINGE.” Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.



   “FRONTAGE.”  Property connected directly with a street or
highway.  For the purpose of determining frontage, an alley is not
considered to be a street or highway.



   “FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.”  An establishment that cannot
be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or
seafood processing facilities. This does not include long term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   “FUNERAL HOMES.”  See “MORTUARY OR FUNERAL HOME.”



   “GALLERY/MUSEUM.”  A privately-operated facility or area for the
acquisition, preservation, study, exhibition or sale of works of artistic,
historic or scientific value.



   “GARAGE, COMMUNITY.”  A detached accessory structure, or
collection of detached accessory structures, used for the storing or parking
of passenger vehicles and/or recreational vehicles and/or boats of the
occupants of the premises. Such uses shall be permitted only inside
multi-family developments.



   “GARAGE, PRIVATE.”  A detached accessory structure, or a portion
of the principal building, used for the storing or parking of passenger
vehicles and/or recreational vehicles and/or boats of the occupants of the
premises.



   “GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL.”  A principal building or accessory
structure other than a private or storage garage, used for the parking or
temporary storage of passenger vehicles.



   “GARAGE SALE (RUMMAGE SALE, NEIGHBORHOOD, ESTATE AND OTHER SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES).”  The sale or offering for sale to the general public of
personal property on any portion of a lot in any zoning district, either
within or outside of a structure on a temporary basis. It includes a single
individual, a group of individuals, and/or a sale conducted by a religious,
school, or not-for-profit organizations.



   “GLASS.”  A hard, brittle transparent or translucent substance,
produced by melting a mixture of salica oxides; while molten it may be blown,
drawn, rolled, pressed, or cast into a variety of shapes.



   “GLASS BLOCK.”  Two sheets of plate glass with an air space
between them, formed into a sealed modular hollow block.



   “GOLF COURSE.”  An area of land laid out for golf with a series of
nine or 18 holes each including tee, fairway, and putting green and often one
or more natural or artificial hazards.  Naturalized areas are acceptable
alternatives to resurfaced and well-manicured courses.  This definition may
include a driving range accessory to the golf course, but a driving range as
a primary use shall not constitute a “GOLF COURSE.”



   “GOVERNMENT OFFICES.”  An office use owned or operated by a unit
of government, except for fire and police stations, post offices, libraries,
or other government-owned or operated uses elsewhere specified in the
Schedule of Uses.  This definition also shall not include offices which are
accessory to the primary use of a lot or structure, such as parks or utility
plants.



   “GRACE PERIOD.”  An extension of time granted for correction,
termination, or cessation of a violation of this Unified Development
Ordinance or related codes.



   “GRADE.”  The level of the ground.  Elevation.



   “GRADE, AVERAGE.”  The mean elevation of the land measured at the
front setback line between the side lot lines.



   “GRADE, FINISHED.”  The elevation of the finished surface of the
ground adjoining the building or structure after final grading and normal
settlement.



   “GRADING PLAN.”  A drawing(s) indicating the existing vertical
elevation of the ground prior to any excavation, filling, or other
construction activity and the resulting vertical elevation of the ground
surface after man-made alterations have been completed.



   “GRANDFATHER, GRANDFATHERED, GRANDFATHERING.”  See
“NONCONFORMING LOT, USE, STRUCTURE.”



   “GREEN BELT.”  A landscaped area required in the MO District which
measures 25 feet in depth and the width of the building plus 20 feet in
length, and is installed on all sides of the building.



   “GREEN SPACE.”  Areas designated for public gatherings or
recreation.



   “GROSS LEASABLE AREA.”  Gross floor area minus elevator shafts and
stairways, public restrooms, public lobbies, common mall areas, atriums and
courtyards provided solely for pedestrian access to the buildings from the
exterior; and permanently designated corridors.



   “GROSS PUBLIC FLOOR AREA.”  The total area of the building
accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture
theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas,
storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not
labeled “public”), areas used for cabaret or similar shows (including
stage areas), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.



   “GROUND FLOOR LEVEL.”  That level of a structure which is not more
than three feet above or three below grade as defined in this chapter.  It
is generally the first floor of living area.



   “GROUNDCOVER.”  A species of low-growing plant used for the
purpose of growing over an area of ground.



   “GROWTH HABIT.” The mode or rate of growth, general shape, mature
size, and branching structure of a plant including the changes that take
place seasonally during its life cycle.



   “GUYED TOWER.”  A telecommunications tower that is supported, in
whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors.



   “HABITAT PRESERVATION AREA.”  An area of a site in which the
entire natural habitat is unchanged and protected for the preservation of
trees, storm water infiltration, and/or wildlife.



   “HARD-CORE MATERIAL.”  Media characterized by sexual activity that
includes one or more of the following: erect male organ; contact of the mouth
of one person with the genitals of another; penetration with a finger or male
organ into any orifice in another person; open female labia; penetration of a
sex toy into an orifice; male ejaculation; or the aftermath of male
ejaculation.



   “HARDSCAPE.” The non-living elements used in landscape such as
decorative walls, ledges, fountains, sculptures, stone paths, etc.



   “HARDSHIP.” The exceptional burden that would result from failure
to grant a requested variance, which may be caused by atypical, unusual, and
peculiar factors or features of the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not enough to claim a hardship. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the
disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot qualify as a hardship. A
problem that may be resolved through other means without granting a variance,
even if the alternative is more expensive, does not constitute a hardship.
Hardship also does not result from an inability to use a parcel exactly as
intended by the property owner as long as there remains a viable use of the
property.



   “HEALTH FITNESS FACILITY.” A place that provides activity
components including strength training, muscular development, and endurance
training and nutritional guidance conducted by a personal trainer or as group
sessions.



   “HEALTH OFFICER.”  Any Officer of authority within the Hamilton
County Health Department and Indiana State Health Department.



   “HEDGE.”  a row or rows of closely planted shrubs, bushes, or
combination thereof creating a vegetative barrier.



   “HEIGHT, BUILDING.”  The vertical distance measured from the
average finished grade to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to
the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and
ridges for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.  (See also “HEIGHT, STRUCTURE.”)







 



   “HEIGHT, SIGN.”  The vertical distance measured from the highest
point of the sign to the finished grade of the ground immediately beneath the
sign. For those instances when the sign is constructed on an artificially
constructed earthen berm, the “SIGN HEIGHT” shall be measured from the
highest point of the sign to the base of the earthen berm.



   “HEIGHT, STRUCTURE.”  The vertical distance measured from the
average finished elevation to the highest point of the structure.



   “HELIPAD.”  A location which is occasionally set aside for
helicopters to land and take off which is intended to be an accessory use
that is temporary in nature.



   “HELIPORT.”  A place for helicopters to land and take off usually
constructed of an asphalt or concrete pad that is appropriately marked and
lighted.



   “HERBACEOUS PLANT.”  A plant with a non-woody stem, typically the
above-ground growth dies back in the winter.



   “HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.”  Highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   “HIGHWAY.”  See “STREET.”



   “HISTORIC STRUCTURE.” Any structures individually listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of
Historic Sites and Structures.



   “HOME OCCUPATION.”  A business use conducted completely within a
dwelling unit, carried on by any member of the immediate family residing on
the premises, clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes.



   “HOMOGENEITY.”  The uniformity of the overall structure, resulting
from the compatibility of components.



   “HOSPITAL.”  An institution licensed by the State Department of
Health and providing health services primarily for inpatient medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such as
laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facility,
provided such institution is operated by, or treatment is given under direct
supervision of a licensed physician.  Types of “HOSPITALS” include
general, mental, chronic disease and allied special hospitals such as
cardiac, contagious disease, maternity, orthopedic, cancer and the like.



   “HOTEL.”  A building in which lodging is offered with or without
meals principally to transient guests and that provides a common entrance,
lobby, halls, and stairways.  See also “MOTEL, BED AND BREAST
ESTABLISHMENT, AND BOARDING HOUSE.”



   “IDNR.” The Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



   “ILLUMINATION.” An artificial light source incorporated internally
or externally for the purposes of illuminating the sign.



   “ILLUMINATION, BARE-BULB.”  A light source which consists of light
bulbs with a 20 watt maximum wattage for each bulb.



   “ILLUMINATION, FLOOD.”  A light source which shines directly upon
the object which it is intended to illuminate.



   “ILLUMINATION, HALO-LIT.” Individually mounted opaque, internally
backlit letters that illuminate the wall or surface to which they are
attached.



   “ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT.”  A light source which does not directly
shine upon the object which it is illuminating.



   “ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL.”  A light source that is concealed or
contained within the object which it is intended to illuminate and becomes
visible in darkness through a translucent .



   “IMPACT.” The effect of one land use upon another as measured by
traffic or noise generation; site activity, hours of operation, site
lighting, vibration, smoke or odor emissions or similar factors.



   “IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.”  Any surface that does not allow water to be
absorbed or percolate into the ground.  Such surfaces include areas covered
by buildings, porches, patios, swimming pools, tennis courts and also
includes surfaces constructed of asphalt, concrete, gravel composite, brick,
stone, tile, or any other paving material used for parking, driveways, and
walkways.



   “IMPROVEMENT.”  Any alteration to the land or other physical
constructions associated with subdivision and building site development.



   “IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.”  A permit issued by the Director of
Planning and Development permitting a person, firm, or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or
demolish any building or structure as a part of a building permit and/or the
alteration of the condition of land, change of use or occupancy, or any
change that is subject to the provisions of this chapter not governed by
other requirements. A separate improvement location permit shall be issued
for grading, earthwork, pad elevations, and similar activities and is
required prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or in conjunction
with the approval of the Technical Advisory Committee members.  A
performance bond is required in the amount of 110% of the improvements and/or
disturbance of the land including grading, topsoil removal, excavation etc.
and shall be posted with the Department of Planning and Development prior to
the issuance of an improvement location permit for any land disturbance
activities associated with multi-family, commercial, industrial, and/or
institutional uses.



   “IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC.”  Any drainage ditch, roadway, sidewalk,
tree, lawn, off-street parking area, main, or other facility for which the
local or state government may ultimately assume the responsibility for
maintenance and/or operation, or which may affect an improvement for which
local or state government responsibility is established.  All such
improvements shall be properly bonded.  See also “INFRASTRUCTURE.”



   “IMPROVEMENT, SUBSTANTIAL.”  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have
incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not include those improvements of structures to correct
existing violations of state or local health, safety, sanitary code
requirements or an alteration of a historic structure, provided said
alteration shall not preclude the structures continued designation as a
historic structure.



   “IMPROVEMENT, TEMPORARY.”  Improvements built and maintained by a
subdivider during construction of the subdivision and which may become
permanent prior to release of the performance bond.



   “IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.”  A certificate issued by the
Director of Planning and Development permitting a person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve,
remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure within the locality,
or cause the same to be done.



   “INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).”  The cost to repair a
substantially damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that
is required to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with
the local flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures
are elevation, relocation, demolition, or any combination thereof. All
renewal and new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or
after June 1, 1997 will include ICC coverage.



   “INDIVIDUAL LETTERS.” May include channel letters/figures,
sandblasted letters/figures, wood-carved letters/figures or other types as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee.



   “INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.”  A septic tank, seepage tile,
sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device
designed for use in a limited area.



   “INDOT.”  The Indiana Department of Transportation.



   “INDUSTRIAL, EXTRACTIVE.”  Any mining, quarrying, excavating,
processing, storing, separating, or cleaning, of any mineral natural resource.



   “INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY.”  Manufacturing, processing, assembly,
storing, testing, and similar industrial uses which are generally major
operations and extensive in character; require large sites, open storage and
service areas, extensive services and facilities, ready access to regional
transportation; and normally generate some nuisances such as smoke, noise,
vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution.



   “INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT.”  Manufacturing or other industrial uses which
are usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet, and free of
objectionable or hazardous elements such as smoke, noise, odor, or dust;
operating and storing within enclosed structures; and generating little
industrial traffic and no nuisances.



   “INFRASTRUCTURE.”  The fixed public works and facilities necessary
in a community, such as sewers, water systems, and streets.



   “INSTITUTIONAL.”  Public and quasi-public land uses which enhance
the community’s quality of life, such as schools, churches, libraries, or
hospitals, but not including such uses as utility plants or garages.



   “INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT.” A development containing three or more
stores, service establishments, offices or other permitted uses planned,
organized, and managed to function as a unified whole and featuring all or
some of the following features in common: (1) driveways, (2) parking, (3)
signage plan, (4) landscaping plan, and/or platted as a subdivision that may
include outlots for lease or for sale.



   “INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES.” An alien species that is not native to
the ecosystem under consideration and whose introduction does or is likely to
cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human, animal, or plant
health.



   “ITEM OF INFORMATION.”  A word, an initial, a logo, an
abbreviation, a number, a symbol, or a geometric shape.



   “JUNK YARD/SALVAGE YARD.” Any place at which person property is or
may be salvaged for reuse, resale, reduction or similar disposition and is
owned, possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or sorted, including but
not limited to used or salvaged base metal or metals and their compounds or
combinations; used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber,
lumber, millwork, brick, and other similar properties, except animal matter
and used motor vehicles or the equipment which is used, owned or possessed
for the purpose of wrecking of salvaging parts therefrom.



   “JURISDICTION.”  Jurisdiction of local government means all land
within its boundaries and any land outside its boundaries over which it is
authorized to exercise powers under state planning legislation.



   “KENNEL.”  Any premises where more than three dogs and/or cats
over four months of age are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, and/or
sold, except for those which are primarily kept indoors at a single- family
residence as domestic pets.



   “KENNEL, COMMERCIAL.” A place primarily for the keeping of three 
or more dogs, cats, or other small animals of at least four months of age
that are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, and/or sold.



   “KENNEL, PRIVATE.” A place for keeping three or less dogs, cats, or
other small animals for personal use and enjoyment which are primarily kept
indoors at a residence as domestic pets and is subordinate to the primary use.



   “LABORATORY.”  A place equipped for experimental study in a
science or for testing and analysis, including chemical labs, dental-medical
labs, and labs performing mechanical. electrical, physical or environmental
tests.



   “LAMP.” The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.



   “LAND.”  The earth, water, and air above, below, or on the
surface, including any improvements or structures customarily regarded as
land.



   “LAND USE DESIGNATION.”  The classification of land according to
the general use allowed therein, under which certain regulations are imposed
and which appears in one or more locations on the City of Noblesville's
Comprehensive Master Plan Land Use Map.



   “LAND USE MAP.” The official City of Noblesville's map that is a
part of the Comprehensive Master Plan which generalizes boundaries of the
land use designations.



   “LANDSCAPE AREA.”  Areas on or adjacent to a lot or right-of-way
or the perimeter of a development that are identified for application of
landscaping regulations. “LANDSCAPE AREAS” include street tree plantings,
parking lots including islands and perimeter, foundation planting areas,
building base landscaping areas, peripheral buffer yard areas, LID Stormwater
BMPs, and retention/detention pond areas.



   “LANDSCAPE BUFFER YARD.”  An area adjacent to the front, side, and
rear property lines of a development, measured perpendicularly from and
parallel to adjacent property lines and/or right-of-way lines, intended to
provide attractive spaces to reduce the impacts of proposed uses on adjacent
properties and rights-of-way, or to maintain natural features, or as required
by this chapter. Buffers help to maintain existing trees and natural
vegetation; to block or reduce noise, glare, or other emissions; and to
maintain privacy. “LANDSCAPE BUFFER YARDS” are in addition to and
separate from front, side, and rear yard setbacks and are not contained
within any lots. This area is common area to be maintained by the property
owners, homeowners association, developer(s) and/or another entity approved
by the Director of Planning and Development.



   “LANDSCAPE ISLAND.”  A landscape area defined by a curb or edge of
pavement and surrounded on all sides by pavement. To function as a LID
Stormwater BMP, the landscape island shall be at a lower grade than the
surrounding pavement and strategic breaks in the curbing shall allow drainage
from pavement to enter into the recessed landscaping area.



   “LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.”  Trees, shrubs, grasses, plants, decorative
fences, walls, berms, irrigation systems, flower beds, ground cover, and
edging. Xeriscaping landscape materials are encouraged to function as LID
Stormwater BMPs. Artificial trees, shrubs, grasses, plants, flowers, ground
cover are not considered “LANDSCAPE MATERIAL.”



   “LANDSCAPE PENINSULA.”  A landscaped area defined by a curb or
edge of pavement and surrounded by paving on three sides. To function as a
LID stormwater BMP, the landscape peninsula shall be at a lower grade than
the surrounding pavement and strategic breaks in the curbing shall allow
drainage from pavement to enter into recessed landscape area.



   “LANDSCAPE PLAN.” A scaled drawing, prepared by a licensed
landscape architect or a landscape contractor, showing all plant materials
including locations, sizes, species (botanical and common names) at the time
of planting, signed by one of the above including a license number for the
landscape architect.  The mature tree canopy size shall be included.



   “LANDSCAPE, STRUCTURE (HARD SCAPE).”  Decorative fences, walls,
retaining walls, decorative rocks, pavers, fountains, or like materials.



   “LANDSCAPING.”  The improvements of an area with trees, shrubs,
grasses and other vegetation and/or ornamental objects. Landscaping may
include flowerbeds, berms, fountains, depressions for LID Stormwater BMPs,
and other similar and man-made objects designed and arranged to create an
aesthetically pleasing effect.



   “LATTICE TOWER.”  A guyed or self-supporting three or four sided,
open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment.



   “LAUNDRIES/DRY CLEANERS WITH ON-SITE PLANT.”  A commercial
laundering or dry cleaning establishment that contains the cleaning
facilities on-site.



   “LETTER OF CREDIT.”  An irrevocable letter of credit, issued by a
bank on behalf of a developer, subdivider, owner, or their designated
representative, providing a cash surety to a governmental body, guaranteeing
the completion of physical improvements according to the approved plans and
specifications, within a prescribed time.



   “LETTER OF FINAL DETERMINATION (LFD).” A letter issued by FEMA
during the mapping update process which establishes final elevations and
provides the new flood map and flood study to the community. The LFD
initiates the six-month adoption period. The community must adopt or amend
its floodplain management regulations during this six-month period unless the
community has previously incorporated an automatic adoption clause.



   “LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA).”  An amendment to the currently
effective FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).  A “LOMA” is only issued by FEMA.



   “LETTER OF MAP CHANGE.” A general term used to refer to the several
types of revisions and amendments to FEMA maps that can be accomplished by
letter. They include Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA), Letter of Map Revision
(LOMR), and Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).



   “LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).” An official revision to the
currently effective FEMA map.  It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations, and elevations.



   “LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F).”  An official
revision by letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA's
determination concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on
fill above the BFE and excluded from the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).



   “LEVEL OF SERVICE.” A qualitative measure describing operational
conditions within a traffic stream and the perception thereof by road users.
Level of Service standards may be evaluated in terms such as speed and
travel, time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort,
convenience, geographic accessibility, and safety. The highway capacity
manual defines six levels of service for each type of facility for which
analysis procedures are available. They are given letter designations from
‘A’ to ‘F’, with level of service ‘A’ representing the best
operating conditions and level of service ‘F’ the worst operating
conditions, as calculated by a methodology endorsed by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE).



   “LIBRARY.”  A permanent building or portion of a building whose
primary use is the temporary loan of books and other reading material to the
public.  Such uses may also include the loan of audio or video tapes, the
use of computer hardware and software, and meeting rooms.



   “LIGHT FIXTURE.”  The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps.



   “LIGHT SOURCE.”  Source from which light emanates either directly
from a bulb or indirectly from a reflective enclosure, lens, or diffuser.
Light level meters are used to measure such intensities and are calibrated in
foot-candles or Lux.



   “LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO.”  An establishment or business that
provides the services of live models modeling lingerie to individuals,
couples, or small groups in a room smaller than 600 square feet either as a
temporary or primary use.



   “LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET.”  Space logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking
spaces are filled. 



      (1)   Required off-street loading space is not to be included
as off-street parking space in computation of required off- street parking
space. 



      (2)   All off-street loading spaces shall be located totally
outside of any street or alley right-of-way.



   “LOGO.” The official emblem or insignia of an organization,
corporation, or institution.



   “LONG TERM CARE FACILITIES.”  See “CONVALESCENT, NURSING OR
RESTHOME.”



   “LOT.”  A parcel of land located within a single block and may be
either a lot of record or a zoning lot.







 



   “LOT, CORNER.”  A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees. 
A lot abutting a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if
tangent projections of the front lot lines drawn perpendicular at the side
lot lines meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees in front of the
lot.



   “LOT, FLAG.”  Any lot that does not meet the minimum stret
frontage requirements and that continues the narrow width from the frontage
for some distance and becomes wider and takes shape as a rectangle or similar
shape of which said lot resembles a hanging flag from a flag pole.



   “LOT, INFILL.”  A lot or parcel bordered on at least two sides by
another established development.



   “LOT, INTERIOR.”  A lot with only one frontage on a street.



   “LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE.”  A lot on which frontage is at right
angles to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also
be a corner lot.



   “LOT, THROUGH.”  A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as
double frontage lots.



   “LOT, ZONING.”  A single tract of land located within a single
block which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by
its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit, under a single ownership or control.  A zoning lot may not coincide
with a lot of record.



   “LOT AREA.”  The area of any lot exclusive of street, highway,
alley, road, or other rights-of-way, the area of the horizontal plane of the
lot bounded by the vertical plans of the front, side, and rear lot lines. 
Easements are considered to be part of the lot area.



   “LOT COVERAGE.”  The ratio of the enclosed ground floor area of
all buildings on a lot to the total area of the lot.



   “LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM.” The percentage of buildable lot that can
be covered with impervious surface including but not limited to principal
buildings and accessory structures, parking, driveways, and walkways.



   “LOT DEPTH.”  The distance between the mid-points of straight
lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the
rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.



   “LOT FRONTAGE.”  The front of a lot shall be construed to be the
portion nearest the street.  For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to
streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as
indicated under “YARDS” in this section.



   “LOT LINE, REAR.”  The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a
lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line between
the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet
long, lying farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the lot has
two front yards (those fronting on a street) and two side yards.



   “LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.”  A division made for the purpose of
adjusting a boundary line(s), which does not create any additional lot; cause
any lot to contain insufficient area, dimensions or building setbacks, or
reduce the overall area in a subdivision plat devoted to open space and which
is not inconsistent with any restrictions or conditions of approval for the
recorded plat, and does not have a common boundary and does not circumvent
the subdivision procedures as set forth in this chapter.



   “LOT WIDTH.”  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at the building setback line.



   “LOT LINE, FRONT.”  On an interior lot, the line separating the
lot from the street.  On a corner or through lot, the line separating the
lot from either street.



   “LOT LINE, REAR.”  The lot line opposite the front lot line.  On
a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line
between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten
feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line.  On a corner lot, the
rear lot line shall be opposite the side of the house considered to be the
front.



   “LOT LINE, SIDE.”  Any lot line other than a front lot line or
rear lot line.



   “LOT OF RECORD.”  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat
of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder; or a lot or
a parcel described by metes and bounds, legally defined and duly recorded in
the office of the County Recorder prior to January, 1974.



   “LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID).”  A land planning and engineering
design approach with a goal of replicating the pre-development hydrologic
regime of urban and developing watersheds. The primary goal of LID is to
mimic a site's predevelopment hydrology by reducing the impervious surface,
infiltrating, filtering, storing, evaporating, and detaining runoff close to
its source.



   “LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE.”  Lowest elevation, after construction, of
the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support, or basement entryway immediately
next to the structure.



   “LOWEST FLOOR.”  The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the building structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
the basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   the walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood water by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) in a minimum of two exterior walls; if a structure has
more than one enclosed area, each shall have openings on exterior walls;



         (b)   the total net area of all openings shall be at
least one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area; the bottom
of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the exterior
grade or the interior grade immediately beneath each opening, whichever is
higher; and



         (c)   such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   “LUMEN.”  A unit used to measure the amount of light emitted by
lamps.



   “LUMINAIRE.” The complete lighting system including the lamp and
fixture.



   “LUX.”  Unit of luminance in the International System of Units
(SI) equal to one lumen per square meter.



   “MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT REPAIR.”  An establishment providing
repair for heavy machinery or equipment, such as farm or construction
equipment.



   “MAJOR CHANGE (as applies to Planned Developments).”  An amendment
which alters the concept or intent of the Planned Development or changes in
the final governing agreements, provisions, waivers, stipulations,
conditions, or covenants where such changes conflict with the approved
preliminary development plan including: (1) increases in density
(residential); (2) a 10% or greater increase in the quantity of approved
diverse housing types; (3) modifications to the proportion or allocation of
land uses; (4) lessening of aesthetic treatments of structures, buildings,
signs, and/or landscaping; (5) modifications in the functional use of open
space; (6) modifications to the street system, access to the development,
and/or off-street parking areas affecting traffic patterns, alignment, or
intensity greater than 10% of the planned development area; (7) modifications
to utilities including water, electricity, gas, drainage, and other
infrastructure greater than 10% of the planned development area; (8)
significant changes to the drainage management systems including but not
limited to BMP’S and legal drains; and/or any other modification that is
not specifically listed and is determined significant by the Director of
Planning and Development.



   “MANUFACTURED HOME.”  A dwelling unit, designed and built in a
factory, which bears a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with
the federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law of
1974 (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.) and which is constructed after January 1, 1981,
and which exceeds 950 square feet of occupied space.  The term
“MANUFACTURED HOME” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   “MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.” A parcel or collection of contiguous
parcels that have been allocated into sites or lots for installation of
manufactured homes. The sites or lots may be offered for rent or sale.



   “MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE.” 
Title IV of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. 5401
et. seq.), as amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which
include HUD-approved information supplied by the home manufacturer, and
regulations and interpretations of the code by the Indiana Administrative
Building Council.



   “MANUFACTURING, GENERAL.”  An establishment engaged in the
mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of
products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics.
resins, or liquors.



   “MANUFACTURING, LIGHT.”  Clean, low intensity, (non-polluting and
no nuisance) manufacturing uses.



   “MAP AMENDMENT.” (for flood purposes only)  Change of the
effective NFIP map that results in the exclusion from the Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA) of an individual structure or a legally described parcel
of land that has been inadvertently included in the Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA) (i.e. no alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the
first NFiP map that showed the structure or parcel to be within the Special
Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)).



   “MARKER (SURVEY).”  A stake, pipe, rod, nail or any other object
that serves to identify something and that is not intended to be a permanent
point for record purposes such as on a lot or within a subdivision.



   “MARKET VALUE.”  The building value, excluding the land, as agreed
upon by a willing buyer and seller, as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. Market value can be established by an independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of the building
(actual cash value), or adjusted assessed values.



   “MARINA.”  Any land, building, structure, or premises used for the
launching, docking, and storage of marine craft.



   “MARINE CRAFT SALES, REPAIR, AND SERVICE.”  Any land, building,
structure, or premises used for the sale, repair, and/or service of new or
used marine craft.



   “MASONRY.”  Includes all brick products, all stone products, and
all concrete block units including decorative and customized blocks.



   “MASSAGE STUDIO.”  Any place where, for any form of consideration
or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric
or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human
body, which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual
activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or
service related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The
definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice of
massage in or by any licensed hospital; nor by a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath; nor by any nurse or technician working under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath; nor
by trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or
athletic team or school athletic program; nor by any person or entity that
operates in compliance with the Noblesville City Code of Ordinances Title XI,
Chapter 113.



   “MASTER PLAN.”  See “COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.”



   “MEDIA.”  Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing,
photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or
pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of
anything that is or may be used as a means of communication.  “MEDIA”
includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers,
magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-roms, other magnetic media,
and undeveloped pictures.



   “MEDIA SHOP.”  A general term, identifying a category of business
that may include sexually oriented material but that is not subject to the
special provisions applicable to adult media shops.  In that context,
“MEDIA SHOP” means a retail outlet offering media for sale or rent, for
consumption off the premises if any outlet meeting the definition of adult
media shop shall be treated as an adult media outlet.  “MEDIA SHOPS” may
contain adult media, which constitutes less than 10% of the stock in trade
and occupies less than 10% of the floor area.



   “MEDICAL OFFICES.”  See “OFFICE, MEDICAL.”



   “MEETING OR PARTY HALL.” A building, structure, or space designed
for public assembly providing an area for open discussion or a particular
service and containing at least one room having an area equivalent to 400
square feet.



   “METES AND BOUNDS.”  A description of land prepared by a
state-registered land surveyor providing measured distances and courses from
known or established points on the surface of the earth.



   “MICROBREWERY.” A limited-production facility, typically producing
specialty beers and ales and often selling its products only locally or on
the premises.



   “MINERAL/SAND/GRAVEL EXTRACTION.”  The excavation of, or mining
of, sand, gravel, rock and other earth materials, and/or minerals, and the
processing, storage, stockpiling, distribution and sale thereof.



   “MINOR CHANGE (as applies to Planned Developments).”  An amendment
that does not alter the intent, objectives, conditions, stipulations,
waivers, or findings of the approved plan and does not significantly differ
from the plan/ordinance adopted.  Minor amendments may include (1)
alteration of plant materials or type; (2) locations and/or specifications of
lighting; (3) additions of emergency generators that have limited impact both
visually and acoustically to the surrounding properties; (4) addition of
electric vehicle charging stations or bike-share facilities; (5)
modifications to the appearance of entrance/subdivisions signs; (6) changes
to lot arrangement but not lot size; (7) reduction of parking spaces by less
than 5% of what is required by the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO)
provided it does not increase intensity or fall below the minimum parking
requirements of the UDO; (8) minor modifications to drainage management
structures; (9) modifications in access to the development site where such
change is a reduction in intensity in the traffic patterns of the roadway;
(10) addition of or modifications to fencing; and/or (11) modification of
trails/sidewalks but not the elimination of such and any modification that is
determined by the Director of Planning and Development meeting this
definition.



   “MITIGATION.” Sustained action taken to reduce or eliminate
long-term risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The
purpose of mitigation is twofold: to protect people and structures, and to
minimize the cost of disaster response and recovery.



   “MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE.”  Any motorized vehicle that includes a
self-contained or attached trailer kitchen in which food is prepared,
processed, or stored and used to sell and dispense food to the consumer that
holds all requisite health department, business, and resale licensures to
sell food and beverages. Mobile units must be mobile at all times during
operation.



   “MOBILE HOME.”  Any factory fabricated portable structure,
residential or non-residential, designed to be towed or transported on its
own chassis for placement on a temporary or permanent foundation, or on its
own structure or elements thereof, without the aid of house moving equipment
or other specialized but separate supporting apparatus, and which is not a
“manufactured home” as defined by this chapter. “MOBILE HOME” shall
include double-wide mobile homes of two such units designed to be used in
combination at a building site.  This definition is not intended to apply to
other modular housing or prefabricated housing panels, trusses, or other
sub-elements, nor any other dwelling unit which is defined as a
“manufactured home” by this chapter.



   “MOBILE HOME PARK.”  A tract of land under single, joint or common
ownership designed in such a manner as to provide sites for mobile homes in a
residential environment.



   “MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION.”  A tract of land divided into
individual lots for the purpose of setting mobile homes on lots generally
owned by the occupant of the mobile home and arranged in such a manner as to
provide a residential community environment.



   “MOBILE HOME TIE-DOWNS.”  Sufficient anchorage to resist
floatation, collapse or lateral movement of any mobile home. At a minimum,
such anchorage shall consist of one over-the-top tie provided at each of the
four corners of the mobile home with two additional ties per side at
intermediate locations, except mobile homes less than 50 feet long require
only one additional tie per side; and two frame ties provided at each corner
of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except
mobile homes less than 50 feet long require only four additional ties per
side.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.  Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly
anchored.



   “MODEL HOME.”  A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes
which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision
or development.



   “MONOPOLE.”  A telecommunication tower consisting of a single-pole
constructed without guy wires and ground anchors.



   “MONUMENT.”  Any permanent marker either of stone, concrete,
galvanized iron pipe, or iron or steel rods, used to identify the boundary
lines of any tract, parcel, lot, or street lines.



   “MORTUARY OR FUNERAL HOME.”  An establishment with facilities for
the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the
body and for funerals.  See also “CEMETERY.”



   “MOTEL.”  A building in which lodging is offered with or without
meals principally to transient guests and that provides each unit with
individual entrances from the outdoors. See also “HOTEL,” “BED AND
BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT,” and “BOARDING HOUSE.”



   “MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.”  Any motor vehicle used or designed
for: (a) use in pulling, towing, hauling, transporting or (b) as a temporary
or permanent base, platform, or support for equipment, machinery, materials,
or other goods (including but not limited to stake body trucks, dump trucks,
trucks or trailers having dual rear wheels or more than two axles,
semi-trailer tractors, semi-trailers and trailers having dual rear wheels or
more than one axle or having an overall length of more than 12 feet; or (c)
passenger vehicles marked by signage, logos or commercial messages. This
definition does not apply to motor vehicles which serve as a source of
transportation for an individual residing at the premises where the vehicle
is stored or parked on a regular basis and is not used in any commercial
activity or vehicles and trailers used for the transport of livestock or
goods associated with and located upon the premises of a property used for
farming or grazing.



   “MOUND.”  See “BERM.”



   “MURAL, ART.” Original works (i) created by an individual or team
that are designed with the intent of producing a creative or aesthetic
outcome, (ii) are not used for advertising a business, product, service, or
commercial activity, and (iii) is painted, drawn, or similarly applied on the
exterior of a structure for artistic expression. The only lettered or numeric
messaging includes the artist's name and date of installation.



   “NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP).”  The federal program
that makes flood insurance available to owners of property within
participating communities nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the
Federal Government and the private insurance industry.



   “NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1923 (NGVD).”  As corrected
in 1929 it is the vertical control used as a reference for establishing
varying elevations within a floodplain.



   “NATIVE PRAIRIE GRASSES.”  A mixture of perennial grasses that
historically populated the prairie ecosystem of the United States that
contain no trees.  Prairie grasses may vary by region.



   “NATURAL AREAS.”  Any critical area such as a floodplain,
wetlands, high tree concentrations, critical habitats that contain rare,
threatened, or endangered species, wooded slopes, wooded or partially wooded
stream, woodlands, and riparian areas.



   “NATURAL CONDITION.”  The condition that arises from, or is found
in nature unmodified by human intervention.



   “NATURAL DRAINAGE.”  Drainage channels, routes, and ways formed
over time in the surface topography of the earth prior to any modifications
or improvements made by unnatural causes and/or human intervention.



   “NATURAL FEATURES.”  The physical characteristics of a property or
area that are not man-made, such as soil types, geology, slopes, vegetation,
and drainage patterns.



   “NAVD.”  North American Vertical Datum.



   “NEIGHBORHOOD.” An area with distinctive characteristics that
distinguish it from others including economic bases, housing types, schools,
development styles or patterns, or boundaries defined by distinct physical
barriers such as railroads, arterial streets, rivers or major water bodies
and/or similar characteristics and boundaries that include both geographic
and social components.



   “NEIGHBORHOOD DELIVERY CENTERS (POSTAL KIOSKS).”  A freestanding,
sheltered or enclosed installation containing a large number of individually
locked, wall-mounted mailboxes and compartments.



   “NEW CONSTRUCTION.”  Structures for which the “START OF
CONSTRUCTION” commences on or after the effective date of this chapter.



   “NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.” A manufactured home park for which
the construction of facilities for servicing the sites on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community's first floodplain ordinance.



   “NEWSPAPER AND JOB PRINTING.”  Art establishment providing
printing, blueprinting, photocopying, engraving. binding, or other related
services.



   “NFIP.”  National Flood Insurance Program.



   “NOBLESVILLE PARKS.”  All public land owned by the City of
Noblesville and under the jurisdiction of the Noblesville Parks Board.



   “NOISE SENSITIVE PURPOSE.”  The use of a building or structure as
a residence, school, church, child care facility, medical facility,
retirement home, or nursing home.



   “NON-BOUNDARY RIVER FLOODWAY.” The floodway of any river or stream
that is not the part of the Ohio River that forms the boundary between
Kentucky and Indiana.



   “NON-CONFORMING LOT, USE OR STRUCTURE.”  Any lot, use, or
structure legally existing as of the effective date of this chapter, that is
not in compliance with this chapter or any subsequent amendments.



   “NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION.”  Pollution affecting a water body
from widely spread sources.  Such sources range from runoff from
agricultural areas draining into a river.  “NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION”
may also include urban runoff, such as contaminated storm water washed off of
parking lots, roads and highways, and lawns (often containing fertilizers and
pesticides).



   “NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD).”  Adopted in 1993
and is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   “NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.”  A legal document announcing the
opportunity for the public to present their views to an official
representative, board, and/or commission of a public agency concerning an
official action pending before the agency.



   “NUDE MODEL STUDIO.”  Any place where a person, who regularly
appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas for money
or any form of consideration and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.



   “NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS, ACCESSORY.”  Land, buildings, or
structures for the use of offering live trees, shrubs, or plants for retail
sale on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use, building, and/or structure.



   “NURSERY, PLANT MATERIALS, PRIMARY.”  Land, buildings, structures,
or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live
trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including
products used for gardening and landscaping.



   “NURSING HOME.”  See “CONVALESCENT, NURSING, OR REST HOME.”



   “OBSTRUCTION.” (for flood purposes only) Includes, but is not
limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment,
projection, excavation, canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building,
wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other
material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may
alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of
water; or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris
carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   “OCCUPANCY.”  The portion of a building or premises owned, leased,
rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use.



   “OFFICE.”  A use that provides professional, administrative, or
business related services.  This definition also includes welfare and
charitable services.  Production, distribution, or the retail or wholesale
of goods are not included.



   “OFFICE, MEDICAL.”  An establishment for the care, diagnosis, and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons, and those who are in
need of medical and surgical attention, but which building does not provide
board, room or regular hospital care and services.  This definition shall
include clinics as well as the offices of medical doctors, physicians,
dentists, or other health care practitioners.



   “OFF-SITE OR OFF-PREMISES (REGARDING SUBDIVISION APPROVAL).”  Any
premises or structure not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant.



   “OFF-SITE OR OFF-PREMISES (REGARDING SIGNS).”  Any sign not
located on the same lot or parcel as the use it is serving.



   “OFF-STREET PARKING AREA.”  See “PARKING, OFF-STREET.”



   “ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA.”  The mandatory
statewide building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building
Council for one and two family residential dwellings.



   “ONE PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD.”  The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter "A" is subject to the 1% chance flood. See “REGULATORY
FLOOD”.



   “ON-SITE CONSULTATION.”  A representative of the Planning
Department meeting at a location that is off-site from the Offices of
Planning and Development to discuss an item(s) relating tor a permit or
planning process as requested by the contractor, owner, and/or developer.



   “OPEN SPACE.”  An area of land not covered by buildings, parking
areas/structures, structures for habitation, or accessory uses. “OPEN
SPACE” does not include street rights-of-way, platted lots, private yards,
patio areas or land scheduled for future development.



      (1)   “ENVIRONMENTAL OPEN SPACE.”  An area which contains
natural systems (including man-made) that function to preserve the natural
integrity of the area including but not limited to woodlands, bio-swales,
restored prairies, wetlands, and naturalized detention/ retention ponds.



      (2)   “RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE.”  An area that has been
designed and designated for active use including but not limited to trails,
nature viewing areas, plazas, ball fields or similar activity fields,
accessible bodies of water for active use, and playgrounds.



   “OPEN-FACE CHANNEL LETTERS.” Three-dimensional individually cut
letters or figures, illuminated, having clear plastic faces allowing for raw
neon or like materials to be seen and affixed to a structure. This type of
channel letter is prohibited.



   “ORDINANCE.”  Any legislative action, however denominated, of a
local government which has the force of law, including the amendment or
repeal of any ordinance.



   “OSHA.”  The United States Occupational Safety & Health
Administration.



   “OUTDOOR AMUSEMENTS.”  See “AMUSEMENTS, OUTDOOR.”



   “OUTDOOR SALE AND/OR DISPLAY.”  The placement and availability for
purchase of products outside of a building or structure, including but not
limited to garden supplies, clothing, toys, play equipment, agricultural
products, building materials, landscape materials and bagged salt.



   “OUTDOOR STORAGE.”  The keeping of materials, merchandise, stock,
supplies, machines, equipment, or manufacturing materials of any nature that
are not kept in a structure, regardless of how long such materials are kept
on the premises.



   “OVERHANG.”  The horizontal distance that the roof projects beyond
the story immediately below.



   “OVERLAY DISTRICT.” An area that is superimposed upon another
district which supersedes, modifies, or supplements the underlying district
regulations.



   “OWNER.”  Any person, firms, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient
proprietary interest in the land under these regulations.



   “PACKAGE SEWERAGE SYSTEM.”  A sewerage system including collection
and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new
subdivision or development in an outlying or generally rural area.



   “PACKAGING OF FINISHED GOODS.”  A facility that packages supplies
and products that are manufactured off site.



   “PARAPET.”  A low solid protective wall along the edge of a roof
or balcony.



   “PARK.”  A non-commercial lot or parcel designed and set aside
exclusively for diversion, recreation, or amusement; characterized by large
amounts of open space; and which is not operated for a profit.  While the
majority of park activities take place out of doors, accessory buildings and
structures such as swimming pools, tennis courts, picnic shelters, or
playground equipment may also be permitted.  See also “SPORTS AND
RECREATION PARK” and “AMUSEMENT, OUTDOOR.”



   “PARKING GARAGE.”  A structure or portion thereof composed of one
or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor
vehicles.



   “PARKING LOT, PUBLIC.”  An un-enclosed area for off-street parking
which is owned and/or operated by the city, county, or other unit of
government; or which is operated for the general public and not for patrons
of a particular use.



   “PARKING, OFF-STREET.”  An area appropriate in size to accommodate
the required parking for the applicable land use(s), together with driveways
and maneuvering room; located totally out of public right-of-way; and set
back from such right-of-way as required within this chapter.



   “PARKING, REQUIRED.”  The number of parking spaces required for a
particular use or uses as required within this chapter.



   “PARKING SPACE.”  An enclosed or un-enclosed surfaced area
permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one passenger motor vehicle
and appropriately part of a street or connected with a street or alley by a
surfaced driveway affording adequate ingress and egress.



   “PARTIAL STREET.”  See “STREET, PARTIAL.”



   “PARTICULATE MATTER.”  Finely divided liquid or solid materials
that are discharged and carried along in the air. This shall not include
water droplets commonly called steam.



   “PARTY WALL.”  A wall starting from the foundation and extending
continuously through all stories to or above the roof which separates one
building unit from another and is in joint use by each building unit.



   “PATIO.”  An open landing that adjoins a dwelling, is often paved,
and is adapted to outdoor uses.



   “PEDIMENT.”  A crowning material used over doors and windows.



   “PENAL OR CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.” The use of land for the
confinement or safe custody of persons as a result of a legal process and may
include attendance centers established for persons sentenced to serve periods
of community service.



   “PERENNIAL.”  A plant that has a life-cycle lasting more than two
years and survives during the winter by an underground root system.



   “PERFORMANCE BOND OR SURETY BOND.”  An amount of money or other
negotiable security paid by the subdivider, developer, property owner or his
or her surety to the city that guarantees that the individual will perform
all actions as required by the city regarding approved plans or in other
situations as stated in the Unified Development Ordinance or by the Director
of Planning and Development within a specified time; which provides that if
the subdivider, developer, property owner or his or her surety defaults and
fails to comply with the provisions of his or her approvals, the subdivider,
developer, property owner, or his or her surety shall pay damages up to the
limit of the bond or the surety will itself complete the requirements of
approval.



   “PERMANENT FOUNDATION.”  A structural system for transporting
loads from a structure to the earth at a depth below the established frost
line without exceeding the safe bearing capacity of the supporting soil.



   “PERMEABLE PAVERS.”  Any kind of pavement constructed of material
that allows water to penetrate and drain into underlying soils.



   “PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES.”  Any premises that requires
and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.



   “PERMITTED USE.”  An authorized use within a zoning district.



   “PERSONAL CARE SERVICES.” Any enterprise conducted for gain which
primarily is engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed
services of a personal nature. Typical uses include shoe repair, barber and
beauty shops, tailor shops, nail shops, individual person trainer, and
similar activities.



   “PERSONAL SERVICES.”  Any enterprise conducted for gain which
primarily offers services to the general public as shoe repair, watch repair,
barber shops, beauty parlors, and similar activities.



   “PETITIONER.”  The property owner or a person legally empowered,
in writing by the property owner, to act on the property owner’s behalf and
who thereby has the property owner’s authority to make representations and
decisions before the city officials, regarding the use and/or development of
the subject real estate.



   “PETITIONER’S REPRESENTATIVE.”  A person legally empowered, in
writing by the property owner, to act on the petitioner’s behalf and who
thereby has the petitioner’s authority to make representations and
decisions before the city officials, regarding the use and/or development of
the subject real estate.



   “PETROCHEMICAL FACILITIES.”  An establishment engaged in the
processing of chemicals derived from petroleum or natural gas.



   “PHYSICAL MAP REVISION.” (for flood purposes only) An official
republication of a community's FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual
chance) flood elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory
floodways, and planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a
result of structural works or improvements, annexations resulting in
additional flood hazard areas, or correction to base flood elevation or SFHAs.



   “PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.”  Buildings or indoor facilities
including, but not necessarily limited to, banquet halls, auditoria, and
conference centers, and including any kitchens for the preparation of food to
be consumed at the premises.



   “PLACES OF WORSHIP.”  Structures and other indoor or outdoor
facilities used for public worship and related educational, cultural, and
social activities.



   “PLAN COMMISSION (PC).” The Advisory City of Noblesville Plan
Commission or any division thereof and its designees.



   “PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).”  A large-scaled unified
development consisting of a parcel or parcels of land, controlled by a single
owner to be developed as a single entity. The area of land in which a variety
of residential, commercial, and/or industrial uses are planned and developed
as a whole according to the adopted preliminary development plans and
approved detailed plans, with more flexible standards, such as lot sizes,
uses and setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally apply to a
specific zoning district.



   “PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT, DIRECTOR OF.”  An official appointed to
administer this chapter.  Director of Planning and Development for
Noblesville.



   “PLANNING JURISDICTION.”  City of Noblesville and the two mile
jurisdictional area(s), and any and all townships participating in a Joinder
Agreement.



   “PLANT MATERIALS.”  Trees, shrubs, native grasses, ground cover,
perennials and the like. Xeriscaping landscape materials are encouraged to
function as LID Stormwater BMPs.



   “PLANTING SEASON.”  The spring and fall time periods during which
new plant materials that are installed are most likely to survive the
planting process. Generally, these periods are from April 15 to June 15
(spring) and October 15 to November 15 (fall). This does not prohibit the
installation of plant materials during other times of the year.



   “PLASTICS.”  Any of the various complex organic compounds produced
by polymerization.



   “PLAT.”  The drawing, map, or plan of a subdivision or other tract
of land or a replat of such including certifications, descriptions, and
approvals.  The final map or drawing, described in these regulations, on
which the subdivider’s plan of subdivision is presented to the Plan
Commission for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to the
County Recorder for filing.



   “PLAT, PRIMARY.”  The preliminary drawing or drawings, described
in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Plan Commission for approval.



   “PLAT, SECONDARY.”  The final and formal presentation of the map,
plan, or record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described
in the regulations of this chapter.



   “POINT SOURCE POLLUTION.”  A single, identifiable, discrete source
from which pollution is generated.  For example, a smokestack, ditch, pipe,
sewer outfall, or an industrial waste pipe.



   “PORCH.”  A structure attached to a building that has a roof and
that may or may not have walls.



   “PORTABLE STORAGE PODS.”  A portable streamlined enclosure or
detachable container that is delivered on-site for the packing of temporary
storage needs and is removed to a secure storage center (indoor warehouse)
for storage of the enclosure/container. The actual pods shall remain on-site
for a maximum of 30 days per calendar year.



   “PORTICO.”  A major porch usually supported by a pedimented roof
and supported by columns.



   “POST FIRM CONSTRUCTION.”  Construction or substantial improvement
that started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the
community or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   “POTENTIAL EMISSIONS.”  Any emissions of any one pollutant which
would be emitted from a facility, if that facility were operated without the
use of pollutant control equipment unless such control equipment (aside from
air pollution control equipment) is necessary for the facility to produce its
normal product or is integral to the normal operation of the facility.
“POTENTIAL EMISSIONS” shall be rated on the maximum rated capacity.



   “PRE FIRM CONSTRUCTION.”  Construction or substantial improvement
that started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of
the initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   “PREMISES.”  One or more lots which are in the same ownership and
are contiguous, or separated only by a right-of-way or water body, including
all buildings, structures, and improvements.



   “PRESCHOOL.” See “SCHOOL, PRESCHOOL.”.



   “PRIMARY LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.”  On-site entertainment by live
entertainers that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if
necessary) from a pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.



   “PRINCIPAL USE.”  The primary use to which the premises are
devoted, and the main purpose for which the premises exist.



   “PRINTING AND PUBLISHING.”  An establishment that provides
printing, publishing, duplicating, or collating services using photocopy,
blueprint, off-set printing, or related equipment.



   “PRIVATE STREETS.”  See “STREET, PRIVATE.”



   “PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM.”  A water system formed by a developer to
serve a new community development in an outlying or generally rural area. 
It includes water treatment and distribution facilities.



   “PROCESS (AIR QUALITY).”  Any action, operation or treatment and
the equipment used in connection therewith and all methods or forms of
manufacturing or processing that emits or is capable of emitting an air
contaminant.



   “PROCESSING OF RAW GOODS.”  An establishment engaged in a specific
industrial or manufacturing operation, such as the chemical trans-formation
of raw goods into new products that may include the blending and combining of
gases and liquids.



   “PROFESSIONAL OFFICE.” The office of a recognized profession
maintained for the conduct of that profession. A “PROFESSION” is a
vocation, calling, occupation, or employment requiring training in the
liberal arts or sciences, or combination thereof, requiring advanced study in
a specialized field, and any occupation requiring licensing by the State and
maintenance of professional standards applicable to that field.
“PROFESSIONS” include attorney, architect, engineer, financial planner,
realtor, insurance agent, broker and other similar professions.



   “PROGRAM OF SIGNS.”  A plan and narrative that sets forth and
describes the signs permitted in a specific development area including sign
materials, lighting, sizes, colors, types, and locations.



   “PROHIBITED USE.”  A use indicated as prohibited for a certain
district in the Schedule of Uses.



   “PROJECT SITE.”  The area of the entire site for a development
that might include smaller, individual platted lots or parcels.



   “PROVISIONAL PLAT.”  See “PLAT, PRIMARY.”



   “PUBLIC ACCESS AREA.” A public place that is generally an outdoor
area, whether publicly or privately owned, to which the public have access by
right or by invitation, expressed or implied, whether by payment of money or
not, but not a place when used exclusively by one or more individuals for a
private gathering or other personal purpose. A social space that is open and
accessible to people.



   “PUBLIC LAW 360, ACTS OF 1971.”  Enabling legislation requiring
the Indiana Administrative Building Council to adopt rules and regulations
for the construction, repair, or maintenance of factory- constructed one or
two family residential dwellings.



   “PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY.”  Buildings, power plants, substations,
water treatment plants, pumping stations, sewage disposal or pumping plants;
lift stations, transmission or distribution systems; collection or disposal
systems; and other similar structures used by a public utility or railroad,
whether publicly or privately owned, or by a municipal or other governmental
agency to furnish electrical, gas, rail transport, transportation,
communications, water and sewer services. Such facilities may include the
specific facilities listed above as well as poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and similar accessories needed to provide such services
for consumption by the general public.



   “PUBLIC STREET.”  See “STREET, PUBLIC.”



   “PUBLIC USES.”  Public parks, schools, fire and police stations,
libraries, museums, zoological gardens and parks, city and town halls, county
courthouses, utility complexes, fairgrounds, and administrative and cultural
buildings and structures, but not including public land or buildings devoted
solely to the storage and maintenance of equipment and materials and public
service facilities.



   “PUBLIC UTILITY.”  Any person, firm, or corporation duly
authorized to furnish electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, water,
or sewerage systems to the public under public regulation.



   “QUALITY OF LIFE.”  The degree to which individuals perceive
themselves as able to function physically, emotionally and socially. 
“QUALITY OF LIFE” includes all aspects of community life that have a
direct influence on the physical and mental health of its members.



   “QUARRIES AND OTHER EXCAVATION ACTIVITIES.”  A place where rock,
ore, stone, sand, and similar materials are excavated for sale or for
off-tract use.



   “QUARTERS FOR RELATIVES.”  A second dwelling unit, located within
and subordinate to an accessory structure, for use as a complete, independent
living facility with provision within said dwelling unit for cooking, eating,
sanitation, and sleeping.  Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main
dwelling on the lot.



   “QUASI-PUBLIC USE.”  Places of worship, private and parochial
schools, colleges, hospitals, cemeteries, and other facilities of an
educational, religious, charitable, philanthropic, or no-profit nature.
Private airports, clubs and lodges, athletic complexes, nursing homes,
clinics, country clubs, homes for elderly and children, and other seemingly
public uses which are in private ownership shall be considered quasi-public.



   “QUOINS.”  Units of stone or brick used to accentuate the corners
of a building.



   “RAIN BARRELS.”  A container that collects rainwater, managing
rooftop runoff.



   “RAIN GARDEN.”  See “BIORETENTION FACILITY.”



   “RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, MAJOR.”  Equipment which must be hauled
on a trailer with two or more wheels or which has two or more wheels
attached, or which is self-propelled with wheels, including boats, travel
trailers, and recreational vehicles.



   “RECREATION, INDOOR.”  Any indoor athletic activity such as but
not limited to indoor swimming pools, track & field events, soccer fields,
gymnasiums, or skating rinks (ice or roller).  See also “PARK, OUTDOOR
AMUSEMENTS, AND SPORTS PARK.”



   “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).”  A vehicle primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel, either with its
own motor power or mounted on or towed by another powered vehicle.



   “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.” (for flood purposes only) A vehicle which
is (1) built on a single chassis; (2) 400 square feet or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling, but as quarters for recreational camping,
travel, or seasonal use.



   “RECYCLING CENTER.”  A facility that accepts source-sorted
recyclable materials, processes those materials, and makes the materials
available for use in their original form.  “RECYCLING CENTERS” are
subject to all applicable requirements of the City and State.



   “REDEVELOPMENT.” Any new construction on a site that has pre-
existing uses on it.



   “REGISTERED ARCHITECT.”  An architect properly licensed and
registered in the State of Indiana or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Indiana.



   “REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR.”  A land surveyor properly licensed and
registered in the State of Indiana or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Indiana.



   “REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT.”  An architect, specializing in
landscaping, properly licensed and registered in the State of Indiana or
through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.



   “REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.”  An engineer properly licensed
and registered in the State of Indiana or through reciprocity permitted to
practice in the State of Indiana.



   “REGULATION.”  A rule or order issued by a public agency having
the force of law.



   “REGULATORY FLOOD.”  See “FLOOD, REGULATORY.”



   “RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.”  Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities. See also “PLACES OF WORSHIP.”



   “REPETITIVE LOSS.”  Flood related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the
event for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the
flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of
the structure at the time of each such flood event.



   “REPLACEMENT COSTS.”  The sum of money which would be required to
reconstruct a structure identical to the one in question.



   “RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.” Indoor facilities for scientific
research; and the design, development, and testing of electrical, electronic,
magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product
manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the
same site. Includes pharmaceutical, chemical, medical/dental, electrical, and
biotechnology research and development.



   “RESIDENCE.”  A building or structure or portion thereof designed
for purposes of housing a family or other single-housekeeping unit. It does
not include hotels, motels, or lodging houses.



   “RESIDENTIAL AREA.” Any portion of the city in which residential
uses are permitted or a legal non-conforming residential use is established.



   “RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME.”  A dwelling unit shared by four or more
unrelated disabled individuals, exclusive of staff, who require assistance
and/or supervision and who reside together in a family- type environment as a
single housekeeping unit.  A “RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME” shall not include a
home for persons currently addicted to alcohol or narcotic drugs or who are
criminal offenders serving on work release or probationary programs.



   “RESPONSIBLE PARTY.”  Any person, firm or corporation that uses
property in violation of this chapter or knowingly permits another person,
firm or corporation to do so.



   “RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN.”  A business establishment within which the
primary use is prepared food offered for sale and consumption within the
structure or in a designated and permitted outdoor area.  May also include
carry-out service.  See “DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT.”



   “RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT.”  A business establishment within which
the primary use is prepared food offered for sale in disposable containers
and packaged for carry-out.  See “DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH
ESTABLISHMENT.”



   “RESUBDIVISION (REPLAT).”  A change in a map for an approved or
recorded subdivision plat if such change effects any street layout on such
map or area reserved thereon for public use, or any lot line; or if it
affects any map or plat legally recorded prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivision.



   “RETAIL SALES.”  A business establishment engaged in selling goods
or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption
and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.



   “RETENTION AREA.”  An area that is designed to capture specific
quantities of stormwater and to gradually release the stormwater at a
sufficiently slow rate to avert flooding. It is an area that normally
contains water at a specific level prior to a storm event.



   “RETIREMENT COMMUNITY.”  An age restricted development that may
include detached and attached dwelling units, apartments, and may include
assisted living units and a nursing home.



   “REVERSE CHANNEL LETTERS (SIGN).”  Individually mounted opaque,
internally backlit letters which illuminate the wall or surface to which they
are attached.



   “REZONING.”  An amendment to a zoning map and/or text of a zoning
ordinance to effect a change in the nature, density, or intensity of uses
allowed in a zoning district and/or on a designated parcel or land area.



   “RIDGE.”  The line of intersection at the top between the opposite
slopes or sides of a roof.



   “RIDGELINE.”  A line marking or following the ridgetop.



   “RIDGETOP.”  The crest of the ridge.



   “RIGHT-OF-WAY.”  An area of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by transportation facilities, public utilities, or other special
public uses. Rights-of-way intended for any use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to the public use by the maker of the plat
on which such right-of-way is established.



   “RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH.”  The distance between properties adjacent to
the right-of-way as measured at right angles to the centerline of the
right-of-way. The minimum right-of-way width will be the sum of the widths of
travel lanes, shoulders, median (if applicable), ditches, plus that necessary
for fill or cut slopes or for roadside clear zones, whichever is greater. The
overall right-of-way width shall be increased to provide additional width for
the following: maintenance, utility corridors and future expansion.



   “RIPARIAN AREA.”  Wooded or vegetative areas along creeks,
streams, rivers or designated regulated drains. The area on each bank
designated as a riparian area shall be no wider than the average width of the
creek, stream, or river at normal flow elevation, but be no less than ten
feet in width from the top of the banks.



   “ROAD.”  See “STREET.”



   “ROADSIDE STAND.”  A temporary structure designed or used for the
display or sale of agricultural and related products, or novelties and other
items of interest, to the motoring public.



   “ROOF GRAPHIC.”  A street graphic which is displayed above the
eaves and under the peak.



   “ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.”  See “CRITICAL ROOT ZONE.”



   “RUNOFF.”  The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a
given watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but
runs off the surface of the land.



   “SALVAGE YARD.” See definition of “JUNK YARD.”



   “SAME OWNERSHIP.”  Ownership by the same person, corporation,
firm, entity, partnership, or un-incorporated associations, in which a
stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or un- incorporated
association.



   “SANITARY LANDFILL.”  A solid waste disposal facility designed to
meet the minimum standards of the State of Indiana wherein "solid waste" as
defined by state standards is disposed of by utilizing acceptable landfill
engineering technology.



   “SATELLITE STORE/OFFICE.” A small store or office in a different
location from a company or government agency's main office to serve an
expanding market share or an underserved area.



   “SCHOOL, PRESCHOOL.”  A school for children primarily between the
ages of three and five, providing preparation for elementary school.



   “SCHOOL, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY.”  An institution primarily engaged
in academic instruction for all or part of grades K through 12, and
recognized or approved by the State.



   “SCHOOL, TRADE OR BUSINESS.”  A school with a curriculum which is
focused upon certain skills required in business, trades or the arts,
including secretarial skills, instrumental music, dancing, barbering,
hairdressing or other technical trades which require knowledge of special
machinery.



   “SCREENING.”  A structure erected or vegetation planted which
eventually is of sufficient height and density for concealing an area from
view.



   “SEAT.”  For purposes of determining the number of off-street
parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating
units installed or indicated, or each 24 lineal inches of benches, pews, or
space for loose chairs.



   “SECONDARY PLAT.”  See “PLAT, SECONDARY.”



   “SEDIMENTATION.”  The process by which mineral or organic matter
is accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity.  Once this
matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred
to as “sediment.”



   “SELF-STORAGE.”  See “WAREHOUSE, MINI-STORAGE.”



   “SEPTIC SYSTEM.”  See “SEWER, ON-SITE.”



   “SERVICES.”  An establishment providing recurrently needed
services, as opposed to products, to the general public for personal or
household use, including finance, real estate and insurance, barber and
beauty shops, personal service, health, and social services.



   “SETBACK, REQUIRED.”  The minimum and/or maximum required distance
between a property line and a setback line, as established by this chapter.



   “SETBACK LINE.”  A line established by this chapter, generally
parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard
in which no building, other than an accessory structure exempted in §§
159.120 et seq., may be located above ground, except as may be provided in
this chapter.  See also “YARD” and “BUILDING SETBACK LINE (FRONT).”



   “SEWERS, ON-SITE (PRIVATE).”  A septic tank or similar
installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological
process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination of sewage and
provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the
approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.



   “SEX SHOP.”  An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and
that meets any of the following tests:



      (1)   The establishment offers for sale items from any two of
the following categories:



         (a)   Adult media;



         (b)   Lingerie; or



         (c)   Leather goods marketed or presented in a context
to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of
such items constitutes more than 10% of its stock in trade or occupies more
than 10% of its floor area.



      (2)   More than 5% of its stock in trade consists of sexually
oriented toys or novelties.



      (3)   More than 5% of its gross public floor area is devoted
to the display of sexually oriented toys or novelties.



   “SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.”  An inclusive term used to describe
collectively: adult cabaret; adult motion picture theater; adult media shop,
video-viewing booth or arcade; massage studio; and/or sex shop.



   “SEXUALLY ORIENTED TOYS OR NOVELTIES.”  Instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or
female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human
genital organs.



   “SHOOTING GALLERY.” An indoor range equipped with targets for
practice with firearms.



   “SHRUB.”  A woody plant of relatively low height having several
stems arising from the base and lacking a single trunk.



   “SIDEWALK.”  That portion of the road right-of-way which is
improved for the use of pedestrian traffic.



   “SIGN.”  Any name, identification, description, display, or
illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other outdoor structure or parcel of land, and
which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, business,
person, service, or interest.



         (1)   “AWNING.”  A roof-like covering of cloth,
plastic or other non-structural material that either is permanently extending
from a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against a
building when not in use.







 



         (2)   “BANNER.” A sign with a message comprised of a
logo, text, coloring, and/or design applied to a lightweight material such as
cloth, paper, fabric, or plastics and secured or mounted to allow movement
caused by the atmosphere or by artificial means of producing the movement of
air. These do not include wing banners, feather banners, flying banners,
towers, cylindrical banners, wind-up banners, and tear-drop banners.



      (3)   “BANNER, FEATHER.” A sign with a rigid rib that
forms a straight line, curve, or angle at the top on a single or two sides
and loose fabric on the other edges. Also known as wing banners, feather
flags, flying banners, towers, cylindrical banners, wind-up banners, and
tear-drop banners.



      (4)   “BLADE.” A smaller version of a projecting sign
oriented to be read from the sidewalk by a pedestrian. These signs shall be
located on the ground floor of the building and shall be suspended from or
supported by the building, an awning, canopy, or marquee.



      (5)   “CABINET/BOX.” A sign with text and symbols printed
on a single piece of plastic, acrylic, wood, or metal made up of a single
face and back or two faces that are mounted in a cabinet or box that houses
the lighting sources and equipment.



      (6)   “CANOPY.”  A roof like structure extending from a
building in order to provide protection from the elements, and which is
carried by a frame which is supported by the ground.



      (7)   “CONSTRUCTION.” A sign located on a property or
within a development or subdivision that is actively under construction. That
includes property with active building permits or improvement location
permits.



      (8)   “DESIGNATION.” A type of ground sign that identifies
an integrated development and may identify one or more establishments within
the development.



      (9)   “DIRECTIONAL.” A sign intending to direct the safe
flow of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic and includes “enter,”
“exit,” and “arrow” signs and other similar information.



      (10)   “DIRECTORY.” A sign that provides a listing of uses
or tenants within a particular building or complex of buildings, intended to
facilitate circulation within the development and provide information to
patrons by providing either directions to or locations of tenants.



      (11)   “ELECTRONIC.” A sign capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures, or images in a format such as LED (Light Emitting Diode)
that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic
means.



      (12)   “GATEWAY.” A permanent sign indicating entry into a
neighborhood or special district located either on private property or within
the right-of-way.



      (13)   “GROUND.”  A freestanding sign supported primarily
by an internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other
solid structure features. If supported by poles, posts, or braces, the
maximum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the grade is one foot.
The external support structures shall be covered by natural flagstone, brick,
rock, stone, and/or river rock with said sign design being of the same
architectural style and materials as the main building on the site. Each
support covering must be a minimum of 25% of the width of the sign face.



      (14)   “INCIDENTAL.” A permanent sign which has a purpose
that is secondary and incidental to the use of the lot on which it is located
such as “hours of operation,” “loading zone only,” “air,” and
“visitor parking” and other similar messages which carries no commercial
message that is legible beyond the lot on which the sign is located.



      (15)   “LIGHTER-THAN-AIR.” A nonporous bag of light
material that can be inflated with heated air or gas so as to make it float
in the atmosphere and give it shape and is properly anchored to the ground.



      (16)   “LOT IDENTIFICATION.” A sign that includes the lot
number, structure address number, and building permit all laminated and
established on a two-foot by four-foot post(2), a minimum of five feet to a
maximum of six and one-half feet in height above the ground level.



      (17)   “MENU BOARD.” A cabinet sign listing the assortment
of food items available and the price of such items offered.



      (18)   “MODEL HOME/SHOW HOME SIGN.” A sign indicating that
it is a “MODEL HOME” or “SHOW HOME” and may include the name of the
builder/developer, telephone number of the builder/developer, hours open,
cost, model/style, and other information relating to that particular home and
located on the lot of the “model” or “show” home.



      (19)   “MURAL.” A sign painted onto the side of a
building, wall, ground, or structure. “MURALS” without a commercial
message are not regulated by this chapter.



      (20)   “NEIGHBORHOOD.” A sign identifying a subsection of
the overall subdivision or development that is internal to the 
subdivision/development.



      (21)   “NON-CONFORMING SIGN.”  A sign legally existing as
of the effective date of this chapter that is not in compliance with this
chapter or any subsequent amendments.



      (22)   “OFF-PREMISE” or “OFF-SITE.” A sign directing
attention to a business, product, service, entertainment and/or any activity
offered, sold or conducted elsewhere than upon the lot where the sign is
displayed.



      (23)   “PARKING LOT IDENTIFICATION.” A sign providing
information for the convenience of the public to identify the location of a
parking space or parking lot that only contains the venue name or symbol and
the necessary information to identify the parking lot and row.



      (24)   “PLACARD.”  A sign that is attached directly to
the face of a residential structure that has been converted into a business
in the area shown in Appendix G of the Unified Development Ordinance also
known as the Central Core Map.



      (25)   “POLE.” A freestanding street graphic that is
permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of poles, posts,
uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base
structure.



      (26)   “PORTABLE.” Any sign that is not permanently
attached to the ground or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be
transported including but not limited to signs designed to be transported by
wheels; balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles which are parked or positioned for the
primary purpose of displaying the sign.



      (27)   “PROJECTING.” Any double-sided sign suspended from
or supported by a building, and extending outward perpendicular to the
building face upon which it is attached.



      (28)   “REAL ESTATE AVAILABILITY.” A sign displayed on
property that is listed for sale, lease, or rent on a centralized listing
service, website, newspaper advertisement, or other similar media.



      (29)   “ROOF.” Any sign erected on or above the roof-line
of a building.



      (30)   “SANDBLASTED.” A sign created by placing a rubber
stencil over letters and images and etching the background with a
high-pressure mixture of sand and air on wood or glass materials.



      (31)   “SANDWICH BOARD.” A sign constructed in such a
manner as to form an “A” or tent-like shape not permanently attached or
secured to the ground or surface upon which it is located specifically for
advertising that business.



      (32)   “SUSPENDED PORCH.”  A sign that is suspended from
a porch or overhang. This type of sign shall be permitted on residential
structures that have been converted to a business in the area shown in
Appendix G of the Unified Development Ordinance also known as the Central
Core Map.



      (33)   “TEMPORARY.”



A sign or advertising display that is to be displayed for a temporary
designated period of time. The following signs are included but are not
limited to contractor sign, garage sale sign, community garage sale sign,
special event sign, real estate availability sign, lighter-than- air display,
lot identification sign, model home/show home sign, open house directional
sign, sandwich boards, banners, community pride sign, and other signs as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee.



      (34)   “WALL.” A sign attached to or affixed directly to
the wall of a building or structure, parallel to the plane of the building or
structure and extending less than 12 inches from the building or structure.



      (35)   “WINDOW.” A sign painted, etched, or attached
either directly onto the inside or outside of a window.



      (36)   “YARD.” A sign mounted on a stake or metal frame
that is used for limited time without regard to the message. Examples include
but are not limited to campaign, sales, service, business identification and
promotions.



   “SIGN, COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.” Any image, logo, or words that
advertise a business conducted, service rendered, activity conducted, or
goods produced and/or sold.



   “SIGN, DIRECTIONAL.”  A street sign providing information for the
convenience of the public such as the location of exits, entrances, and
parking lots.  Limited in size to four square feet and no more than four
feet from ground to top of sign.



   “SIGN, GROUND.”  A freestanding sign supported primarily by an
internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid
structure features other than support poles, posts, uprights, or braces with
no clearance between the bottom of the sign, the sign face and the ground
below, and designed to include a continuous or nearly continuous central base.



   “SIGN, HEIGHT OF.”  The vertical distance measured from grade at
the edge of the adjacent right-of-way to the highest point of the street sign.



   “SIGN, ILLUMINATED.”  Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas, or
other artificial light including reflecting or phosphorescent light:



      (1)   “INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED.”  A sign with a light
source directed primarily toward said sign and so shielded so that no direct
rays from the light source are visible.



      (2)   “INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED.”  A sign that has its
light source enclosed and viewed through a translucent material.



   “SIGN, PORTABLE, HUMAN.” Any sign or banner, made of any material,
which is carried, held, or displayed by any person or persons.



   “SIGN AREA.”  The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing all elements of the sign which form an integral part of the sign
and which are organized, related, and composed to form a single unit.  Where
matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of
elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.



   “SIGN AREA, GROUND AND PROJECTING SIGN (for calculating area).” 
The total area of the face which is used to display a street sign, not
including its supporting poles or structures.  If a sign has two faces that
are parallel and supported by the same poles or structures, the area of the
sign is one-half the area of the two faces.  If a sign has two or more faces
that are supported by the same poles or structures but are not parallel, the
area of the sign is the largest area of all faces visible at one time.



   “SIGN AREA, WALL SIGNS (for calculating area).”  The percentage of
the signable area of a building or structure which may be used for roof and
wall signs.



   "SIGN BACKER." A background display that is attached to the building or
a part of the sign which is typically a geometric shape and usually of a
contrasting color to either the building and/or the sign face.



   “SIGNABLE AREA.”  An area which is free of architectural details
on the facade of a building or part of a building in which an activity is
located.



   “SIGNATURE MONUMENT.” An identifying mark, architectural feature,
or water feature located at the entrance to a residential development on a
roadway identified on the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan. These include, but
are not limited to, a fountain, clock tower, pergola, gazebo, outdoor plaza,
ponds, spire, arbor, or waterfalls.



   “SITE.” A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or
single control, considered as a unit for the purpose of development or other
use.



   “SITE COMPOSITION.”  The position of a building in reference to
the surrounding locality.



   “SITE PLAN.”



      (1)   A drawing of the site, drawn accurately to an
engineering scale, showing existing and proposed features of the site
including but not limited to buildings and other structures both existing and
proposed; setbacks from all buildings/structures to the property lines;
location and dimensions of all building lines and easements; widths and
lengths of all entrances and exits to and from said property (driveways);
location of all adjacent and adjoining streets, service facilities, manholes,
ponds, drainage swales, grading and all other improvements sufficient for the
review as required by the Unified Development Ordinance. The lot number and
subdivision and/or legal description, address of site, property owner’s
name and contact information, and contractor’s name and contact information
shall be included.



      (2)   All planned developments and/or ARB subdivisions require
the addition of a landscaping plan that is relevant to the site, indicating
plants (common and botanical names if possible or an approved list of plants
from the developer/owner/builder); tree calipers and minimum height of shrubs
and/or grasses at the time of installation; planting bed(s) width and length
including materials used in the planting beds and any and all other
information as required for sufficient review by the planning/engineer staffs.



   “SLOPE.”  Any ground, sidewalk, or off-street parking area whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon.



   “SMALL CELL FACILITY.”  A wireless service facility that satisfies
the following requirements:



      (1)   Each antenna, including exposed elements, has a volume
of three cubic feet or less;



      (2)   All antennas, including exposed elements, have a total
volume of six cubic feet or less; and



      (3)   The primary equipment enclosure located with the
facility has a volume of 17 cubic feet or less.



   “SMALL CELL NETWORK.”  A collection of interrelated small cell
facilities designed to deliver wireless service.



   “SOIL MAP.”  A National Cooperative Soil Survey prepared by the
USDA Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Purdue Experiment Station
and the Hamilton County Soil and Water Conservation District.



   “SPECIAL CONSIDERATION.” A use requiring specific approval by the
Plan Commission and Common Council because of its unique or unusual nature
accompanied with special conditions.



   “SPECIAL EXCEPTION.  A use that may be permitted in a district only
if it meets special conditions, and upon application is specifically
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   “SPECIAL EVENT.”  A noteworthy occasion or activity that is not a
part of a regular service or occasion that is conducted by a business,
religious, civic, educational, community, governmental or similar
organizations.



   “SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).”  Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the city that are subject to inundation by the regulatory
flood. The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the Hamilton County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 19,
2014, as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by
FEMA with the most recent date. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A,
AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99, or AO.)



   “SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.”  (1) Less than completely and
opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (2) human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.



   “SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.”  Human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, or female breast.



   “SPORTS AND RECREATION PARKS.”  The use of land for commercial
outdoor athletic activities such as but not limited to baseball/softball
diamonds, soccer fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, water parks, ice
skating rinks, or track and field events.  Such uses shall not include
shooting ranges.



   “SPREAD.” A term used to indicate the horizontal width of a shrub
or the crown of a tree.



   “STADIUM (COLISEUM, ARENA).” A large, usually roofless building
with tiers of seats for spectators at public entertainments.



   “STAINED GLASS.”  Glass that is given a desired color while in the
molten state or by firing a stain into the surface of the glass after
forming. This glass is used as decorative windows set in lead canes.



   “START OF CONSTRUCTION.” The first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main
structure.



   “STATE.”  State of Indiana.



   “STIPULATION.”  A condition, requirement, or item specified as a
part of an agreement or ordinance.



   “STOCKPILE, SOILS PILE, STORAGE PHILE (CONSTRUCTION ONLY).” - The
accumulation of excavated soil which is a reserve supply to provide proper
building/site elevations for construction.



   “STOCKPILE (PERMANENT).” Any stockpile remaining after a particular
phase of construction has achieved its own dirt balance and is surplus that
remains on site for future phases.



   “STOCKPILE (TEMPORARY).” Any stockpile associated with the same
phase of construction for which a permit has been issued and will be removed
at the end of the permitted phase for which it was created.



   “STONE PROCESSING ACTIVITIES.”  An establishment engaged in the
processing of stone and its products for the purpose of wholesaling or
distribution.



   “STORAGE BY THE BIN.”  A building that contains storage bins that
are leased or rented, and are used for storing personal property, household
goods, merchandise or commodities.  Such bins are transported to and from
the warehouse building by the storage company, as requested by the
leasee/renter, to another destination for loading, unloading or reloading.



   “STORY.”  The part of a building between the surface of a floor
and the ceiling immediately above; or if there is a floor above, the portion
of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above. A basement shall be counted as a story, and a cellar shall not be
counted as a story.



   “STREET.”  A general term denoting a public way for purposes of
vehicular travel, including the entire area within the right-of-way.  The
term “STREET” also includes the terms highway, parkway, road,
thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, lane, court, place, and other such terms.



   “STREET, ARTERIAL.”  A system of streets and roads which form an
integrated network of continuous routes primarily for through traffic. The
“Arterial” system is stratified into “major” and “minor”
categories.



   “STREET, ARTERIAL, MAJOR.”  Serves corridor traffic movements
having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of
substantial statewide or interstate travel, or connects major population
centers in rural areas or serves major centers of activity and highest
traffic volume corridors with the longest trip desires in urban areas.



   “STREET, ARTERIAL, MINOR.”  Links other cities, town, and traffic
generators, and provides a substantial amount of interstate and inter-county
service in rural areas; or interconnects and augments with the principal
arterials to provide service to trips of moderate length for intracommunity
continuity in urban areas.



   “STREET, COLLECTOR.”  A system of streets and roads which
generally serve travel of primarily intra-area and intracounty importance
with approximately equal emphasis to traffic circulation and land access
service.  The “collector” system is generally further stratified into
“major” and “minor” categories.  The system collects and distributes
traffic between an arterial and local systems.



   “STREET, CUL-DE-LOOP.” A local street that runs into and reconnects
with its main axis with the center or island used for parking or open space
purposes.



   “STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.”  A short local street having one end open to
traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around at the
other end.



   “STREET, DEAD-END.”  A local street open at one end only and
without a special provision for a vehicle turn-around.



   “STREET, FRONTAGE.”  A local street or road auxiliary and parallel
to an arterial for service to abutting property and adjacent areas, and for
control of access. Sometimes also called a “marginal access street.”



   “STREET, HIGHWAY.”  A term applied to streets and roads that are
usually under the jurisdiction of the Indiana Department of Transportation
(INDOT).



   “STREET, LOCAL.”  A system of streets and roads, which primarily
provides local access service including supplying access to fronting
properties and access to higher order street systems.



   “STREET, PARTIAL.”  A dedicated right-of-way providing only a
portion of the required street width, usually along the edge of a subdivision
or tract of land.  Sometimes referred to as a “half- street.”



   “STREET, PRIVATE.”  A local street that is not dedicated or
accepted for public use or maintenance which provides vehicular and
pedestrian access to more than one property, or dwelling unit.



   “STREET, PUBLIC.”  A street owned and maintained by a unit of
government within an officially dedicated and accepted right-of-way to
provide vehicular and pedestrian access.



   “STREET, STUB.”  A temporary dead-end street intended to be
extended at a later date.



   “STREET TREES.”  Trees growing on public rights-of-way except for
alleys and for medians contained within subdivisions.



   “STRUCTURE.”  Anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on
the ground or requires location under the ground. Among other things,
structures include buildings, walls, fences, signs, gas or liquid storage
tanks, mobile homes, and accessory structures under 200 square feet that do
not require a permanent foundation. A structure is not a building except as
further defined by that term.



   “STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.” A structure that is located on the same
parcel of property as the principal building and the use of which is
incidental and subordinate to the use of the principal building. Accessory
structures should be designed to have a minimal impact on adjoining
properties and may not be used for human habitation. Examples of accessory
structures include, but are not limited to, detached garages, carports,
storage shed, pole barns, hay sheds, and lean-tos. For the purposes of
floodplain regulation, accessory structures shall have a floor area of 400
square feet or less.



   “STRUCTURE, ELEVATED.”  A non-basement structure built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, filled stem wall foundations (also called chain
walls), pilings, or columns (posts or piers).



   “STRUCTURE, HISTORIC.”  Any structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places, The Indiana State Survey of Historic,
Architectural, Archaeological and Cultural Sites, Structures, Districts and
Objects, or a local designation of a structure, site or object.



   “STRUCTURE, SEMI-ENCLOSED.”  A structure which has either a roof
or walls but not both, or which has only partial roof and/or walls, such that
the structure is open to the outdoors.



   “STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY.” Any building or structure which is easily
moved, without any foundation or footing, or intended to be used for a
limited period of time.



   “STUCCO.”  A mixture of lime or gypsum, Portland cement and water
to produce a paste-like material which sets to form a hard surface.



   “SUBDIVIDER.”  An individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, syndicate, trust, or other legal entity which is engaged in
developing or improving a tract of land that complies with the definition of
subdivision and executes the application and initiates proceedings for the
subdivision of land in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   “SUBDIVISION.”  Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or
proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or
the combination of two or more lots into one lot, or interests for the
purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development either on the installment plan
or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including
resubdivision. Subdivision includes the division or development of
residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds
description, or other recorded instrument. However, this regulation shall not
apply to the following:



      (1)   An adjustment of lot lines as shown on a recorded plat
which does not reduce the area, frontage, width, depth, or building setback
lines of each building site below the minimum zoning requirements, and does
not change the original number of lots in any block of the recorded plat.



      (2)   A division of land into two or more tracts consisting of
more than five acres each for agricultural or any other uses not involving a
new road.



      (3)   An allocation of land in the settlement of an estate of
a decedent or a court decree for the distribution of property.



      (4)   The unwilling sale of land as a result of legal
condemnations as defined and allowed in the Indiana State Law.



      (5)   Widening of existing streets to conform to the
Comprehensive Plan.



      (6)   The acquisition of street rights-of-way by a public
agency in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan.



      (7)   The exchange of land for the purpose of straightening
property boundary lines which does not result in the change of the present
land usage.



      (8)   The division, sale, and recordation of land and
structures within condominium developments which comply with the appropriate
statutes of the State of Indiana and the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Noblesville Regarding Condominium Development.



   “SUBDIVISION, MINOR.” Is any land which is proposed to be further
divided or the combining of existing lots currently existing in an approved
and recorded plat, meeting the following criteria:



      (1)   Contains a maximum of three lots;



      (2)   Has all lots fronting an existing street;



      (3)   Does not involve the construction of a new street,
realignment, or the extension of an existing street;



      (4)   Does not involve the dedication of additional right-of-
way;



      (5)   Does not necessitate the extension of any municipal
infrastructure or the creation of any public improvements;



      (6)   Does not create non-conformity of lot(s) and/or
structure(s); and



      (7)   Does not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining properties.



The land shall be subdivided to developable lot(s) as required by the
applicable regulations in the Unified Development Ordinance (Ch. 159).



   “SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.”  Damage of any origin sustained to a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 40% of the market value of the structure in
the Flood Hazard (FH) zoning district and would equal or exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure in all other zoning districts before the damage
occurred.



   “SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.”  Any alteration, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, enlargement, addition, or extension, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 40% of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred "repetitive
loss" or "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed.
Such substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural element of the building
commences. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code requirements or (2) any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Indiana
State Survey of Historic, Architectural, Archeological and Cultural Sites,
Structures, Districts, and Objects provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".



   “SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION OF A WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.”  The
mounting of a wireless facility on a wireless support structure in a manner
that:



      (1)   Increases the height of the wireless support by the
greater of:



         (a)   Ten percent of the original height of the wireless
support structure; or



         (b)   Twenty feet;



      (2)   Adds an appurtenance to the wireless support structure
that protrudes horizontally from the wireless support structure more than the
greater of:



         (a)   Twenty feet; or



         (b)   The width of the wireless support structure at the
location of the appurtenance; or



      (3)   Increases the square footage of the equipment compound
in which the wireless facility is located by more than 2,500 square feet.



   This does not include the following:



      (1)   Increasing the height of a wireless support structure to
avoid interfering with an existing antenna;



      (2)   Increasing the diameter or area of a wireless support
structure to:



         (a)   Shelter an antenna from inclement weather; or



         (b)   Connect an antenna to the wireless support
structure by cable.



   “SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR.” The same or significantly the same as a
prior plan or application as determined by the associated land area, the
intensity of development proposed, the range of proposed uses, the type,
variety, and scale of signage, and other relevant factors.



   “SUPPLY YARD.”  A commercial establishment storing and offering
for sale building supplies, steel, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and
similar goods.



   “SUPPORT STRUCTURE.”  A free standing structure designed and
constructed to support an antenna array that may consist of a monopole, a
self supporting lattice tower, a guyed tower, or other similar structure.



   “SURETY.”  An amount of money or other negotiable instrument
provided by a developer, subdivider, or owner to the city, which guarantees
that the developer, subdivider, owner or their assignees will perform all
actions required by the city regarding an approved development plan, site
plan, subdivision plat, landscaping plan or other improvements. Surety
provides that, if the developer, subdivider, owner or assignee fails to
comply with the requirements of the approval, funds will be provided to the
city to complete those improvements.



   “SURFACE PARKING LOT.”  A parking facility constructed on prepared
grade and without a covering roof or structure.



   “SURVEYOR, LAND.”  Any person who is licensed in the State of
Indiana to practice professional land surveying.



   “SWALE.”  A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries
surface water runoff.



   “SWIMMING POOL, COMMUNITY.”  A swimming pool for the benefit of
the general public, usually operated with a charge for admission; a principal
use.



   “SWIMMING POOL, NON-PERMANENT.”  Any on-ground pool capable of a
water depth no greater than 42 inches that is so constructed that it may be
readily disassembled for storage and reassembled to its original integrity.



   “SWIMMING POOL, PERMANENT.”  Any in-ground pool or on-ground pool
capable of a water depth of greater than 42 inches and 12 feet in diameter.



   “SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE.”  A swimming pool used exclusively
without paying an additional charge for admission by the residents and guests
of a single household, a multi-family development, a community, the members
and guests of a club, or the patrons of a motel or hotel; an accessory use.



   “TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.”  A committee established to assist
in the evaluation of development applications, and to make advisory
recommendations to the applicable reviewing authority. The membership of the
Committee shall include, but not be limited to, persons that are engaged in
either private or public work with specific knowledge in road design and
construction; sewer and water facility design and construction; solid waste;
health requirements for water and sewer facilities; recreation and open
space; environmental planning criteria related to geology, vegetation, noise,
and water systems; and urban design.



   “TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER.”  Any mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower,
lattice tower, freestanding tower, or other similar structure designed and
primarily used to support antenna arrays. (For Mobile Telecommunications
Tower, see “CELLULAR ON WHEELS (COW)”.)



   “TEMPORARY SHELTERS.” An establishment providing cover, protection,
and/or food to individuals or families on a short-term basis. Such
accommodations shall be utilized for no more than three consecutive months
per individual or family. This shall include shelters operated by
organizations such as the Red Cross and churches to provide housing form
families and individuals displaced by a natural or man-made disaster.



   “TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION.”  For purposes of these regulations and
to guide the application of geometric design criteria, terrain has been
classified as follows:



      (1)   Level.  That condition where street sight distances, as
governed by both horizontal and vertical restrictions, are generally long or
would be made to be so without construction difficulty or major expense.



      (2)   Rolling.  That condition where the natural slopes
consistently rise above and fall below the street grade line and where
occasional steep slopes offer some restriction to normal horizontal and
vertical street alignment.



      (3)   Hilly.  That condition where longitudinal and
transverse changes in the elevation of the ground, with respect to a street,
are abrupt and where the roadbed is obtained by fragment benching or side
hill excavation.



   “TEXT AMENDMENT.”  A modification that clarifies or preserves the
written provisions of an adopted ordinance or creates a new provision.  It
may correct an error or inconsistency or meet the challenge of changing
conditions.



   “THEATER.”  See “CINEMAS AND THEATERS.”



   “THOROUGHFARE PLAN.”  The portion of the Comprehensive Plan
adopted by the City Plan Commission indicating the general location
recommended for arterial, collector and local streets and roads within the
appropriate jurisdiction.



   “TOPOGRAPHY.”  The configuration of the earth’s surface
including the relative relief, elevations, and position of land features.



   “TOPSOIL.”  Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably
are fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or
humus debris. “TOPSOIL” is usually found in the uppermost soil layer
called the “A Horizon.”



   “TOWING AND RECOVERY YARD.”  A lot or building used for the
storage of damaged, wrecked or impounded motor vehicles for a limited period
of time, usually awaiting insurance adjustment, transport to a repair shop,
or recovery by the owner operator.



   “TOWNHOUSE.” One or more single-family dwellings with a minimal
front and rear yards and no side yards, arranged side by side, separated by
common walls between living areas, each having more than one story.



   “TRAFFIC CALMING.”  Methods of reducing the negative impacts of
vehicles on surrounding land uses and other methods of personal
transportation through street design that decreases the speed of vehicles and
provides increased space and comfort for pedestrians.



   “TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.”  All signs, signals, markings, and
devices placed or erected by authority of the Common Council or official
having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic.



   “TRAILER, UTILITY.” A road vehicle, usually two-wheeled, towed by a
motor vehicle and features an open-top rear cargo area (bed), and used for
the transportation of a user's personal property including but not limited to
boat, ATV, motorcycle, snowmobiles, other water recreational vehicles or
horse trailers, not used in commerce, which has a gross weight equal or less
than 3,000 pounds, or a manufacturer's gross vehicle rating (GVWR) of 3,000
pounds. Notwithstanding the above, a "UTILITY TRAILER" includes a trailer or
semitrailer designed and used for the transportation of livestock, not in
commerce, which does not exceed GVWR of 10,000 pounds or manufacturer's GVWR
of 10,000 pounds.



   “TRAINING FACILITY.” A site used for education and preparation of
individuals in a specific field or skill. May include indoor or outdoor
spaces that may be manipulated to create different drills or activities for
hands-on demonstrations.



   “TRASH RECEPTACLE ENCLOSURE.”  An enclosure for trash containers,
recycling containers, garbage containers, building material containers or
other large metal containers.  Three sides of the enclosure shall be
constructed of building materials matching the facade of the on-site
principal building with the fourth side being screened by a metal gate or
other similar materials.  The enclosure shall completely screen the
containers from view and measure a minimum of six feet in height or two above
the size of the container whichever is greater.



   “TRAVEL TRAILER.”  A vehicle or other portable structure less than
35 feet in length designed to move on the highway, not under its own power,
and designed or used as a recreational dwelling.



   “TREE.”  A perennial woody plant with one main trunk and a rather
distinct and elevated head, ordinarily growing to definite heights and
usually developing branches at some distance from the ground.



      “LARGE SHADE.” Any tree the height of which is 35 feet or
greater at maturity and has a limb spread of 30 feet or more at maturity and
has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



      “MEDIAN SHADE.” Any tree which has a mature height of 25 to
40 feet and has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



      “ORNAMENTAL.” Any tree grown for decorative purposes,
typically small with multi-seasonal interest.



      “SMALL SHADE.” Any tree which has a mature height of less
than 25 feet and has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



   “TREES, STREET.”  See “STREET TREES.”



   “TRUCK TERMINAL.”  A building or area in which freight brought by
truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate and interstate
shipment by truck or in which semi-trailers, including tractor and/or trailer
units, and other trucks are parked or stored. This term includes moving and
storage establishments.



   “TRUNK.” The portion of a stem or stems of a tree before branching
occurs.



   “TRUSS.”  An assemblage of members (as beams) forming a rigid
framework.



   “TRUSS DESIGN DRAWING.”  The graphic depiction of an individual
truss which describes the design and physical characteristics of the truss.



   “TURF.”  Lawn-type grasses that are intended to be manicured and
maintained at a maximum height of six inches.



   “UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE.”  A document comprised of the
zoning ordinance and subdivision control ordinance for the city.



   “USE.”  The specific purpose for which land or a building is
designated, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.



   “USE, ACCESSORY.” A use subordinate to another use located on the
same property which does not change or alter the character of the premises
and is clearly and customarily incidental to the primary use.



   “USE, LEGAL-NONCONFORMING.” Any continuous, lawful use of
structures, land, or structures and land in combination established prior to
the effective date of the Unified Development Ordinance or its subsequent
amendments that is no longer a permitted use in the zoning district where it
is located.



   “USE, NONCONFORMING.” A use which does not conform to the use
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.



   “USE, PERMITTED.” Any use by right authorized in a particular
zoning district or districts and is subject to the restrictions applicable to
that zoning district(s).



   “USE, PRIMARY.”  The main use of land or buildings as
distinguished from an accessory use. It may be a permitted use, conditional
use, or a special exception.



   “USE, TEMPORARY.” Short-term or seasonal uses which may be
associated with construction projects or which intend to sell or promote
specific merchandise or products and shall include, but not be limited to,
residential model homes, sales offices operated from a temporary structure,
non-commercial batching plants, temporary building or yard for construction
materials, parking lot for a special event; bazaars, carnivals and similar
temporary uses; outdoor seasonal sales; parking of recreational vehicle
exceeds 14 days; garage sales; and any uses deemed appropriate by the
Director of Planning and Development and/or the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   “UTILITY POLE.”  A structure that is:



      (1)   Owned or operated by:



         (a)   A public utility;



         (b)   A communications service provider;



         (c)   A municipality;



         (d)   An electric membership corporation; or



         (e)   A rural electric cooperative; and



      (2)   Designed and used to:



         (a)   Carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable
television, or electricity; or



         (b)   Provide lighting.



   This does not include a wireless support structure or an electrical
transmission tower.



   “UTILITY, PUBLIC.”  Any person, firm, or corporation duly
authorized to furnish under public regulations to the public electricity,
gas, steam, telephone, fiber optics, transportation, water, or sewage systems.



   “VARIANCE.”  A modification of the strict terms of the relevant
regulations of this chapter where such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property
and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of
this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, serious
practical difficulties.



   “VARIANCE, DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.”  A specific approval granted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals deviating from the development standards (such as
height, setbacks, lot area, etc.) that are prescribed within the Unified
Development Ordinance.



   “VARIANCE, USE.”  An approval of use granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals permitting a use other than that prescribed in the Unified
Development Ordinance.



   “VEGETATIVE SCREEN.” A visual barrier of vegetation with dense
foliage used to block aesthetically intrusive land uses from view.



   “VEHICLE LENGTH.”  For purposes of indicating stacking at drive-
thru windows, ATM’s, etc., the minimum vehicle length is 25 feet.



   “VEHICLE, INOPERATIVE.”  A vehicle: from which the engine,
transmission, or differential has been removed; that is partially dismantled
or inoperable; or that is at least three model years old, is mechanically
inoperative, does not have current license plates, and is left on private
property continuously for more than 20 days.



   “VESTED RIGHTS.”  A right that has become fixed and cannot be
revoked by subsequent changes of applicable regulations.



   “VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL.”  A place used for the care,
diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured small animals,
and those who are in need of medical or surgical attention.  Generally,
operated by a licensed veterinarian.  See also “KENNEL.”



   “VICINITY MAP.”  A small inset map located on the plat showing the
location of a proposed subdivision or use to nearby developments, landmarks,
community facilities, and services within the general area.



   “VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH.”  Any booth, cubicle, stall,
or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat patrons
and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any
photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media
(including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc,
CD-rom, books, magazines, or periodicals) for observation by patrons
therein.  A “VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH” shall not mean a theater, movie house,
playhouse, or a room or enclosure or portion thereof that contains more than
600 square feet.



   “VILLAGE CENTER.”  A location within the city containing an
orderly mix of land uses that meets the daily needs of surrounding area
residents. The mix is intended to contain active street shops such as
convenience retail, food services, personal business service uses, and public
access areas that will accommodate directly the pedestrian linkages to the
non-residential facilities. These uses should be arranged in a manner which
is focused around a central open space.



   “VIOLATION.”  The erection, alteration, enlargement, maintenance
or use of any land, building or structure in violation of this chapter,
Building Codes and related codes, weed ordinance or other codes and
ordinances of the city applicable to said land, use, building, or structure
in the zoning district in which it is located.



   “VIOLATION, NOTICE OF.”  A letter, stop work order, or citation
identifying the violation and issued by the Department of Planning and
Development.



   “VIOLATION, REPEATED.”  A repeat of the same violation or a
similar violation at the same or different location by the same responsible
party.



   “VISIBLY OBSTRUCTED.” The view of an object which is blocked by a
building or other manmade structure so as to be incapable of being seen from
that line-of-sight.



   “VISUAL CORNER CLEARANCE.”  A triangular space at the street
corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of obstruction to vision,
including buildings, structures, fences, signs, trees, and shrubs between the
heights of two and one-half feet and ten feet above the established street
grade.  The street grade is measured at the intersection of the centerlines
of the intersecting street pavements. The triangular space is determined by a
diagonal line connecting two points, measured 15 feet equidistant from the
lot corner along each property line at the intersections of two local
streets, or one local street and one alley; or 25 feet along each property
line at the intersection of a local street and a collector, arterial,
expressway or any combinations thereof.  For measuring purposes only, an
alley shall be determined as per the local street distances. For areas
located within the Central Core Map, Appendix G, this particular requirement
may be modified and shall be approved by the City Engineer on a case-by-case
basis.



   “WAIVER.”  A specific modification or lessening of the regulations
of the Unified Development Ordinance granted by the Plan Commission and
Common Council for a specific development such as a Planned Development in
response to unique site characteristics or development patterns that justify
relief from the otherwise applicable regulations or by the Plan Commission
for relief from the Subdivision Control standards.



   “WAREHOUSE, MINI-STORAGE.”  A building containing small,
independent, fully enclosed storage compartments that are leased or rented to
persons exclusively for storage of their household goods or personal property.



   “WAREHOUSING.”  A building used for the storage of goods,
merchandise and/or commodities that may be for later use or for resale,
typically used or leased by importers, exporters, wholesalers, retailers,
transport businesses, customs and other similar entities. A
“STORAGE-BY-THE-BIN” facility would be considered “WAREHOUSING.” 
This definition does not include in-house warehousing within the principal
building of a non-residential use, which is used by the company or entity
occupying the principal building.



   “WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.”  The height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929 (NGVD) or other datum where specified, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.



   “WATER TABLE.”  The upper surface of groundwater, or the level
below which the soil is seasonally saturated with water.



   “WATERCOURSE.”  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
“WATERCOURSE” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial
flood damage may occur.



   “WATERSHED.”  The total area above a given point on a watercourse
that contributes water to its flow; the entire region drained by a waterway
or watercourse that drains into a reservoir, lake, or sea.



   “WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.”  Signs such as, but not limited to,
those which advertise real estate open houses, residential development
locations, and auctions.  These signs typically are placed out on weekends,
however, the definition does include this type of sign when placed out any
day of the week.



   “WHIP ANTENNA.”  An antenna that transmits signals in 360-degrees.
These are typically cylindrical in shape and are less than three inches in
diameter and measure up to six feet in length, including mounting. It may be
called omni-directional, stick or pipe antennas.



   “WHOLESALE TRADE, INDOOR.”  Establishments or places of business
engaged primarily in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. Such operations shall
be totally enclosed within the principal structure of the property.



   “WHOLESALE TRADE, OUTDOOR.”  Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.



   “WIDTH, PAVEMENT.” The actual measurement of a street surface that
includes only the area that is drivable by vehicles, excluding curbs and/or
gutter.



   “WILDLIFE HABITAT (SIGNIFICANT).” A place or environment where a
plant, insect, or animal naturally or normally lives and grows including
shelter, food, nesting sites, and protection.



   “WIRELESS FACILITY.”  A set of equipment and network components
necessary to provide wireless communications service. This does not include a
wireless support structure.



   “WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.”  A freestanding structure designed
to support wireless facilities. This does not include a utility pole or an



electrical transmission tower.



   “WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE FACILITY.”  An unmanned
facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves, commonly
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure or
tower to achieve the necessary elevation, and an equipment facility to house
accessory equipment which may include cabinets, pedestals, shelters, and
similar protective structures. It may include antenna array on buildings or
structures of sufficient height.



   “WOOD PRODUCTS.”  Uncut trees suitable for construction are
converted to lumber or lumber products by sawing, planing, or rotary cutting
to produce standardized sizes of rough or dressed lumber.



   “WOODLAND.”  Land covered with a dense growth of trees usually
greater in extent than a grove and smaller than a forest.



   “WOODY PLANTS.”  A plant that has a hard stem and has buds that
survive above ground in the winter.



   “XERISCAPING.” An approach to landscaping that minimizes outdoor
water use while maintaining soil integrity through the use of native,
drought-tolerant plants.



   “YARD.”  An open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.  See also “SETBACK, REQUIRED.”







 



   “YARD, FRONT.”  A yard across the full width of the lot extending
from the front property line to the front setback line.  On corner lots and
through lots, there shall be two or more front yards as determined by the
road frontages.



   “YARD, REAR.”  A yard extending the full width of the lot between
the rear setback line and the rear property line.



   “YARD, SIDE.”  A yard between the side setback line and side
property line and extending from the front setback line to the rear setback
line.



   “YARD CARD (SIGN BOARD).” A durable, double-sided, detailed design
advertising a community garage sale event. The “CARD/SIGN BOARD” may be
constructed of PVC or pressure treated wood with a protective coating or
similar materials.



   “ZERO LOT LINE.”  A development approach in which a building is
sited on one or more lot lines with no yard.  The intent is to allow more
flexibility in site design and to increase the amount of usable open space on
the lot.



   “ZONE.”  A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects
the severity or type of flooding in the area.



   “ZONE A.”  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no
base flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.



   “ZONE AE.”  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood elevations are shown
within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



   “ZONE AO.” Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.



   “ZONE AH.”  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between
one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply.



   “ZONE AR.”  Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   “ZONE A99.”  Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance
flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of an
under construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams, and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. Zone A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   “ZONE B, C, X.”  Areas identified in the community as areas of
moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
Buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available
in participating communities, but is not required by regulation in these
zones.



   “ZONING.”  A police power measure, enacted by the governing body
of local governments, in which the community is divided into districts or
zones within which permitted and special uses are established as are
regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other
development standards.  Requirements vary from district to district, but
they must be uniform within districts.



   “ZONING DISTRICT(S).”  Areas within the city for which uniform
zoning regulations governing use, height, area, size, intensity of use of
both buildings and land, and open spaces are established by this Unified
Development Ordinance.



   “ZONING DISTRICT, BASE.”  In the case of an overlay district, the
standard zoning district that the parcel or tract of land is located and the
standards of which apply when the overlay district regulations are silent on
any given point.



   “ZONING MAP.”  The official City of Noblesville zoning map.



   “ZONING VERIFICATION LETTER.”  A request initiated by an
individual or organization to provide information concerning a particular
parcel or project. Information requested may include previous or existing
zoning and building code violations, building and site plans, adopted
ordinances and/or zoning commitments that apply to the project or parcel,
zoning restrictions, certificates of occupancy, certificates of compliance,
and other similar items. This request does not include those individuals or
organizations requesting only written confirmation of the current zoning
classification of a particular parcel or project.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 5-2-97, passed 3-10-97; Am. Ord.
67-12-98, passed 1-11-99; Am. Ord. 15-3-00, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord.
55-11-01, passed 12-11-01; Am. Ord. 5-2-02, passed 3- 12-02; Am. Ord.
04-01-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. 26-4-03, passed 5-13-03; Am. Ord.
86-11-03, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 57-9-04,
passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 42-5- 05, passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord. 48-6-05, passed
7-12-05; Am. Ord. 76-9-05, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 82-10-05, passed
11-15-05; Am. Ord. 96-11-05, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 89-10-06, passed
11-14- 06; Am. Ord. 95-11-06, passed 12-12-06; Am. Ord. 22-4-07, passed
4-10-07; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed
12-11-07; Am. Ord. 13-3-08, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed
12-9-08; Am. Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 25-7-09, passed 8-11-09;
Am. Ord. 41-9-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am.
Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord.
12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-5-11; Am. Ord. 03-02-12, passed 2-28-12; Am. Ord.
09-03-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 121-06-12, passed 7-10-12; Am. Ord.
22-06-13, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord.
13-02-14, passed 3-11-14; Am. Ord. 17-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord.
37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 48-10-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord.
49-10-14, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord.
53-10-15, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 61-12-15, passed 1-12-16 ; Am. Ord.
01-01-17, passed 1-24-17; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17; Am. Ord.
25-07-17, passed 8-15-17; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS



§ 159.025  SUMMARY OF AUTHORITY.



   The city decision making bodies and officials described in this
subchapter, without limitation upon such authority as each may possess by
law, each has responsibility for implementing and administering this
subchapter in the manner described in this subchapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 5-1-95)



§ 159.026  COMMON COUNCIL.



   The Common Council hereby reserves to itself the following powers and
duties in connection with the implementation of this chapter:



   (A)   To initiate amendments to the text of this chapter and to the
Zoning Map pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth
in § 159.044; and



   (B)   To take such other actions not delegated to other bodies which
may be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 5-1-95)



§ 159.027  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Jurisdiction and Authority.  The Board of Zoning Appeals has
the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of this
chapter:



      (1)   To approve, approve with modifications, or deny any
application for a variance from the terms of this chapter pursuant to the
procedures and standards for variances set forth in § 159.043(C) except
those variances requested from the subdivision control requirements set forth
in §§ 159.060 through 159.087, which is the responsibility of the Plan
Commission as set forth in § 159.060(E);



      (2)   To approve, approve with modifications, or deny any
application for a use variance pursuant to the procedures and standards for
variances set forth in § 159.043(C);



      (3)   To grant, grant with modifications, or deny any
application for a conditional use pursuant to the procedures and standards
for conditional uses set forth in § 159.041(A); and



      (4)   To hear and decide any appeal from any order of final
decision made by the Director of Planning and Development in the
administration or enforcement of this chapter pursuant to procedures and
standards for appeals of administrative decisions set forth in § 159.043(B).



   (B)   Conflicts.  No members of the Board of Zoning Appeals may
participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which that member
has any conflict of interest prohibited by state law.



   (C)   Independent Investigation.  No members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals may participate in the hearing or disposition of any matter in which
that member has conducted an independent investigation into the facts of the
matter pending before the Board.



   (D)   Undue Influence.  A person may not communicate with any
member of the Board of Zoning Appeals before a hearing with the intent to
influence the member's action on a matter pending before the Board.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.028  PLAN COMMISSION.



   The Plan Commission has the following powers and duties in connection
with the implementation of this chapter:



   (A)   To initiate amendments to the text of this chapter and to the
Zoning Map pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments set forth
in § 159.044;



   (B)   To review all proposed amendments to this chapter and make
recommendations to the Common Council pursuant to the procedures and
standards for amendments set forth in § 159.044;



   (C)   To review all planned developments and make recommendations to
the Common Council pursuant to the procedures and standards for amendments
set forth in § 159.044;



   (D)   To review, approve, approve with modifications, or deny all
subdivision applications pursuant to the procedures and standards for
subdivision approval set forth in §§ 159.060 through 159.087; and



   (E)   To approve, approve with modifications, or deny all
applications for variances from subdivision control pursuant to the
procedures and standards for plat approval set forth in §§ 159.060 through
§ 159.062; and



   (F)   To accept and release of performance bonds, letters of credit,
certified checks, and maintenance bonds for all non-infrastructure items.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 95-11-06, passed 12-12-06)



§ 159.029  DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Establishment of Department of Planning and Development and
Director of Planning and Development.  There is hereby established a
Department of Planning and Development in the City of Noblesville, which may
consist of the Director of Planning and Development, Building Administrator,
Secretary, and assistants.  The basic duties and responsibilities of the
Director of Planning and Development are set forth in Section 500-501 of this
Zoning Code.  The Mayor is hereby authorized to employ a Director of
Planning and Development and such other employees deemed necessary, subject
to the approval of the City Plan Commission.  Appointments shall continue
during good behavior and service and they shall not be removed from office
except for cause after full opportunity has been given them to be heard on
specific charges.



   (B)   Jurisdiction and Authority.  The Director of Planning and
Development has the following powers and duties in connection with the
implementation of this chapter:



      (1)   To interpret provisions of this chapter pursuant to the
procedures and standards for interpretation set forth in § 159.043(A);



      (2)   To ensure compliance with or prevent violation of
provisions of this chapter pursuant to the procedures and standards for
enforcement set forth in §§ 159.240 through 159.248 and 159.999;



      (3)   To inspect buildings, structures, and use of land to
determine compliance with this chapter pursuant to the procedures and
standards for enforcement set forth in §§ 159.240 through 159.248 and
159.999;



      (4)   To issue all necessary permits and certificates and
maintain records thereof in the name of the Plan Commission and Board of
Zoning Appeals pursuant to the procedures and standards for zoning
certificates set forth in § 159.045;



      (5)   To issue all necessary building permits and maintain
records thereof and to inspect buildings and structures to determine
compliance with this chapter, pursuant to the procedures and standards for
Building Permits set forth in §§ 159.060 through 159.062;



      (6)   To provide technical and clerical assistance to the Plan
Commission and Board of Zoning Appeals;



      (7)   To provide and maintain a public information service
relative to all matters arising out of this chapter;



      (8)   To maintain permanent and current records relative to
the administration of this chapter, including but not limited to, all maps,
amendments, Improvement Location Permits, Certificates of Occupancy,
Variances, and Conditional Uses, Appeals and disapproved applications, and
record of hearings;



      (9)   To review all development permit applications to
determine that the application meets the requirements of this chapter and to
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state
and local government agencies which prior approval is required;



      (10)   To conduct all research and collect and analyze all
data pertaining to the growth and development of the City and its environs,
as delegated by the Common Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals,
or other bodies which may be desirable and necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter;



      (11)   To coordinate and conduct all development activities
and programs for the City and its environs, as delegated by the Common
Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies which may
be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter;



      (12)   To obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data in order to administer this chapter;



      (13)   To notify all jurisdictions and other bodies relative
to the alteration of watercourses;



      (14)   To make interpretations as to the location of special
flood hazards; and



      (15)   To take such other actions as delegated by the Common
Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies which may
be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Delegation of Authority.  The jurisdiction and authority of
the Director of Planning and Development may be delegated to his or her
designee except as prohibited by law.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.030  TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Establishment and Membership.  The Technical Advisory
Committee is hereby created and shall consist of the following members as
invited by the Director of Planning and Development:



      (1)   Planning Department representative(s).



      (2)   The City Engineer or his or her designee.



      (3)   The City Fire Department Fire Marshall or his or her
designee.



      (4)   The City Urban Forrester or his or her designee from the
Street Department.



      (5)   The City Park Department Director or his or her designee.



      (6)   The Hamilton County Surveyor’s Office representative.



      (7)   The Hamilton County Highway Department representative.



      (8)   The Hamilton County Health Department representative.



      (9)   Indiana American Water.



      (10)   Citizens Energy.



      (11)   Duke Energy.



      (12)   Vectren Energy.



      (13)   Hamilton Southeastern Utilities.



      (14)   AT&T.



      (15)   Comcast.



      (16)   Panhandle Eastern Pipeline Company.



      (17)   Representatives from adjacent communities having
jurisdiction of public infrastructure within the community.



   (B)   Jurisdiction and Authority.  The Technical Advisory Committee
has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of
this chapter:



      (1)   To review and evaluate applications for variances and
make recommendations to the Board of Zoning Appeals, pursuant to the
procedures and standards for variances set forth in § 159.043(C) or to the
Plan Commission, pursuant to the procedures and standards for variances set
forth in §§ 159.075 through 159.087;



      (2)   To review and evaluate all site plans, and make
recommendations to the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan Commission as may be
appropriate, pursuant to the procedures and standards for site plan review
set forth in § 159.041(B); and



      (3)   To take such other actions as delegated by the Common
Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies which may
be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 86-11-03, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12- 11-07; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



§ 159.031  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Establishment and membership.  The Architectural Review Board
is hereby created and shall consist of the following members as invited by
the Director of Planning and Development:



      (1)   Council Appointee to Plan Commission.



      (2)   Plan Commission President.



      (3)   General Plan Commission Member.



      (4)   General Council Member.



      (5)   Director of Planning and Development (or appointee).



   (B)   Jurisdiction and authority.  The Architectural Review Board
has the following powers and duties in connection with the implementation of
this section:



      (1)   To review and evaluate applications for residential PDs
and make recommendations to the Plan Commission, pursuant to the procedures
and standards for PDs set forth in § 159.109(D).



      (2)   The ARB shall conduct a review of any proposed
residential planted development prior to a public hearing before the Plan
Commission. The ARB shall review a proposal and make a recommendation based
on the following criteria:



         (a)   Consideration shall be given to the
characteristics of the housing type and the individual site. These
considerations may differ from one circumstance to another based on the fact
that what may be an acceptable design of an exterior in one instance may not
be for another. Design decisions made by the review board in reviewing
applications, however, are not based on any individual's personal opinion or
taste.



         (b)   The proposed improvement or new construction must
be compatible with the architectural characteristics of the existing site
conditions, adjoining houses, surrounding area, and the neighborhood setting.
“COMPATIBILITY” is defined as similarity in architectural style, form,
height, size, scale, quality of workmanship, similar use of materials, color,
and construction details.



         (c)   Significant amounts of open space should be used
to enhance the appearance and general character of the individual
neighborhoods and homes, as well as providing recreational benefits to the
community. In turn the architectural themes, materials, structures, and
design of individual homes and use of private property should enhance and not
interfere with the aesthetic usefulness of the open space to all residents.



         (d)   Landscape treatments should be provided in all
yards to enhance the building design and other site improvements. Grading,
vegetation removal and other changes to the site shall be minimized in an
effort to preserve, as best as possible, the natural beauty of a site.



         (e)   The site plan, building design and landscaping of
a new development shall achieve high quality appearance that will enhance and
be compatible with the character of the surrounding area. Site plans shall be
designed with variation both in the street patterns and the siting of
structures so the appearance of the streetscape does not become overly
repetitive, especially in the design of large developments.



         (f)   Attempts will be made to incorporate natural
materials on exterior surfaces that blend and are compatible with the natural
landscape. Suggested materials include brick, stone masonry veneer, and
painted or stained wood material. The colors of the exterior materials should
be generally subdued, to blend with the natural landscape. Earth tones,
generally, muted, are recommended, although occasional accent colors used
judiciously and with restraint may be permitted. Selections should be made
which harmonize and blend with the housing type/style and other community
units.



         (g)   Houses with identical or similar building
elevations and/or floor plans shall not be located on adjacent lots or
directly across the street from each other. Where a single house design is
used repeatedly, materials and detailing of major facade elements shall be
varied from lot to lot.



         (h)   Building facades should he articulated by using
color, arrangement, or change in materials to emphasize the facade elements.
The planes of the exterior walls should be varied in height, depth or
direction. Design elements and detailing shall be continued completely around
the structure. Such design elements shall include window treatments, window
placement, trim detailing, and exterior wall materials. Long, massive,
unbroken exterior building walls shall be avoided. Roof form and design will
include, where appropriate, varied pitch and overhangs of exterior walls.



      (3)   To review appeals of staff decisions regarding the
appropriateness and adherence of architectural plans to the standards
approved as part of the planned development application. Appeals of ARB
decisions will be made directly to the Common Council.



      (4)   To take such other actions as delegated by the Common
Council, Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, or other bodies, which may
be desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 68-11-00, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)



§ 159.032  PRE-CONSTRUCTION COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Establishment and membership. The Pre-Construction Committee
is hereby created and shall consist of the following members:



      (1)   Planning Department representative(s) (Zoning and
Building Divisions).



      (2)   Engineering Department representative(s).



      (3)   Fire Marshal or his or her designee.



      (4)   MS4 representative.



      (5)   Street Department representative.



      (6)   County Surveyor representative.



      (7)   Contractor for the project.



      (8)   Design Engineer.



      (9)   Developer/owner.



   (B)   Jurisdiction and authority. The Pre-Construction Committee is
established to coordinate all information regarding construction projects
including contractor information, emergency numbers, inspections, discussion
of the Noblesville Construction Standards, Engineer's estimates for public
infrastructure improvements including any Performance Bonds required,
coordination of on-site erosion control inspection(s) and the issuance of an
Improvement Location Permit for earth moving activities and installation of
infrastructure. The committee reviews all non-residential construction
projects, multi- family construction projects, and may include other projects
as deemed necessary by the Director of Planning and Development or the City
Engineer.



(Ord. 12-2-11, passed 3-15-11)



§ 159.033  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Beginning with all meetings after January 1, 2001, all members
of the Plan Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals (hereinafter referred
to as “Member”) shall be paid $50 for each regularly scheduled meeting of
the Board or Commission which they attend



   (B)   Any Member who is an employee of the city shall be paid along
with their regular payroll amounts



   (C)   Any non-employee Member shall be paid semi-annually, in July
and in January, for the previous six months, upon a claim prepared by the
Planning Department.



(Ord. 58-10-00, passed 10-24-00)



ZONING APPLICATIONS AND APPROVALS



§ 159.040  APPLICATIONS AND HEARINGS.



   (A)   Applications.  Applications submitted pursuant to this
chapter shall be handled in accordance with the procedures set forth below:



      (1)   Place of Filing.  Applications shall be filed with the
Director of Planning and Development or with such other City official or body
as the Director of Planning and Development may designate.



      (2)   Form, Number, and Scale.  Applications shall be on
forms supplied by the Department of Planning and Development and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as required. All plans filed as part
of any application shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and
precise understanding of the contents of said plans and the proposal being
made and submitted on the required paper size and scale size as per the
specific instruction sheets attached to said applications.



      (3)   Minimum Requirements.  Every application submitted
pursuant to this chapter shall contain such minimum data and information as
listed on the application or as may be required by the Director of Planning
and Development, City Engineer, or their designees. In addition, the
applicant shall provide all the required submittals in a Portable Document
Format (PDF), Version 7 or later, submitted on a CD, DVD, or other similar
media.



      (4)   Filing Deadlines.



         (a)   An application requiring a public hearing or
meeting will not be scheduled for such hearing or meeting unless filed, in
proper form and number and containing all required information, as per the
adopted meeting dates and filing deadline schedule.



An application so filed will be scheduled for hearing or meeting as per the
adopted meeting dates and filing deadline schedule, or on the first available
date thereafter open on the relevant hearing or meeting agenda.  All
applications shall follow the meeting dates as per the filing deadline
date.  If for some unforeseen reason, the meeting dates following the filing
deadline date cannot be adhered to, those applications shall then adhere to
the following month's meeting dates and filing deadline schedule.



         (b)   An application that does not require a public
hearing shall be filed, in proper form and number and containing all required
information.



      (5)   Fees.  Every application filed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to an application and filing fee
as established, from time to time, by the Common Council.  The owner of the
property subject of the application and, if different, the applicant shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fee.  The failure to
fully pay any such fee or required deposit when due shall be grounds for
refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or
approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which
the unpaid fee or required deposit relates.  A current fee schedule may be
found in Appendix A of this chapter.



      (6)   Special Requests.  In addition to the minimum data and
information required pursuant to division (A)(3) of this section, every
applicant shall submit such other and additional data, information, or
documentation as the Director of Planning and Development or his or her
designee or any board or commission before which its application is pending
may deem necessary or appropriate to achieve a full and proper consideration
and disposition of the particular application.



      (7)   Dedication of Right-of-Way.  All applications receiving
final approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals, Plan Commission, and/or
Common Council shall be required to dedicate all right-of-way for any and all
streets, adjacent to the property identified in the application, consistent
with and depicted on the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan, as amended or the
Hamilton County Thoroughfare Plan, as amended. The dedication may appear on a
plat prepared by a licensed land surveyor or by a metes and bounds
description and drawing prepared by a licensed engineer/surveyor and shall be
recorded within 30 days of the application approval and/or adoption. A
recorded copy of said dedication shall be submitted to the Noblesville
Planning Department prior to the issuance of any building permit. Failure to
dedicate the required right-of-way within the time period shall result in
said application being null and void.



      (8)   Waiver of Application Requirements.  Notwithstanding
any other provision of this division (A), the Director of Planning and
Development shall have the authority to waive any requirement set forth in
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section when, in his judgment,
such waiver is appropriate in light of the nature and extent of the relief
being sought or in light of special circumstances making compliance with
those provisions either unnecessary or unduly burdensome; provided, however,
that any board or commission before which such application may come shall
continue to have the right to request additional information pursuant to
division (A)(3) of this section and to delay processing of such application
until such information is provided and available in accordance with the
deadlines established in division (A)(4) of this section.



   (B)   Successive Applications.



      (1)   Second Applications Without New Grounds Barred. 
Whenever any application filed pursuant to this chapter has been finally
denied on its merits, a second application seeking essentially the same
relief, whether or not in the same form or on the same theory shall not be
returned to the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Plan Commission before one
year has lapsed from the date of denial unless in the opinion of the
official, Board of Zoning Appeals, or Plan Commission before which it was
brought, there is substantial new evidence available or an error or fact that
significantly affected the prior denial is discovered.



      (2)   New Grounds to Be Stated.  Any such second application
shall include a detailed statement of the grounds justifying consideration of
such application.



      (3)   Summary Denial With or Without Hearing.  Any such
second application may be denied by the Director of Planning and Development
summarily, and without hearing, on a finding that no grounds appear that
warrant a new hearing.  In any case where such application is set for
hearing, the applicant shall be required to establish grounds warranting
reconsideration of the merits of its application prior to being allowed to
offer any evidence on the merits.  Unless such grounds are established, the
application may be summarily dismissed for such failure.



      (4)   Exception.  Whether or not new grounds are stated, any
such second application filed more than one year after the final denial of a
prior application shall be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals or the Plan
Commission.  The applicant shall, however, be required to place in the
record all evidence available concerning changes of conditions or new facts
that have developed since the denial of the first application.  In the
absence of such evidence, it shall be presumed that no new facts exist to
support the new petition that did not exist at the time of the denial of the
first application.



   (C)   Public Hearings And Meetings.



      (1)   Setting Hearing or Meeting.  When the provisions of
this chapter require a public hearing or public meeting in connection with
any application filed pursuant to this chapter, the official or body charged
with conducting the hearing or meeting shall, upon receipt of a properly
completed application, fix a reasonable time and place for such hearing or
meeting.



         (a)   Hearings for All Applications.  The exact time
for hearings or meetings held before the Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan
Commission shall be determined by the official filing deadline timetable
adopted yearly.  However, no public hearing shall be held within 17 days,
not including the day of the meeting, or more than 49 days of receipt by the
Board of Zoning Appeals or Plan Commission on any application.



      (2)   Notice.



         (a)   Hearings on All Applications.



            1.   Notice to Parties of Interest.  After the
application is filed, the applicant shall furnish the Director of Planning
and Development, or his or her designee, with a complete list of names and
last known addresses of the owners of property adjacent to the subject
property, to a depth of two properties or 660 feet, whichever is less, of the
subject tract(s) for Board of Zoning Appeals applications, and 660 feet for
Plan Commission applications.



The owners and their mailing addresses shall be identified and provided by
the Hamilton County Auditor’s Office, Division of Transfer Mapping, a list
that is from the authentic tax records of this county.  The applicant shall
give due notice to these owners as identified herein, concerning the place,
date, and time for the first public hearing of the petition, utilizing the
notification letter prepared by the Department of Planning and Development,
mailed as a Certificate of Mailing, and date stamped by post office personnel
not less than 17 days nor more than 30 days prior to the public hearing
date.  The Certificate of Mailing receipts of the notification letters shall
be submitted to the Director of Planning and Development, or his or her
designee, prior to the public hearing.



            2.   Notice of Public Hearing in Newspaper.  The
Department of Planning shall arrange for the publication of a public notice
to be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Noblesville
jurisdictional area. Said notice is prepared by the Department of Planning
and Development and shall include the same information as described in the
“Notice to Adjoining Property Owners.” The newspaper notice shall run at
least one time prior to the meeting date of not less than 17 days prior to
the meeting. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of publishing
the notice in the newspaper and will be billed according to the policies of
the applicable newspaper. The applicant shall file with the Department of
Planning and Development a copy of the proof of publication prior to the
hearing date.



         (b)   Content of Notice.  All notices shall include the
date, time and place of such hearing or meeting, a description of the matter
to be heard or considered, the address or particular location of the subject
property, and a legal description of the subject property.



         (c)   Referral of Applications.  The Director of
Planning and Development shall refer every application or petition for which
this chapter requires a hearing before the Plan Commission, the Board Zoning
of Appeals or the Common Council to all appropriate city commissions and
departments.  Each commission and department to which an application is
referred shall review such application and submit its comments thereon to the
Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee for transmittal
to the specific body hearing the application. Such comments shall, whenever
possible, be submitted at least 14 business days prior to the date set for
the hearing and shall be made available to any person on request prior to the
hearing.



         (d)   Conduct of Hearings.  All other matters
pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be governed by the provisions of
this chapter pertaining to, and the rules promulgated by, the official or
body conducting the hearing.



         (e)   Examination and Copying of Application and Other
Documents.  At any time following the giving of notice as required in this
division (C), and upon reasonable request, any person may examine the
application and, subject to the exceptions set forth in the Indiana Freedom
of Information Act, all other documents on file pertaining to the
application.  In addition, any person shall be entitled to copies of such
application and documents upon reasonable request and payment of a fee as
established from time to time by the Council to cover the cost of such copies.



      (3)   All applications receiving final approval and/or
adoption from the Board of Zoning Appeals, Plan Commission, and/or Council
shall be required to dedicate all right-of-way for those streets as depicted
on the adopted Thoroughfare Plan, as amended, for the City of Noblesville or
Hamilton County by either a metes and bounds description and drawing or a
plat, prepared by a licensed engineer or surveyor, no later than 60 days
after the final approval or adoption  by any or all of the above-mentioned
entities to be recorded in the Hamilton County Recorder’s Office located in
Noblesville, Hamilton County, Indiana. Failure to dedicate the required
right-of-way within 60 days of the application approval/adoption shall result
in the application approval/adoption being null and void. A recorded copy of
the documents shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and
Development.



      (4)   Vested Rights.



         (a)   If a person files a complete application for a
permit with the Noblesville Planning Department as required by the effective
ordinances or rules of the city, the granting of the permit, and the granting
of any secondary, additional, or related permits or approvals required from
the Noblesville Planning Department with respect to the general subject
matter of the application for the first permit, are governed for at least
three years after the person applies for the permit by the Indiana statutes
and the city's ordinances, rules, development standards, and regulations in
effect and applicable to the property when the application is filed, even if
before the issuance of the permit or while the permit approval process is
pending, or before the issuance of any secondary, additional, or related
permits or approvals or while the secondary, additional, or related permit or
approval process is pending, the Indiana statutes or City of Noblesville
ordinances, rules, development standards, or regulations governing the
granting of the permit or approval are changed by the Indiana General
Assembly, the Noblesville Common Council or the Noblesville Planning
Department. However, this subsection does not apply if the development or
other activity to which the permit relates is not completed within seven
years after the development or activity is commenced.



         (b)   Subsection (c) below applies if:



            1.   Either:



               A.   The Noblesville Planning Department
issues to a person a permit or grants a person approval for the construction
of a development, a building, or another structure; or



               B.   A permit or approval is not required
from the Noblesville Planning Department for the construction of the
development, building, or structure;



            2.   Before beginning the construction of the
development, building, or structure, the person must obtain a permit or
approval for the construction of the development, building, or structure from
a state governmental agency; and



            3.   The person has applied for the permit or
requested the approval for the construction of the development, building, or
structure from the state governmental agency within 90 days of issuance of
the permit by the Noblesville Planning Department.



         (c)   Subject to subsection (d) below, if the conditions
of subsection (c) above are satisfied:



            1.   A permit or approval issued or granted to a
person by the Noblesville Planning Department for the construction  of the 
development,  building, or structure; or



            2.   The person's right to construct the
development, building, or structure without a permit or approval from the
Noblesville Planning Department;



is governed for at least three years after the person applies for the permit
by the Indiana statutes and City of Noblesville ordinances, rules,
development standards, regulations, and approvals in effect and applicable to
the property when the person applies for the permit or requests approval from
the state governmental agency for the construction of the development,
building, or structure, even if before the commencement of the construction
or while the permit application or approval request is pending with the state
governmental agency the statutes governing the granting of the permit or
approval from the Noblesville Planning Department are changed by the Indiana
General Assembly or the ordinances, development standards, or regulations of
the Noblesville Planning Department are changed by the Noblesville Common
Council or Noblesville Planning Department. However, this subsection does not
apply if the development or other activity to which the permit or approval
request relates is not completed within seven years after the development or
activity is commenced.



         (d)   Subsection (c) above does not apply to property
when it is demonstrated by the Noblesville Planning Department or a state
governmental agency that the construction of the development, building, or
structure would cause imminent peril to life or property.



         (e)   This section does not apply to building codes
under I.C. 22-13.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 10-3-02, passed 3-26-02; Am. Ord.
36-08-02, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 04-01-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 41-9-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 12-04-17,
passed 4-25-17)



§ 159.041  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of these regulations is to promote
orderly growth and development in the City of Noblesville and to insure that
such development is done in a manner harmonious with surrounding properties
and consistent with the general public welfare and with the policies in the
Comprehensive Plan.



   (B)   Authority.  The Technical Advisory Committee may, in
accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in this section and
other regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is
located, review and make written recommendation with regard to any
application requiring a site plan.



   (C)   Site Plan Approval Required.  Site plan review by the
Technical Advisory Committee in accordance with this section shall be
required in the following situations:



      (1)   In connection with any development or redevelopment for
which this chapter requires a Conditional Use Permit, Variance, Improvement
Location Permit, Subdivision Approval, and any Planned Development Approval.



      (2)   In connection with any redevelopment or minor
modification consisting of 35% of the market value of a premises, except for
the initial construction of a single- or two-family detached dwelling unit,
or any structure accessory thereto.



      (3)   In connection with any development, redevelopment or
minor modification in an Historic Preservation Overlay District.



   (D)   Procedure for Review and Recommendation.



      (1)   Pre-application Conference.  Refer to § 159.046,
Pre-filing Application Conference.



      (2)   Technical Advisory Committee Review.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for a site plan review
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



         (b)   Action by Department of Planning and
Development.  Within seven days after receipt by the Department of a
properly completed application, the Director of Planning and Development or
his or her designee shall forthwith transmit such application to the
Technical Advisory Committee for hearing and review.



         (c)   Public Meeting.  The Technical Advisory Committee
shall hold a public meeting on the application in accordance with the
requirements of § 159.040.  The site plan, construction drawings (civil
plans) and all other required documentation shall be reviewed for conformity
with this chapter and all other applicable regulations.



         (d)   Action by Technical Advisory Committee.  Each
member of the Technical Advisory Committee shall provide a written report and
recommendation either (i) endorsing the site plan as submitted; or (ii)
endorsing it subject to specific modifications; or (iii) not endorsing the
site plan.  The endorsement of the Technical Advisory Committee shall then
be forwarded to the appropriate administrative body for final determination.



         (e)   A pre-construction meeting shall be held within
six months from the date of the Technical Advisory Committee meeting. Within
60 days after the issuance of the ILP, earthmoving and installation of
infrastructure shall begin. Should the issuance of the ILP and construction
activity not begin within the above noted timeframes, the TAC approvals shall
lapse and become null and void thus requiring the re-submittal of said plans
including new filing fees, project plans, and application(s) and other
supplemental documents as required.



   (E)   Standards for Site Plan Review.  The goals and objectives of
the Comprehensive Plan or other applicable Noblesville planning documents
shall be utilized in the review of site plan applications.  In addition, the
Technical Advisory Committee shall only recommend approval of the site plan
submitted pursuant to this division (E) on the basis of specific written
findings directed to one or more of the following standards:



      (1)   The arrangement of the structures on the site allow for
the effective use of the proposed development.  Furthermore, such
arrangement is compatible with development on adjacent property and shall
minimize potential impact on the provision of municipal services and
utilities.



      (2)   The arrangement of open space and landscape improvements
on the site create a desirable and functional environment for patrons,
pedestrians, and occupants.  The arrangement preserves unique natural
resources where possible and respects desirable natural resources on adjacent
sites.



      (3)   All circulation systems provide adequate and safe access
to the site and are compatible with public circulation systems minimizing
potentially dangerous traffic movements.  Pedestrian and auto circulation
are separated insofar as practical.  Site curb cuts have been minimized.



      (4)   Proposed parking areas or lots are designed, located and
screened to minimize adverse visual impacts on adjacent properties. Parking
lot drainage does not adversely affect neighboring properties. Perimeter
parking lot screening and internal landscaped islands have been utilized
where feasible.



      (5)   Landscaping design shall create a logical transition to
adjoining lots and developments, screen incompatible uses, and minimize the
visual impact of parking lots on adjacent sites and roadways.  Plant
materials selected can withstand the microclimate of the city.



      (6)   Site illumination has been designed, located and
installed so as to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties.



      (7)   Reasonable drainage or erosion solutions have been
created which properly integrates the site fully and satisfactorily into the
overall existing and planned drainage system serving the city.



   (F)   Additional Standards for Non-Residential Uses, Except in I-2
and I-3.  The city requires design review of all non-residential building
construction including new structures, additions to, alterations of, or
modifications of any existing structure or building, which is located within
a non-residential zoning district. The purpose of these design principles is
to outline for the benefit of applicant the expectations of the city
regarding design and style of development in all non-residential districts. 
These principles are intended to provide a general understanding of the
criteria applied to the design review process. Each structure is considered
unique and will be judged on the following design principles.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   The architecture shall be of high quality,
enduring, and promoting a sense of character for the building street wall.



   Building walls shall reflect high-quality architecture and complement
the surrounding development(s). Building walls shall not be too simple or too
ornate and shall:



            1.   Provide those qualities in the environment
which bring value to the city;



            2.   Foster an attractiveness and functional
utility of the city as a place to live and work;



            3.   Preserve the character and quality of our
heritage by maintaining the integrity of those areas which have a discernible
character;



            4.   Protect certain public investments in the
local area;



            5.   Encourage a mix of uses and design;



            6.   Promote pedestrian accessibility and safety;
and



            7.   Minimize visual clutter and blight.



         (b)   All new structures shall relate to the community's
history, culture, and/or geography. Time, place, and culture, work to create
endless variations on the themes of the city.  Shape and form of a structure
is accomplished through architectural design. The following massing
requirements shall be incorporated in any proposed structure:



            1.   Building silhouette. Shall have similar pitch
and scale to the roofline of adjacent structures.



            2.   Spacing between the buildings. Shall include
setbacks or notches between the primary facades that frame the structure.



            3.   Setback from property line. Shall include
setback area of adjacent structures.



            4.   Proportion of windows and bays, doorways.
Shall include vertical and horizontal elements tied together in bands across
the facade.



            5.   Proportion of facade. Shall be similar in
area and height to width ratios.



            6.   Location and treatment of entryway. Shall
create a visual commonality between structures.



            7.   Exterior materials. Shall include similar
materials and treatment of adjacent structures



            8.   Building scale. Shall include height and
configuration compatible with adjacent structures.



            9.   Landscaping. Shall tie the structure to the
site and define spaces.



            10.   Shadow patterns that form decorative
features.  Shall include the light and dark surfaces from materials used and
the projections from windows, bays, etc., and recesses, and setbacks that
create visual breaks.



            11.   360° architecture (refer to definition, §
159.016).



      (2)   Design principles.  The design of the building should
be kept simple and materials and details should be consistent. Avoid a gaudy
design.



         (a)   Avoid long, straight building shapes that are
uninviting and do not contribute positively to the streetscape.



         (b)   Detail shall be an integral part of the building
design and use consistently throughout.



         (c)   The exterior building design shall be coordinated
on all elevations with regard to color, materials, architectural form, and
detailing to achieve design harmony and continuity.



         (d)   Shadow patterns created by architectural elements
such as overhangs, projections, reveals, and awnings are strongly encouraged.



         (e)   Buildings shall be broken into a series of volumes
that lessen the volume and mass of the building by stepping back upper levels
or integrating projections and recesses into the design



         (f)   Structures located toward the front of the
property serve to visually narrow wide streets. Unifying the area with site
amenities can lessen the impact of the automobile and encourage pedestrian
use.



         (g)   Protection of adjacent neighborhoods, in
particular the location of parking, driveways, outdoor lighting, trash bins,
landscaping, signage, development bulk standards, fencing, and the general
character of the surrounding development shall be considered when
incorporating the architectural design and materials.



      (3)   Relationships (architectural).



         (a)   New buildings shall respond to the existing
streetscape. The relative proportion of the building to its neighboring
existing buildings and pedestrians shall be maintained or enhanced when new
buildings are built or existing buildings are remodeled or altered.



         (b)   Buildings shall be designed to create interesting
outdoor spatial relationships.



         (c)   Production design common to restaurants,
hotels/motels, convenience markets, banks, etc. are strongly discouraged.



         (d)   The standard national franchise design is
unacceptable and shall be retrofitted to compliment the local character and
surrounding community. Architectural transplants from other communities are
neither appropriate nor desirable.



         (e)   Building heights, configurations, color, texture,
and materials shall be consistent among all buildings in a specific
development and/or area.



         (f)   Building entries shall be accentuated with strong
definition.



         (g)   Upgraded rear and side elevations, those exposed
to public view, shall have a level of quality and detail consistent with the
front elevation of the building.



         (h)   An identical design of at least one publicly
exposed elevation of the building cannot be repeated within a series of three
buildings on either side of the street. An identical building is one that an
ordinary observer would find the differences between the two elevations to be
imperceptible when viewing the elevations as a whole or unless instructed to
detect the differences, an ordinary observer would conclude that the two
elevations are the same.



         (i)   Building facades that are blank or windowless
shall be prohibited.



         (j)   Rooflines of existing structures or adjacent
properties shall be considered in the design to avoid clashes of materials
and styles. The visual continuity of roofs and their contributing elements
such as parapet walls, coping, cornices, etc., shall be maintained in the
building development or redevelopment.



         (k)   The roofline shall be designed in conjunction with
the mass and facade so that the building and its roof form a consistent
composition.



         (l)   Roof penetrations shall be minimized by grouping
plumbing vents and ducts together.



         (m)   Sloped roof shall be a minimum of 6/12 pitch.



      (4)   Relationships (site).



         (a)   Building design shall be fitted to the natural
contours of the site. Natural features of the site, such as natural drainage
ways, wooded or forested areas, rock formations, etc. shall be preserved.



         (b)   On wooded sites, buildings shall be carefully
situated to take advantage of the shade and energy conservation provided by
the trees.



         (c)   The impression of the buildings tucked into,
rather than superimposed on, the natural landscape shall be created.



         (d)   The view of the building from the street and
surrounding areas shall be as important as the view available to the building
occupants.



         (e)   Buildings shall be located according to the
natural characteristics of the site to avoid destroying sensitive natural
areas.



         (f)   Buildings shall be designed to harmonize with the
existing topography, thereby minimizing land disruption.



         (g)   Grading shall be held to a minimum and should
complement natural landforms.



      (5)   Materials and colors.



         (a)   Building colors should be compatible with the
adjacent buildings and neighborhood and shall reinforce the visual character
of the area. The color scheme shall be coordinated with the neighboring
buildings and the city as a whole. The intent is to unify the look of the
buildings and/or area without resorting to a "rubber stamp" type of approach.



         (b)   The color of the building shall not be such that
the building is competing for attention. Building colors shall be subdued and
not "garish" and shall not in any way become a "signing" of the building or
site



         (c)   Integral coloring of the building materials is
encouraged. Differentiation of the color shall relate to the materials and/or
the plane.



         (d)   The number of materials on the exterior building
shall be limited to prevent visual overload.



         (e)   Use of warm, muted, earth-tones shall be used on
the body of the building. More intense hues may be used as accent colors and
for the highlighting of architectural elements.



         (f)   Relate the paint colors to the natural material,
colors found on the building, such as brick, terra cotta, stone, tile, wood,
or cast iron. Brick and stone shall be left natural in all zoning districts
except those buildings located in the DT Downtown Zoning District that can be
painted with approval from the Director of Planning or his or her designee.



         (g)   Colors for building walls and storefronts shall be
compatible for the shops that occupy a multiple-storefront building. The use
of different colors to identify individual shops within a single structure is
prohibited, as it is visually disruptive and obscures the overall composition
of the facade.



         (h)   Material samples and color samples for the
buildings shall be required to be submitted with the building permit
application.



         (i)   Maximum number of colors on a single building is
three.



         (j)   No blank walls are permitted for all building
elevations. All building elevations not facing a public right-of-way shall
have a minimum of 20% of the walls having glazed areas or a glazed appearance.



         (k)   Storefronts shall consist of a maximum of 75% of
the primary facade.



 




BUILDING MATERIALS




Permitted

 
Prohibited


Hand-laid clay brick
 
Concrete


Tile or masonry
 
Faux wood grain, vinyl and aluminum siding


Native stone
 



Integral color CMU - 50% maximum
 



Gypsum reinforced fiber concrete, PERMITTED for trim elements only
 



Wood-lap siding (horizontal configuration) smooth or rough-sawn finish
(maximum 30%)
 



Stucco/EIFS (maximum 50%)
 



Split-faced block (maximum 20%)
Decorative split-faced block (maximum 40%)
 



Metal for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornamentation only
 





 



      (6)   Exterior walls (architecture).



         (a)   Exterior walls greater than 40 feet in length
shall break any flat, monolithic facade with discernible architectural
elements such as recessed windows and entrances, projections, arcades,
balconies, cornices, bases, pilasters, columns or other architectural details
or articulation combined with changes in materials to provide visual interest
and pedestrian scale. Building designs, roof lines, or facade treatments that
are monotonous shall be prohibited.



         (b)   Exterior wall materials shall be consistent
horizontally.



         (c)   Exterior wall materials/architectural changes
shall be provided with constructional logic.



         (d)   Brick or stone shall specify the pattern, color,
type, and finish number of brick or stone to be used.



         (e)   All materials shall specify the pattern, color,
type, and finish of materials to be used.



         (f)   The ratio between the width of the street corridor
or internal drives, as measured between the opposing building facades, and
the height of the walls of that corridor, measured as the foundation to eaves
dimension, plays in important role in the human scale in the streetscape. The
ratio shall generally be a width that is two to three times the height of the
defining walls or edges.



         (g)   Building sites shall accommodate pedestrians and
shall be centered on pedestrian traffic as opposed to vehicular traffic.



         (h)   Pedestrian walkways at intersections shall be
clearly defined with contrasting surfaces.



         (i)   Major commercial developments shall include a
system for internal pedestrian movement as well as being linked to city-wide
systems.



         (j)   If concrete is used for the pedestrian areas, it
shall be textured or patterned.



         (k)   For major developments, the building materials
including color of the initial building shall continue the theme among the
other buildings. Colors may change in hue only.



      (7)   Roofs.



         (a)   Roofs shall be compatible with the building's
architecture including roof shape, color, and texture.



         (b)   Gable or hip roofs.



         (c)   Any pitched roof shall be a minimum of 6/12 to
12/12 slope.



            1.   Large overhangs shall be a minimum of 12
inches.



            2.   Large roof areas shall have more than one
plane.



            3.   Roof pitches for overall porches shall be in
keeping with the principal building having a minimum slope of 3/12.



            4.   Wood shakes, slate, concrete tiles,
fiberglass shingles, asphalt composition shingles (artificial shingles).



            5.   Earth toned colors, dark hues (browns, blacks
and maybe reds or grays).



         (d)   Parapet roofs shall be permitted only to conceal
roof top mechanical equipment and shall be extended a minimum of one foot
beyond the height of the rooftop mechanical equipment. All roof top
mechanical equipment is to be hidden from public view.



         (e)   Gutters and downspouts should be internal.
However, if exposed shall be painted to match the adjacent wall or roof
materials.



         (f)   Roof-top screens used for hiding roof-top
mechanical equipment or other accessory objects shall match the roof and/or
shingle color on the building.



      (8)   Windows (all).



         (a)   Windows shall not span vertically more than one
story and shall not span across building structural elements such as walls
and mechanical spaces between the floors.



         (b)   Windows shall be separated by mullions, columns,
piers or wall sections that are a minimum of seven inches wide.



         (c)   Windows shall not be closer than three feet to a
building corner.



      (9)   Doors (all).



         (a)   Primary entrances shall be delineated having major
architectural features so that they are clearly identified as entry points,
fronting the primary access street, and are pedestrian accessible. A portico,
arcade, awning, projection, recess, or similar architectural features shall
be provided to shelter the primary entrance.



         (b)   Primary building entrances shall connect to a
sidewalk with a pedestrian walkway.



         (c)   Doors shall not be recessed more than three feet
behind the shop front windows and shall have a clear view and path to a 45°
angle past the perpendicular from each side of the door.



         (d)   Roll-down security gates, door, and windows shall
be prohibited within view of the public.



 


WINDOWS AND DOORS




   Permitted Materials (entrances)



Anodized aluminum, wood, clad wood, vinyl, or steel


Glass at the ground story shall be clear or lightly tinted with at least 90%
light transmission. Specialty windows may utilize stained, opalescent, or
glass block (maximum one per facade)


Screen frames shall match window frames


Doors shall be steel, wood, or wood clad


Translucent glass - 30% maximum



 



      (10)   Lighting.



         (a)   Design and intensity of lighting shall be
architecturally integrated with the building style, material, and color.



         (b)   All parking lot and internal street lighting shall
provide shield covers to direct the light in a downward manner.



         (c)   See §§ 159.140 through 159.148 and §§ 159.200
through 159.208 for additional requirements.



      (11)   Fencing.



         (a)   Fencing shall consist of wrought iron or brick or
stone and be complemented with appropriate landscaping to break up the length
and solidity of the fencing. This does not include fencing of outdoor storage
areas in an I-1 zoning district as regulated by §§ 159.105 through 159.109.



         (b)   The maximum height of fencing shall be as provided
in this chapter for said district in which the fence is constructed.



   (G)   Effect of Positive Recommendation.



      (1)   The recommendation of approval, or approval with
modification of a site plan shall not authorize the establishment or
extension of any use nor the development, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or moving of any building or structure, but shall merely
authorize the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for any
permits or approvals that may be required by the ordinances of the City of
Noblesville.



      (2)   A copy of every approved site plan shall be filed with
the Department of Planning and Development and the development of the site
shall be in substantial conformity with such approved and filed plan.



   (H)   Limitations on Site Plan Approval.  Subject to an extension
of time granted by the Director of Planning and Development, no
recommendation of approval, or approval with modification of a site plan
shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless a Building Permit is
issued and construction is actually begun within that period and is
thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless a Certificate of
Occupancy is issued and a use commenced within that period.



   (I)   Adjustments to Site Plan During Development.



      (1)   Minimum Necessary Adjustment.  Any adjustment approved
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall be consistent with the intent
and purpose of this chapter and the site plan as approved, shall be the
minimum necessary to overcome the particular difficulty and shall not be
approved if they would result in a violation of any standard or requirement
of this chapter.



      (2)   Minor Adjustments.  During the development of the site,
the Director of Planning and Development, with the aid of the Technical
Advisory Committee, may authorize adjustments to a site plan when such
adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering
considerations first discovered during actual development.  Such minor
adjustments shall be limited to the following:



         (a)   Altering the location of any one structure or
group of structures by not more than ten feet or one-fourth of the distance
shown on the approved site plan between such structure or structures and any
other structure or any vehicular circulation element or any boundary of the
site plan, whichever is less.



         (b)   Altering the location of any circulation element
by not more than ten feet or one-fourth of the distance shown on the approved
site plan between such circulation element and any structure, whichever is
less.



         (c)   Altering the location of any open space by not
more than 20 feet.



         (d)   Altering any final grade by not more than 20% of
the originally planned grade.



         (e)   Altering the location, by not more than 20 feet,
or type, without reduction of total number, of landscaping elements.



      (3)   Major Adjustments.  Any adjustment to a site plan not
authorized by division (I)(2) of this section shall be considered to be a
major adjustment and shall be granted only upon formal application for site
plan review.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 36-08-02, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord.
89-10-06, passed 11- 14-06; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord.
17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 12-04-17,
passed 4-25-17; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.042  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose.  Conditional uses are those uses that, because of
their potential adverse impact upon the immediate neighborhood and the City,
as a whole, require a greater degree of scrutiny and review of site
characteristics and impacts to determine their suitability in a given
location.  As such, the determination of conditional uses as appropriate
shall be contingent upon their meeting a set of specific standards and the
weighing, in each case, of the public need and benefit against the local
impact, giving effect to the proposals of the applicant for ameliorating
adverse impacts through special site planning and development techniques and
contributions to the provisions of public improvements, sites, right-of-way
and services.



   (B)   Authority.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in accordance
with the procedures and standards set forth in this section and other
regulations applicable to the district in which the subject property is
located, approve by ordinance, uses listed as conditional uses within each
zoning district.



   (C)   Parties Entitled to Seek Conditional Use.  An application for
a Conditional Use Permit may be filed with the Director of Planning and
Development or his or her designee by the owner or lessee of the subject
property or other person having a legal or equitable interest in the subject
property.



   (D)   Procedure for Review and Decision.



      (1)   Application.  Applications for a Conditional Use Permit
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



      (2)   Action by Director of Planning and Development or his or
her designee.



         (a)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application
for a Conditional Use Permit, the Director of Planning and Development or his
or her designee shall forthwith transmit to the Technical Advisory Committee
for its review subject to § 159.041.



         (b)   The report and recommendations of the Technical
Advisory Committee shall be submitted in writing from the Director to the
Board of Zoning Appeals for its review.



      (3)   Public Hearing and Notice.  The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with the
requirements of § 159.041.  Notice for the public hearing shall be
performed in the manner prescribed by § 159.041.



      (4)   Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.  Within 45 days
after the close of the public meeting, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall in
writing either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or disapprove
the application.  If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Director of
Planning and Development in writing to issue a Conditional Use Permit listing
the specific conditions specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals for
approval.  If the application is disapproved by the Board of Zoning Appeals,
it shall notify the applicant in writing.



      (5)   Judicial Review.  Final decisions of the Board of
Zoning Appeals are subject to judicial review as provided by applicable law.
(See, e.g., I.C. 36-7-4-1600 et seq.).



   (E)   Standards for Conditional Uses.  The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed
conditional use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate
evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:



      (1)   Is in fact a conditional use established within the
specific zoning district involved;



      (2)   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the
general objectives or with any specific objective of the City's Comprehensive
Plan and this chapter;



      (3)   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained
so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential
character of the same area;



      (4)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing
neighboring uses;



      (5)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities
and services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer, and schools; or that the
persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use
shall be able to provide adequately any such services;



      (6)   Will not create excessive additional requirements at
public expense for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental
to the economic welfare of the community;



      (7)   Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any
persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production
of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors;



      (8)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which
shall be so designed as not to create an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares; and



      (9)   Will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage of a
natural, scenic, or historic feature of major importance.



   (F)   Supplementary Conditions And Safeguards.  In granting any
Conditional Use Permit, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe conditions
and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, screening, parking and other matters relating to the purposes
and objectives of this chapter upon the premises benefited by a conditional
use as may be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects
upon other property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property
or upon public facilities and services.  However, such conditions shall not
be used as a device to authorize as a conditional use that which is intended
to be temporary in nature.  Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in
the ordinance granting the Conditional Use Permit.  Any conditions
prescribed by the Board of Zoning Appeals must be recorded by the applicant
as a supplement to the deed for the property, in the Hamilton County
Recorder's office.  Violation of any such condition or limitation shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall constitute grounds for revocation of the
conditional use permit pursuant to §§ 159.240 through 159.248 and 159.999



   (G)   No Presumption of Approval.  The listing of a conditional use
within each zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption
that such conditional use will be approved.  Rather, each proposed
conditional use shall be evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to its
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in § 159.041, and
with the standards for the district in which it is located, in order to
determine whether approval of the conditional use is appropriate at the
particular location and in the particular manner proposed.



   (H)   Limitations on Conditional Uses.



      (1)   Subject to an extension of time granted by the Director
of Planning and Development, no Conditional Use Permit shall be valid for a
period longer than one year unless a building permit is issued and
construction is actually begun within that period and is thereafter
diligently pursued to completion, or unless a certificate of occupancy is
issued and a use commenced within that period or unless a longer time is
requested and granted by the Common Council.



      (2)   The approval of a proposed Conditional Use Permit by the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be deemed to authorize only that particular use
at that particular location for which the conditional use was issued.



      (3)   Except when otherwise provided in the ordinance for
approving a conditional use, a conditional use shall be deemed to relate to,
and be for the benefit of the use and lot in question, rather than the owner
or operator of such use or lot.



   (I)   Effect of Approval.  The approval of a proposed Conditional
Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not authorize the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and
processing of applications for such permits or approvals as may be required
by the regulations of the City, including but not limited to a building
permit and a certificate of occupancy.



   (J)   Amendment to Approved Conditional Use Development Plans.  The
holder of an Improvement Location Permit for a conditional use may apply to
the Board of Zoning Appeals at any time for an alteration, change, amendment,
or extension of the Conditional Use of Development Plan upon which such
permit was based.



      (1)   Upon receipt of such application, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall proceed as in the case of original applications for an
Improvement Location Permit for a conditional use.



      (2)   In the event the Board of Zoning Appeals shall approve
and order such applications or Development Plan changed, altered, amended, or
extended, it shall notify the Director of Planning and Development who shall
issue an amended Improvement Location Permit accordingly.



      (3)   Any alteration, change or amendment to a site plan
(previously approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals through the conditional
use process) and involving a new structure, combination of structures, or
addition to an existing structure, may be approved by the Director of
Planning and Development, who may issue an Improvement Location Permit
without the requirement of a public hearing or Board of Zoning Appeals
approval provided that:



         (a)   The net increase in floor area is less than 10,000
square feet but not to exceed 50% of the gross floor area of structures on
the parcel;



         (b)   That the plans for the proposed use be submitted
to and reviewed by the Technical Advisory Committee according to the schedule
of filing deadlines established by the Director of Planning and Development;



         (c)   That the plans be revised to incorporate any
recommendations of the Technical Advisory Committee that the Director of
Planning and Development deems appropriate; and



         (d)   That the property of the proposed use does not
fall within 100 feet of the property line of an existing residential land use
or platted residential subdivision.



   (K)   Temporary Zoning Certificates for Staged Development. 
Whenever a Conditional Use Permit has been approved and is of such a nature
that the applicant desires to complete the structures and improvements shown
in the Conditional Use Development Plan by stages, the applicant may make
application for a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for any portion of the
Plan that has been completed.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.043  INTERPRETATIONS, APPEALS, AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Interpretations.



      (1)   Purpose.  The interpretation authority established by
division (A)(4) of this section is intended to recognize that the provisions
of this chapter, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical
matter, address every specific situation to which they may have to be
applied.  Many such situations can be readily addressed by an interpretation
of the specific provisions of this chapter in light of the general and
specific purposes for which those provisions have been enacted.  Because the
interpretation authority established is an administrative rather than a
legislative authority,  it is not intended to add to or change the essential
content of this chapter but is intended only to allow authoritative
application of that content to specific cases.



      (2)   Authority.  The Director of Planning and Development,
subject to the procedures, standards, and limitations of division (A)(4) of
this section may, by written order, render interpretations of the provisions
of this chapter and of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to it.



      (3)   Parties Entitled to Seek Interpretations.  Applications
for interpretations may be filed by any person having a legal or equitable
interest in property that gives rise to the need for an interpretation;
provided that interpretations shall not be sought by any person based solely
on hypothetical circumstances or where the interpretation would have no
effect other than as an advisory opinion.



      (4)   Procedure for Review and Decision.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for interpretations of
this chapter shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



         (b)   Action on Application.  Within ten working days
following the receipt of a properly completed application for interpretation,
the Director of Planning and Development shall inform the applicant in
writing of his interpretation, stating the specific precedent, reasons, and
analysis upon which the determination is based.  The failure of the Director
of Planning and Development to act within ten working days, or such further
time to which the applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision
denying the application rendered on the day following such ten day period.



         (c)   Records.  A record of all applications for
interpretations shall be kept on file in the office of the Director of
Planning and Development.  At least once a year, the Director of Planning
and Development shall make public a listing of his decisions, by address,
regarding the applications for interpretation.



         (d)   Appeal.  Appeals from interpretations rendered by
the Director of Planning and Development may be taken to the Board of Zoning
Appeals pursuant to division (B)(4) of this section.



      (5)   Standards for Interpretations.  The following standards
shall govern the Director of Planning and Development, and the Board of
Zoning Appeals on appeals from the Director of Planning and Development, in
issuing interpretations.



         (a)   Any use defined in § 159.016 shall be interpreted
as therein defined;



         (b)   No interpretation shall permit any use in any
district unless evidence shall be presented that demonstrates that it will
comply with the general district regulations established for that particular
district;



         (c)   No interpretation shall permit any use in a
district unless such use is similar to other uses permitted in the district
and is more similar to those uses than to uses permitted in a more
restrictive district;



         (d)   If the proposed use is most similar to a use
permitted only as a conditional use in the district in which it is proposed
to be located, then any interpretation permitting such use shall be
conditioned on the issuance of a conditional use permit for such use pursuant
to division (A)(2) of this section; and



         (e)   No interpretation shall permit the establishment
of any use that would be inconsistent with the statement of purpose of the
district in question.



      (6)   Effect of Favorable Interpretations.  No interpretation
finding a particular use to be permitted or permitted as a conditional use in
a particular district shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing,
and processing of applications for any permits and approvals that may be
required by the ordinances and ordinances of the City including, but not
limited to, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, subdivision
approval, and site plan approval.



      (7)   Limitations on Interpretations.



         (a)   Subject to an extension of time granted by the
Director of Planning and Development, no interpretation shall be valid for a
period longer than 12 months from the date of issue.



         (b)   An interpretation finding a use to be permitted,
or permitted as a conditional use in a particular district, shall be deemed
to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued, and such permit
shall not be deemed to authorize any allegedly similar use for which a
separate use interpretation has not been issued.



   (B)   Appeals.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   The appeal procedure is provided as a safeguard
against arbitrary, ill-considered, or erroneous administrative decisions. 
It is intended to avoid the need for legal action by establishing local
procedures to review and correct administrative errors.  It is not, however,
intended as a means to subvert the clear purposes, meanings, or intent of
this chapter or the rightful authority of the Director of Planning and
Development to enforce the requirements of this chapter.  To these ends, the
reviewing body should give all proper deference to the spirit and intent
embodied in the language of this chapter and to the reasonable
interpretations of that language by those charged with the administration of
this chapter.



         (b)   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director of Planning
and Development certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals, after the notice of
appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would cause, in his opinion, imminent peril to life or property, in
which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or by a
court of record, on application, of notice to the Director of Planning and
Development and on due cause shown.



         (c)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order or final decision as in its opinion
ought to be made in the premises, and to that end has all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.



      (2)   Authority.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals from, and review orders, decisions, determinations, or the
failure to act, of the Director of Planning and Development acting pursuant
to his or her authority and duties under this chapter and to that end the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the same powers and be subject to the same
standards and limitations as the Director of Planning and Development with
respect to any order, decision, or determination being appealed.



      (3)   Parties Entitled to Appeal.  Appeals to the Board of
Zoning Appeals concerning the interpretation or administration of this
chapter may be taken by any persons aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of
the legislative authority of the city affected by any decision of the
Director of Planning and Development.



      (4)   Procedure.



         (a)   Application.  An application for appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be filed not later than 45 days after the
action being appealed and shall be in accordance with the requirements of §
159.040.



         (b)   Action by Director of Planning and Development. 
Upon receipt of a properly completed application for an appeal, the Director
of Planning and Development shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Zoning
Appeals the application together with all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.



         (c)   Public Hearing and Notice.  The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with the
requirements of § 159.040.  Notice for the public hearing shall be provided
in the manner prescribed by § 159.040.



         (d)   Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.  Within 30
days after the close of the public meeting, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
render a written decision on the appeal.  Such decision may reverse, affirm,
or modify, in whole or in part, the action appealed from and may include such
order or determination as, in the opinion of the Board of Zoning Appeals, is
proper to be made in the premises.  The failure of the Board of Zoning
Appeals to act within such 30 days, or such further time to which the
applicant may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision denying the appeal.



         (e)   Review by Certiorari.  Every decision by the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari. Any person
aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to the
Circuit Court of Hamilton County a petition duly verified setting forth that
such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of
the illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days
after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (5)   Right to Grant Variance in Deciding Appeals.  In any
case where the application for appeal is accompanied by an application for a
variance in accordance with § 159.043(C)(4), the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall notice, hear, decide to grant or deny, such variance in compliance with
the provisions of § 159.043(C)(4).



      (6)   Conditions and Limitations on Rights Granted by
Appeal.  In any case where this chapter imposes conditions and limitations
upon any right, any such right granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals on
appeal shall be subject to such conditions and limitations in the same manner
and to the same extent as if secured without the necessity of an appeal.



   (C)   Variances.



      (1)   Purpose.  The variance procedures are intended to
provide a narrowly circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from
unforeseen particular applications of this chapter that create unnecessary
hardships.  When such hardships may be more appropriately remedied, if at
all, pursuant to other provisions of this chapter, the variance procedure is
inappropriate.



      (2)   Authority.



         (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may authorize upon
application in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter
as will not be contrary to the public interest where,  owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
result in serious practical difficulty. No non-conforming use of neighboring
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or
non-conforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts
shall be considered grounds for issuance of a variance.  Variances shall not
be granted solely on the grounds of convenience or profit; however, where
strict application of the provisions of this chapter would result in serious
practical difficulty, convenience or profit may be considered as a relevant
factor in the Board decision.



         (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may consider issuing a
variance from the terms and provisions of the Flood Hazard (FH) District
provided the structure for which a variance is requested existed at the time
of the effective date of this chapter, and provided the applicant offers that
the grant of the requested variance will not increase flood heights, create
additional threats to public safety, cause additional public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing laws or ordinances.



         (c)   In addition, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
consider land use variances in cases in which a proposed use for a property
does not fall within the list of permitted or conditional uses for the zone
district in which it is located.



      (3)   Parties Entitled to Seek Variance.  An application for
a variance may be filed with the Director of Planning and Development by the
owner or lessee of the subject property or other person having a legal or
equitable interest in the subject property.



      (4)   Procedure for Review and Decision.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for a variance shall
be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



         (b)   Action by Director of Planning and Development.



            1.   Upon receipt of a properly completed
application for a Conditional Use Permit, the Director of Planning and
Development shall forthwith transmit it to the Technical Advisory Committee
for its review subject to § 159.041.



            2.   The report and recommendations of the
Technical Advisory Committee shall be submitted in writing from the Director
to the Board of Zoning Appeals for its review.



         (c)   Public Hearing and Notice.  The Board of Zoning
Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the application in accordance with the
requirements of § 159.040.  Notice for the public hearing shall be provided
in the manner prescribed by § 159.040.



         (d)   Action by Board of Zoning Appeals.  Within 45
days after the close of the public meeting, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
in writing either approve, approve with supplementary conditions, or
disapprove the application.  If the application is approved or approved with
modifications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall instruct the Director of
Planning and Development in writing to issue a Variance Permit listing the
variance allowed and the specific conditions specified by the Board of Zoning
Appeals for approval.  If the application is disapproved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, it shall notify the applicant in writing.



         (e)   Review by Certiorari.  Every decision by the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall be subject to review by certiorari.  Any
person aggrieved by a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may present to
the Circuit Court of Hamilton County a petition duly verified setting forth
that such decision is illegal in whole or in part and specifying the grounds
of the illegality.  The petition shall be presented to the court within 30
days after the entry of the decision or order of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (5)   Findings of Fact for Variances.



         (a)   Findings of Fact. 



            1.   Every application for a variance shall be
subject to the findings of fact as set out in I.C. 36-7-4-918.5 et seq. A
variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted unless the Board
of Zoning Appeals makes specific written findings of fact based directly on
the particular evidence presented in the application materials and at the
hearing which support conclusions that all of the standards and conditions
imposed by recommendation of the Director of Planning and Development and the
Technical Advisory Committee have been met. A Development Standards Variance
may be approved only upon a determination in writing that:



               A.   The approval will not be injurious to
the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;



               B.   The use arid value of the area adjacent
to the property included in the variance will not be affected in a
substantially adverse manner; and



               C.   The strict application of the terms of
the zoning ordinance will result in practical difficulties in the use of the
property.



            2.   In addition to the findings of fact, the
Board should consider the following factors when deliberating over a variance
request:



               A.   Hardship.  No variance shall be
granted pursuant to this unless the applicant shall establish that carrying
out the strict letter of the provision's of this chapter would create a
particular hardship or practical difficulty. The hardship in the FH zoning
district must be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved.
Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience,
aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or
disagreement with the neighbors also does not qualify as an exceptional
hardship as they can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive. The need for a property
owner to build elsewhere or put the property to a different use than
originally intended does not constitute a hardship.



               B.   Unique physical condition.  The
subject lot is exceptional as compared to other lots subject to the same
provision by reason of a unique physical condition, including presence of an
existing use, structure, or sign, whether conforming or non-conforming;
irregular or substandard shape or size; exceptional topographical features;
or other extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to and inherent in the
subject lot that amount to more than a mere inconvenience to the owner and
that relate to or arise out of the lot rather than the personal situation of
the current owner of the lot.



               C.   Not self-created.  The aforesaid
unique physical condition is not the result of any action or inaction of the
owner or its predecessors in title and existed at the time of the enactment
of the provisions from which a variance is sought or was created by natural
forces or was the result of governmental action, other than the adoption of
this chapter.



               D.   Denied substantial rights.  The
carrying out of the strict letter of the provision from which variance is
sought would deprive the owner of the subject lot of substantial rights
commonly enjoyed by owners of other lots subject to the same provision.



               E.   Not merely special privilege.  The
alleged hardship or difficulty is neither merely the inability of the owner
or occupant to enjoy some special privilege or additional right not available
to owners or occupants of other lots subject to the same provision, nor
merely the inability of the owner to make more money from the use of the
subject lot.



               F.   Ordinance and plan purposes.  The
variance would not result in a use or development of the subject lot that
would not be in harmony with the general and specific purposes for which this
chapter and the provision from which a variance is sought were enacted or the
general purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.



               G.   No other remedy.  There is no means
other than the requested variance by which the alleged hardship or difficulty
can be avoided or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use
of the subject lot.



               H.   Minimum required.  The requested
variance is the minimum measure of relief necessary to alleviate the alleged
hardship or difficulty presented by the strict application of the ordinance.



         (b)   Additional Considerations for Flood Hazard
Areas.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall, in weighing the appropriateness
of a variance for Flood Hazard areas, consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter,
as well as the following:



            1.   The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage.



            2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.



            3.   The importance of the services provided by
the proposed facility to the community.



            4.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable.



            5.   The availability of alternative locations for
the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



            6.   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development.



            7.   Whether development of the subject lot would
be in harmony with the general and specific purposes of this chapter, the
comprehensive plan, and the floodplain management program of that area.



            8.   The safety of access to the property in times
of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



            9.   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate
of rise, and sediment of transport of floodwaters at the site.



            10.   Costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water systems,
streets, and bridges.



         (c)   Every application for a land use variance shall be
subject to the findings of fact as set out in I.C. 36-7-4-918.4 et seq. A
variance from the land use of this chapter shall not be granted unless the
Board of Zoning Appeals makes specific written findings of fact based
directly on the particular evidence presented in the application materials
and at the hearing which support conclusions that all of the standards and
conditions imposed by recommendation of the Director of Planning and
Development and the Technical Advisory Committee have been met. A land use
variance may be approved only upon a determination in writing that:



            1.   the approval will not be injurious to the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community;



            2.   the use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner;



            3.   the need for the variances arises from some
condition peculiar to the property involved;



            4.   the strict application of the terms of the
zoning ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the
property for which the variance is sought; and



            5.   the approval does not interfere substantially
with the comprehensive plan.



   (F)   Supplemental requirements for variances in flood hazard areas.



      (1)   Variances shall only be issued for properties located
within the flood hazard zoning district when there is:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



         (b)   A determination of failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship.



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



      (2)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway may
be granted.



      (3)   Any variance for non-residential uses granted in a
floodway will require prior approval of a permit from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources.



      (4)   Variances to the standards regulating building
protection standards may be granted only when a new structure or substantial
improvement is to be located on a lot of one half acre or less in size,
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the flood protection grade.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (6)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or
restoration of any structure individually listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and
Structures. Such repair, rehabilitation, or restoration may be issued only
upon a determination that the proposed construction will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an "historic structure" and the variance
is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



      (7)   Any applicant that is granted a variance shall be given
written notice, which will then be recorded against the deed to the property
in the office of the County Recorder, specifying the following:



         (a)   The difference between the base flood elevation
and the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built.



         (b)   Stating that construction of a structure below the
base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance. Such rate increase will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



         (c)   Such construction below the base flood elevation
increases risks to life and property.



      (8)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain records of
appeal actions and report any variance to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
49-10-14, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.044  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide standards
and procedures for making amendments to the text of this chapter and the
Zoning Map that are of general significance or application.  This amendment
process is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special
privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make adjustments necessary
in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy.



   (B)   Authority.  The text of this chapter and the Zoning Map may
be amended from time to time by the passage of an ordinance duly adopted by
the Common Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section.



   (C)   Parties Entitled to Initiate Amendments.



      (1)   Amendment to Text.  Amendments to this chapter may be
initiated by adoption of a motion of the Plan Commission or by adoption of a
resolution by Common Council.



      (2)   Amendment to Zoning Map.  Amendments to this chapter
may be initiated by adoption of a motion of the Plan Commission; by adoption
of a resolution by Common Council; or by the filing of a petition by at least
50% of the owners of property within the area proposed to be changed or
affected by said amendment.



   (D)   Standards for Amendments.  The wisdom of amending the text of
this chapter or the Zoning Map is a matter committed to the sound legislative
discretion of the Common Council and is not controlled by any one standard.
In making their determination, however, the Common Council should, in
determining whether to adopt or deny, or to adopt some modification of the
Plan Commission's recommendation, consider, among other factors, the
following:



      (1)   Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the
goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and
amended from time to time by the Common Council;



      (2)   Whether the proposed amendment is compatible with
current conditions and the overall character of existing development in the
immediate vicinity of the subject property;



      (3)   Whether the proposed amendment is the most desirable use
for which the land in the subject property is adapted;



      (4)   Whether the proposed amendment will have an adverse
effect on the value of properties throughout the jurisdiction; and



      (5)   Whether the proposed amendment reflects responsible
standards for development and growth.



   (E)   Procedure for Review and Decision.  A petition to amend the
text of this chapter or the Zoning Map shall be processed in accordance with
the procedures set forth below:



      (1)   Petitions.  Petitions for amendment to this chapter
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



      (2)   Public Hearing and Notice.  After receipt of a properly
completed petition for an amendment, the Director of Planning and Development
shall fix a date for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of
§ 159.040.  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as prescribed in
§ 159.040.



      (3)   Plan Commission Action.  Within 60 days after receipt
of the proposed amendment, the Plan Commission shall recommend the approval
or denial of the proposed amendment, or the approval of the amendment with
modifications, and shall then submit its written recommendation, together
with the petition for the text and/or map change, to the Common Council.



      (4)   Common Council Action.  The Common Council shall either
adopt or reject the recommendation of the Plan Commission or adopt some
modification of the recommendation of the Plan Commission.  Failure of the
legislative body to pass the proposed amendment within 90 days after its
rejection by the Plan Commission constitutes rejection of the proposed
amendment; and the proposed amendment may not be reconsidered by the Plan
Commission or legislative body until the expiration of one year after the
date of its original rejection by the Plan Commission.



      (5)   Effective Date.  Such amendment adopted by Common
Council shall become effective immediately upon adoption and approval by the
Plan Commission.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.045  PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   Improvement Location Permits.



      (1)   Scope.  No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered; nor shall any building,
structure, or land be established or changed in use without an improvement
location permit issued by the Director of Planning and Development.  A
permit shall be issued by the Director of Planning and Development upon
finding that the proposed use complies with the requirements of this chapter
or upon written order from the Board of Zoning Appeals deciding an appeal,
conditional use, or variance; or from the Common Council approving a Planned
Unit Development, as provided by this chapter.  Such permit shall be posted
on or near the structure during the entire duration of construction and shall
be the original card issued by the Director of Planning and Development.



      (2)   Application for Improvement Location Permit.
Applications for Improvement Location Permits (ILP) shall be filed in
accordance with the requirements of § 159.040. An ILP for the installation
of infrastructure and/or grading, erosion, or other similar land activities
shall be required to obtain approvals from the various Technical Advisory
Committee members prior to a request for a Pre- Construction meeting. The
information required for a Pre-Construction meeting includes but is not
limited to performance bond submittals, certified grading plans, construction
plans, and other documentation as may be necessary for the release of the ILP.



         (a)   For all non-residential construction projects,
multi-family construction projects, and those projects as deemed necessary by
the Director of Planning Development or the Engineering Department, a
Pre-Construction Committee meeting is required.



         (b)   Contact the Engineering Department for scheduling
of a pre-construction meeting. At a minimum, seven business days prior to the
scheduled meeting, the following information shall be submitted as per the
Pre-Construction Meeting Protocol Sheet. The following items are required to
be submitted and/or approved prior to the actual Pre- Construction meeting:



            1.   A PDF copy of all civil drawings approved by
the Technical Advisory Committee.



            2.   A copy of the Technical Advisory Committee
approval letter(s).



            3.   A copy of the Geographic Information System
(GIS) approval letter.



            4.   A copy of the MS4 approval letter.



            5.   A copy of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management (IDEM) approval letter for sanitary sewers.



            6.   A copy of the County Surveyor's "indirect" or
"direct" outlet permit, regarding any County Legal Drains.



            7.   A copy of all conveyance documents for
off-site easements and/or public right-of-way.



            8.   A check payable to the City of Noblesville
for pre-paid engineering inspection fees.



            9.   A certified construction cost estimate
prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor detailing each
individual infrastructure item to be bonded and its associated costs (e.g.
surface, binder, stone, sub-base).



            10.   Original performance bond(s) in the amount
of 110% of the construction cost estimates for all public infrastructure
improvements. This includes but is not limited to sidewalk/trails, driveway
approaches, and/or entrance/deceleration lane improvements.



            11.   A.   Residential development.



                  i.   Three sets of full-sized scaled
drawings as per the approvals above.



                  ii.   Two sets of 11 x 17-inch scaled
drawings.



                  iii.   One PDF of the approved scaled
drawings submitted on a disk or other acceptable media.



               B.   Non-residential development.



                  i.   Three sets of full-sized scaled
drawings as per the approvals above.



                  ii.   Two sets of 11 x 17-inch scaled
drawings.



                  iii.   One PDF of the approved scaled
drawings submitted on a disk or other acceptable media.



      (3)   Permits for Industrial Uses.  An application for an
Improvement Location Permit for an enclosed industrial use or an open
industrial use shall be accompanied by a "Certificate of Compliance"
subscribed by a registered professional engineer or architect, certifying
that the use intended will satisfy the standards of the enclosed industrial
use or the open industrial use, as the case may be, and in the District in
which it is to be located.  The Director of Planning and Development or his
or her designee may take ten working days in which to study the application,
during which time he may consult with appropriate technical consultants. If
after the ten working days period the Director has not required any
additional information or stated any objections in writing, the Director of
Planning and Development or his or her designee shall issue the Improvement
Location Permit.



      (4)   Submission to State or Local Highway Department. 
Before any improvement location permit is issued which affects any land
within 300 feet of the centerline of a proposed highway or a highway for
which changes or improvements are proposed, or within 500 feet of the
intersection of the aforementioned highway and any other public road or
street, the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) and/or any local or
county highway departments must be notified by the applicant and comments or
suggestions received back from same.  Such permit shall be posted on or near
the structure during the entire duration of construction and shall be the
original card issued by the Director of Planning and Development.



      (5)   Action by Department of Planning and Development.



         (a)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application
for a Improvement Location Permit, the Director of Planning and Development
shall forthwith transmit such application to the Technical Advisory Committee
for its review subject to § 159.041.



         (b)   Within five working days after the receipt of the
report and recommendations of the Technical Advisory Committee, the Director
of Planning and Development shall either approve or disapprove the
application.  One set of the plans shall be returned to applicant by the
Director of Planning and Development and be marked either "approved" or
"disapproved", and the Director of Planning and Development's signature on
the copy should attest.  One set of the plans, similarly marked, shall be
retained by the Director of Planning and Development.  If the application is
approved, the Director of Planning and Development shall issue a placard to
the applicant.  It is to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property in
question and will attest to the fact that the plans for construction or
alteration are in compliance with the provisions of the state building rules
and regulations.  If disapproved, the Director of Planning and Development
shall notify the applicant indicating the reasons in writing within ten days.



      (6)   Expiration of the Improvement Location Permit.  The
work or use authorized by any Improvement Location Permit must be commenced
within six months of the date of issuance of such permit, otherwise the same
shall lapse and be and become null and void.  All work so authorized shall
be completed within 24 months from the issuance of the permit, and provided
that for good cause shown the Director of Planning and Development may extend
the work completion time.



      (7)   Failure to Obtain an Improvement Location Permit. 
Failure to obtain an Improvement Location Permit shall be a violation of this
chapter and be punishable under the provisions of §§ 159.240 through
159.248 and 159.999.



      (8)   Limitation on Improvement Location Permits. 
Improvement location permits issued on the basis of plans and applications
approved by the Director authorize only the use or arrangement set forth in
such approved plans and applications or amendments thereto, and no other use,
arrangements, or construction.  Any use, arrangement, or construction
contrary to that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
be punishable under the provisions of §§ 159.240 through 159.248 and
159.999.



      (9)   Records of Improvement Location Permits.  Every
Improvement Location Permit issued pursuant to division (A)(3) of this
section shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Planning and
Development and shall be a public record.



   (B)   Building Code and Building Permits.



      (1)   Purpose.  The City Building Code is intended to
regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving,
removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area,
maintenance, electricity, plumbing, heating, ventilation and air conditioning
of all public and private buildings or structures within the corporate limits
of the City of Noblesville, Indiana, and within the area which is within the
jurisdiction of the Noblesville City Plan Commission.  The creation of the
Office of Building Commissioner provides for the issuance of building
permits, the collection of fees therefor, and a penalty for the violation
thereof.



      (2)   Title.  This section shall be known and may be cited as
the "Building Code of Noblesville, Indiana."



      (3)   Content of Building Code. Certain documents, copies of
which are on file in the Office of the Department of Planning and
Development, and the Office of the Clerk of the City of Noblesville, Indiana,
the Indiana Department of Homeland Security, Fire and Building Safety
Division, Indianapolis, Indiana being marked and designated as General
Administrative Rules 675 IAC 12, Indiana Building Code 13, Indiana
Residential Code 14, Indiana Industrialized Building Systems 15, Indiana
Plumbing Code 16, Indiana Electrical Code 17, Indiana Mechanical Code 18,
Indiana Energy Conservation Code 19, Indiana Swimming Pool Code 20, Safety
Code for Elevators, Escalators, Man Lifts and Hoists Code 21, Indiana Fire
Code 22, Indiana Amusement Device (Recreational Facilities) Code 23, Indiana
Supplementary Fire Safety Rules Code 24, and Indiana Fuel Gas Code 25, and
Indiana Visibility Rule 27 be and the same are hereby adopted as the Building
Code for regulation, the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, maintenance, fire prevention and safety,
electricity, plumbing, heating, ventilation and air conditioning of all
public and private buildings and structures within the Jurisdiction of the
Noblesville Plan Commission as set forth herein; and all rules and
regulations as provided by the Fire Safety Division of the Indiana Homeland
Security as above referenced to, as now on file in the Offices referred to
and are hereby adopted including all amendments by the Fire and Building
Safety Commission and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Code.



      (4)   Building Permit Required.  No persons, firms, or
corporations shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, remove, improve,
convert, or demolish any building or structure within the Jurisdiction of the
Noblesville City Plan Commission, or cause the same to be done, until first
having obtained a separate building permit for each such building or
structure from the Director of Planning and Development, who may require
plans thereof, together with a statement of materials to be used.



      (5)   Application for Permit.



         (a)   To obtain a permit, applicant must first file an
application therefor, on forms to be furnished by the Director of Planning
and Development, and every applicant shall complete all information requested
on said form.



         (b)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied
by the following:



            1.   Residential Projects.



               a.   Construction (civil) plans;



               b.   Three development plans and legal
description;




               c.   2012 Energy Code Compliance;





               d.   For projects within the city limits, a
copy of the approved sewer/driveway permit or





               e.   A copy of the approved septic permit
and a copy of the approved driveway permit;





               f.   For projects within the territorial
jurisdiction of Noblesville, a copy of the approved septic permit and a copy
of the approved driveway permit from Hamilton County;




               g.   One complete Portable Document Format
(PDF), Version 7 or later, of all required documents and paperwork provided
through a file hosting system such as Drop Box, or on a CD, DVD, or other
similar media that is filed at the time the application is submitted to the
Planning Department. Review by Planning and Engineering Staffs of the
submitted documentation shall not begin until the digital formatted items are
received by the Planning Department.



            2.   Commercial Projects.



               a.   Digital PDF's only unless otherwise
noted below;



               b.   Two copies of the development (site)
plan including the legal description;



               c.   Two copies of the landscaping plan
including both botanical and generic names of plants, heights, calipers, and
gallon sizes of plants at the time of planting. Include the location of both
underground and above ground utilities. For above ground utility lines,
indicate the type of line i.e. transmission or distribution.



               d.   One full set of color elevations of the
building exterior (front, both sides, and rear) including the labeling of
building materials, colors, and height.



               e.   Roof Truss Certification for One and
Two Family Structures shall be as per local ordinance as required by State of
Indiana, Section R802.10.1 and shall include the following:



                  1.   Truss design drawings must have
lot number and subdivision stated on packet



                  2.   Truss design drawings shall be
dated within the code-cycle that is in effect and be clear and readable.



                  3.   Truss design must comply with
ANSI/TPI 1-2002



                  4.   Trusses shall be designed in
accordance with accepted engineered practices.



                  5.   Truss design drawings shall be
certified by a registered architect under I.C. 25-4 or a professional
engineer registered under I.C. 25-31.



                  6.   Wind uplift rating must be on
truss specifications.



                  7.   Locations noted on truss design
drawings where permanent member bracing is required by the manufacturer or
design professional.



               f.   For single-family and two-family
dwellings, the site plan shall include the standard information as defined in
the Unified Development Ordinance and the following additional information.
The drawing shall be titled "Site Plan and Pre- Construction Elevation
Certificate. Information required on the updated submitted site plan includes
both "existing" and "proposed" grades for the structure, lot, and drainage
swales, adjacent pond 100-year flood elevations; finished floor elevations of
the proposed structure; all window wells and/or ingress/egress areas from the
basement area including elevations; the finish floor elevations for
structures on adjacent lots or the proposed pad elevations for those adjacent
lots without structures; and spot grade elevations for those adjacent
structures. A "typical driveway construction profile" as per the Noblesville
Construction Standards and drive slope calculations are required on the
submittal including the profile of the grade on the driveway elevation. Any
and all Flood Hazard Statements, base flood profiles, floodway/floodway
fringe/flood hazard area lines, etc. Include the subdivision restrictions for
all yard setbacks and/or aggregate side yards, finished floor elevation
including pad grade, garage finished floor elevation, basement finished floor
elevation, residential finish first floor elevation and any notes pertaining
to the garage finish floor elevation and its height above the curb at the
drive, and all ground cover calculations including drive, public walks,
private walk, sod, and hydro seeding. Additional information may be required
from either the Planning Department or Engineering Department under certain
circumstances. The following certification statement:



“I certify that the elevations shown as "existing" grades were existing on
(insert date), prior to the construction of the house and lot improvements
and prepared for the benefit of the parties indicated hereon and for the
purpose of obtaining approval for the "Building Permit." It is my opinion
that if the proposed finish grades are constructed as shown, the surface
drainage on the subject lot will be satisfactory for residential
construction. This plan was compiled based on documents prepared by others
and the (insert your company's name) assumes no liability for the accuracy,
completeness, or acceptance of those documents. This drawing is not intended
to be represented as a retracement or original boundary survey, a route
survey, or a surveyor location report."



Include "Notes: The drawing is based on (fill in the blank with one or all
including but not limited to construction plans, record drawings, type of
survey). Your company's name detailing any warranties to the accuracy or
sufficiency of the construction plans or record drawings and any
discrepancies.



      Upon completion of the improvements and prior to the issuance of
a temporary and/or final Certificate of Occupancy, a "Post Construction
Elevation Certificate" shall be submitted to the Planning Department to
verify all information submitted on the "Site Plan and Pre-Construction
Elevation Certificate".



   As per the submitted 'Site Plan and Pre-Construction Elevation
Certificate', the finished floor elevation of the proposed structure shall
not be greater than three feet (+/-) above the required height of the
finished floor elevation (15-inches) as measured from the lowest point of the
top of the back of curb as per the 'Grading and Building Pad Elevation -
Section 105.02' of the City of Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual as adopted and amended unless otherwise approved by the City of
Noblesville's Engineer for warranted circumstances particular to said
structure/parcel.



               g.   One copy of the State Release Letter.



               h.   One completed Road Impact Fee
Calculation Request.



               i.   One complete Portable Document Format
(PDF), Version 7 or later, of all required documents and paperwork provided
through a file hosting system such as Drop Box, or on a CD, DVD, or other
similar media that is filed at the time the application is submitted to the
Planning Department. Review by Planning and Engineering Staffs of the
submitted documentation shall not begin until the digital formatted items are
received by the Planning Department.



         (c)   Building Construction Plans including structural,
architectural, mechanical, plumbing, and electrical shall be submitted with
application. Fire sprinkler systems and fire alarms systems may be submitted
after the issuance of the building permit and should include a digital copy
of the plans to the Building Commissioner and the Fire Marshal.



         (d)   No building permit shall be issued until such time
notification has been received from the Water Utility for the project stating
the water lines have been accepted and are in service, the fire hydrants have
been accepted by the Fire Marshal, and streets, curbs, gutters, sanitary
sewers storm sewers and like infrastructure have been constructed to the
Noblesville standards and accepted/approved by the City Engineering
Department or other governing utility. This applies to each section of a
subdivision or approved development plan in which structures are being
constructed.



         (e)   For all Class 1 (Commercial) and Class 2 (Single-
family and Two-Family) structures should “advanced structural components”
be used as per Senate Enrolled Act No. 393, additional information is
required to be submitted as a part of the building application per I.C.
22-11-21.



         (f)   Pre-con meeting correspondence.



      (6)   Procedure.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for a Building Permit
shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



         (b)   Fees.



            1.   No permit shall be granted by the Director of
Planning and Development, until all applicable fees pertaining to that permit
have been paid in full.



            2.   No permit shall be granted by the Department
of Planning and Development until all fees owned by the applicant to the City
of Noblesville have been paid in full. This requirement shall apply not only
to fees specified in § 159.045(B)(1) above, but shall also include all fees
owed on any permit previously issued to the applicant. A schedule of payment
of all owed fees provided by the applicant to the satisfaction of the
Director of Planning and Development shall satisfy the requirement of this
section in lieu of payment in full.



            3.   No part of any filing fee paid pursuant to
this subchapter shall be returnable to the applicant.



            4.   The Building Permit fees include the
Improvement Location Permit fee for those applications listed in §
150.045(A).



         (c)   No permit shall be issued until parcel
identification is posted on the site.  This identification shall be clearly
visible from the road on which the property achieves access and must include
street address and/or lot number.



         (d)   Lot identification number, structure address
number, and building permit shall be established on a two inch by four inch
post, a minimum of five feet to a maximum of 6½ feet in height above the
ground level, with the following 8½ inch by 11 inch laminated
permit/identification items. Top posting is building permit, next is the lot
number, and third is the address numbers. These laminated
permit/identification items will be given to the individual who obtains the
building permit and must be posted between ten to 15 feet behind the street
pavement or curb line and must be posted by the time of the first inspection.
Once the home is weather-tight (felt paper on roof), then the building
permit/identification cards shall be moved to the inside of the house and
placed in a window facing the street. The identification/permit must be
clearly visible from the road and must remain posted until such time the
house number is permanently attached to the structure or mailbox adjacent to
the road and final inspection is approved.



      (7)   Penalties.



         (a)   If construction has commenced prior to obtaining
permit or payment of fees, penalties may be assessed pursuant to § 159.999.



         (b)   Also, any person who shall initiate construction
prior to obtaining a Building Permit (or a Certificate of Occupancy) or any
other permit required, shall pay twice the amount of the filing fee set forth
herein.



         (c)   The owner or tenant of any building, structure,
premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, realtor,
agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains
such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the
penalties herein provided.



      (8)   Deadline for obtaining permit once filed.  Any permit
shall be considered null and void unless all applicable fees have been paid
in full within 90 days from the date a permit is approved by the Department
of Planning and Development.



      (9)   Fees for renewing permits.  In the event that a
building permit is commenced but not completed in the time frame established
by this chapter, it will be necessary for the applicant to renew the permit
at the end of the prescribed time frame.  The fee that shall be collected
for this renewal shall be equal to 50% of the building fee originally paid
for the permit.  This fee must be paid prior to the issuance of the renewed
permit.



      (10)   Appeals.  Any person may appeal any decision of the
Director of Planning and Development or anyone acting under his or her
supervision in the enforcement of this chapter to the City Board of Zoning
Appeals.



   (C)   Certificate of occupancy.



      (1)   Scope.  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit
the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered
or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Director of Planning and Development.  The
certificate of occupancy shall state that the proposed use of the building
and/or land conforms to the requirements of this chapter and that the
Director or his representative has inspected the property and attested to
that fact.



      (2)   Application for certificate of occupancy.  Applications
for certificates of occupancy shall be filed in accordance with the
requirements of §159.040.



      (3)   Change in use.  No change shall be made in the use of
land, except as provided in this chapter or the use of any building or part
thereof, now or hereafter erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, 
without a certificate of occupancy having been issued by  the Director of
Planning and Development; and no such certificate shall be issued to make
such change unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Change of occupancy.  No persons, firms, or
corporations shall move into or occupy any nonresidential structure or land,
new or existing, without first obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the
Department of Planning and Development.



      (5)   Completion time.  The work or use authorized by any
improvement location permit, conditional use permit, variance permit,
building permit, or other permit must be commenced within six months of the
date of issuance of such permit(s), otherwise the same shall lapse and be and
become null and void.  All work so authorized shall be completed within 24
months from the issuance of the permit therefor, and if for good cause shown
the Director of Planning and Development may extend the work completion time
as per § 159.041(H).



      (6)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy.  Certificates of
occupancy may be issued by the Director of Planning and Development within
ten days after notification by the applicant that the lawful erection,
reconstruction, or structural alteration of such building or other
improvement of the land shall have been completed and the finding of the
Director that such erection, reconstruction, or structural alteration is
complete and all required inspections were approved including those required
by the Building, Planning, Engineering, MS4 Division, GIS, and other
departments as may be required.



      (7)   Enforcement.  In case any building, structure, or
property is, or is intended to be erected constructed, reconstructed, altered
or converted, or any building, structure, or property is, or is intended to
be used in violation of, or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the
Director of Planning and Development is hereby authorized, in addition to
other remedies set forth in the Statutes of the State of Indiana and in this
chapter, to institute an action to enjoin, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or
use.



      (8)   Sewage disposal.  An application for an improvement
location permit for any use shall not be approved until it has been
ascertained by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her
designee that the proposed use and minimum lot size and width meet the
minimum standards for a sewage disposal system as required by the Hamilton
County Health Department, the Noblesville Board of Public Works and Safety,
other licensed centralized waste collection entities of appropriate
jurisdiction, and as otherwise required by this chapter.



      (9)   Temporary certificate of occupancy. When the improvement
covered by the issued permit has been completed in substantial conformity
with the architectural plan, site plan and/or development plan submitted with
the application, a temporary certificate of occupancy may then be issued. For
non-residential structures, the temporary certificate of occupancy shall
permit the stocking, shelving, furniture installation and similar activities
but not the utilization of the building for general public use or the term
"Open for Business." For residential structures, a temporary certificate of
occupancy does permit the occupying of the structure in most instances. All
temporary certificates of occupancy are valid for a period not exceeding 30
days except as otherwise noted in this chapter. At the end of the 30 days,
all unfinished items shall be completed and re-inspected for total compliance
with the issued permit and submitted plans. The Director of Planning and
Development may grant a one-time extension not exceeding 30 days for unusual
or unique circumstances.



      (10)   Final certificate of occupancy.  For commercial
projects, no FINAL certificate of occupancy will be issued to occupy the
structure until such time the GIS submittal (as-built infrastructure), per
the Noblesville GIS requirements, has been submitted and approved and all
building and site conditions have been inspected and approved as per the
issued permit. The above applies to the overall residential subdivision
and/or planned development and not individual lots. In addition, for
commercial projects, the Fire Department GIS submittal of “as-built
building plans” per the specifications shall be submitted and accepted.



      (11)   Records of certificate of occupancy.  Every
certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to division (C) of this section
shall be kept on file in the Office of the Director of Planning and
Development and shall be a public record.



   (D)   Demolition permits.



      (1)   Scope. A demolition permit shall be obtained when a
structure is removed and/or destroyed to the ground.



      (2)   Application for Demolition Permit.



         (a)   Completed application for building permit (green
form);



         (b)   A single copy of a sketch plan drawing (informal)
including the general locations of all existing structures on the property
and highlighting/identifying the structure to be removed;



         (c)   A written statement as to the removal of the
demolished materials and intended use of area;



         (d)   A signed copy of the “Demolition Permit
Requirements” application concerning existing wells, septic system sanitary
sewers, and/or fuel tanks.



         (e)   Written proof of disconnection from other
utilities such as gas, water, and/or electric.



      (3)   (a)   Application requirements for demolitions within
the following described area: bounded by the alley as extended between
Clinton Street and Wayne Street, an alley as extended between 10th Street and
11th Street, an alley as extended between Maple Street and Cherry Street, an
alley extended west of Eighth Street to and extended Sixth Street north of
Conner Street, and the east side of Sixth Street south of Conner Street to
the east-west alley between Maple Street and Cherry Street and the adoption
of Appendix I.



         (b)   All of the above requirements in division (D)(2)
shall be met, in addition to the following: Prior to the issuance of a
demolition permit, a minimum 30-days notice shall be given by the Planning
Department in a report to the Common Council at its first scheduled meeting
following the filing of the demolition application.



   (E)   Sexually Oriented Business Uses. 



      (1)   No sexually oriented business as regulated by § 159.130
shall be permitted to operate without obtaining a sexually oriented
improvement location permit.  This permit shall be required separately from
other permits as required by the city.



      (2)   Applications for Improvement Location Permits shall be
filed in accordance with the requirements of §§ 159.040 - 159.045. Sexually
Oriented Improvement Location Permit Applications must include the following:



         (a)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.  The
sketch must also address the specific requirements of the business for which
the permit application is for, as outlined by the Classification Specific
Design Requirements.



         (b)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing
prepared within 30 days prior to application prepared by a State of Indiana
registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures
containing any established existing uses regulated by this chapter within
1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established protected use within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified;
and the property lines of any residentially zoned area or residential
property within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified, if not
apparent.  For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing
or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.



   (F)   Other permits issued by Department of Planning and
Development.  Permits or registrations shall be required for the following
uses pursuant to the procedures and standards in §§ 159.120 through 159.129;



      (1)   Accessory Uses and Structures.



      (2)   Home Occupations.



      (3)   Residential Care Homes.



      (4)   Temporary Uses.







 



(Ord. 62-12-95 , passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord.
21-6-97, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord. 57-9-98, passed 9-28-98; Am. Ord. 25-5-01,
passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 55-11- 01, passed 12-11- 01; Am. Ord. 55- 12-02,
passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 57-9-04, passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 42-5-05, passed
6-14-05; Am. Ord. 76-9-05, passed 10-11- 05; Am. Ord. 89- 10-06, passed
11-14- 06; Am. Ord. 56- 11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed
12-9-08; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11, passed 3-15-11;
Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 03-02-12, passed 2-28-12; Am.
Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
31-09-13, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.046  PRE-FILING APPLICATION CONFERENCE.



   Scope and Purpose.



   (A)   Pre-filing conference with Planning Department staff is
required prior to the applicant/developer/owner filing an application(s) for
a public hearing before the Plan Commission or for site plan review by the
Technical Advisory Committee with said conference being completed at a
minimum of seven business days prior to the filing of said application(s) and
adopted filing deadline dates. (Refer to the adopted schedule of meeting
dates and filing deadlines.)



   (B)   At the pre-filing conference, the following items shall be
available for discussion purposes:



      (1)   Preliminary site plan, including delineation of
floodplains and wetlands.



      (2)   Preliminary utility plan.



      (3)   Preliminary building elevations, including materials.



      (4)   Preliminary landscaping plan.



      (5)   Aerial photograph of general area surrounding the real
estate in discussion.



   (C)   During the conference, staff will provide input and
suggestions on the preliminary plans based on adopted ordinance standards. 
Filing procedures, including applications, fees, meeting dates and plan
submittals, shall be discussed.



(Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE



§ 159.060  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Applicability.  The subdivision procedure described in this
subchapter shall be required for the subdivision or resubdivision of any
tract of land and/or the dedication of right-of-way within the planning
jurisdiction of the city.



   (B)   General Procedure.  Before any land is subdivided the owner
of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall
apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with
the following three-step procedure:



      (1)   A Minor Subdivision Plat shall be submitted to and
reviewed by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee,
reviewed and approved by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), prepared on
Mylar and signed by the President and Secretary of the Plan Commission, and
submitted to the Board of Public Works or the Hamilton County
Commissioner’s for acceptance, depending on jurisdiction, and recorded in
the Hamilton County Recorder’s Office.



      (2)   A primary plat shall be submitted to and reviewed by the
Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee, reviewed by the
Technical Advisory Committee, and reviewed and approved by the Plan
Commission in a public hearing.



      (3)   A secondary subdivision plat or a replat of a
subdivision shall be submitted to and approved by the Director of Planning
and Development or his or her designee, reviewed and approved by the
Technical Advisory Committee, signed by the President and Secretary of the
Plan Commission, signed by either the Board of Public Works or the County
Commissioners depending on jurisdiction and filed with the Hamilton County
Recorder.



   (C)   General Restrictions.



      (1)   The following actions may occur once the secondary plat
has been signed, regardless of whether the plat has been recorded:



         (a)   The granting of an Improvement Location Permit, or
the construction of any public improvements authorized thereby provided
appropriate performance bonds have been posted and all required
pre-construction meeting(s) have been held with the public works agency of
jurisdiction;



         (b)   Contracts made for the sale of any part of the
subdivision;



         (c)   Improvements or building on any individual lot.



      (2)   No building permit shall be issued until the plat has
been recorded.



      (3)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction
of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   Resubdivisions (replats).



      (1)   For any change in a map of an approved or recorded
subdivision plat, if such change affects any street layout shown on such map,
or area reserved thereon for public use, or if it affects any map or plan
legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling
subdivision, such change shall be approved by the Plan Commission by the same
procedure, rules, and regulations as for a subdivision.



      (2)   Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the
subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land
and there are indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided, the
Plan Commission may require that such parcel of land allow for the future
opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. As a
requirement of the plat, dedications of rights-of-way shall be provided for
the future opening and extension of the streets.



   (E)   Waivers to Subdivision Standards.



      (1)   Waivers to subdivision standards found in this chapter
shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, but may be granted by
the Plan Commission subject to the applicable requirements herein. It is not
within the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals to grant waivers to
subdivision regulations.



      (2)   It is the intention of this chapter that all newly
created lots conform to the provisions of this chapter for lot area and
width. Variances to these or other zoning standards may be granted subject to
the provisions of § 159.043(C) - Variances or may be obtained through
flexible zoning districts such as the Zero Lot Line (ZLL) or Planned
Development (PD) Overlay Districts. It is not within the jurisdiction of the
Plan Commission to grant variances to zoning regulations.



      (3)   Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary
hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with
the subdivision regulations of §§ 159.060 through 158.087, or if the
purposes of these regulations may be better served by an alternative
proposal, it may approve waivers to said regulations so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such
waivers shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
these regulations; and further provided the Plan Commission shall not approve
waivers unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it
in each specific case that:



         (a)   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental
to the public safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property.



         (b)   The conditions upon which the request for a waiver
is based are unique to the property for which the waiver is sought and are
not applicable generally to other properties.



         (c)   Because of the particular physical surroundings,
shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a
particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out.
Financial hardship does not constitute grounds for a waiver.



         (d)   The waiver will not in any manner vary the
provisions of the Comprehensive Master Plan or this Unified Development
Ordinance.



         (e)   Where the waiver impacts on the design and
construction of public facilities; all appropriate public agencies will be
given ample time to comment in writing to the Commission.



      (4)   In approving waivers, the Plan Commission may require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of these regulations.



      (5)   A petition for any such waiver shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the sketch plat is filed for the
consideration of the Director of Planning and Development. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon
by the petitioner.



   (F)   Homeowners' Associations. Wherever a subdivision includes
common areas, such as but not limited to detention ponds, open space, private
streets and private parks; provisions shall be made in covenants accompanying
the subdivision to create a Homeowners' Association to maintain such common
areas in a neat and safe condition. This shall also apply to condominium
developments.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord.
29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.061  SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Minor Subdivision. The purpose of the minor subdivision plat
is to allow the creation of a maximum of three lots without being subject to
the entire procedural provisions of the primary and secondary plat
regulations of this title. Prior to the submission of the application and
fees, the subdivider shall discuss with the Director of Planning and
Development and/or his or her designee, the proposed changes to the existing
subdivision plat regarding the proposed minor subdivision plat. Any setback
legally established and currently considered lawfully non-conforming
setback(s) shall remain as lawfully non-conforming setbacks provided it is
not altered by the creation of the minor subdivision plat. The submission of
the 'minor subdivision plat’ application and the filing fee(s) are required
as per the adopted Schedule of Meeting Dates and Filing Deadlines and the
Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses and shall meet the conditions as set
forth by the definition of 'minor subdivision' and the Unified Development
Ordinance. The minor subdivision plat shall require review by the Technical
Advisory Committee and after approval of the Technical Advisory Committee,
the Planning Staff shall complete the process administratively including the
acceptance of the minor subdivision plat by the Board of Public Works or
County Commission based on jurisdiction. This process may be used one time
per lot adjustment(s). Any additional adjustments shall require the entire
procedural provisions of the primary and secondary plats.



   (B)   Primary Plat.



      (1)   Primary Plat Application.  Applications for primary
plat approval shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of §
159.040.



      (2)   Primary Plat Procedure.  Applications for primary plat
approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth below:



         (a)   Action by Department of Planning and Development.



            1.   Transmit Primary Plat Application to
Technical Advisory Committee for Site Plan Review.  Within 28 days after
receipt by the Department of Planning and Development of a completed primary
plat application, the Director of Planning and Development or his or her
designee shall transmit the application to the Technical Advisory Committee
for hearing and review.  The Technical Advisory Committee hearing and review
shall be conducted pursuant to § 159.041(C).  Within 21 days of the
Technical Advisory Committee hearing, the report and recommendations of the
Committee shall be submitted in writing from the Director of Planning and
Development to the Plan Commission for its review.



            2.   Add Primary Plat Application to Plan
Commission Agenda.  The Director of Planning and Development or his or her
designee shall add the primary plat application to the agenda of the next
regularly scheduled Plan Commission meeting.



            3.   Submit Notice of Public Hearing.  The
Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee shall submit a
notice of public hearing for publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in Hamilton County to be published at least 17 days prior to the
public hearing.



         (b)   Action by Subdivider.  At the time of the public
hearing, the subdivider shall submit an affidavit, stating that he has
notified by Certificate of Mailing each property owner to a depth of 660
feet, at least 17 days prior to the public hearing.  The subdivider shall
bear the cost of the public notice.  If the subdivider does not notify the
property owners as described above, the subdivider shall notify the Director
of Planning and Development, at least seven days before the scheduled public
hearing, so that the hearing date may be rescheduled.



         (c)   Action by Plan Commission; Public Hearing.  Upon
receipt of the primary plat application, the report of the Technical Advisory
Committee, and the report of the Director of Planning and Development, the
Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing scheduled pursuant to this
section.  Within 45 days after the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the primary plat.



         (d)   Department of Planning and Development to Notify
Subdivider.  The Department of Planning and Development shall return one
copy of the primary plat application to the subdivider with the date of
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore, in
writing, accompanying the application.  The Department shall maintain one
file copy of the primary plat application.



      (3)   Standards for Review.  In reviewing applications for
primary plat approval, the Plan Commission shall consider the following
criteria:



         (a)   The degree to which the application meets the
criteria for site plan review found in this chapter, as determined by the
reports of the Technical Advisory Committee and Director of Planning and
Development;



         (b)   Consistency with the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (c)   Consistency with the purposes of the zoning
district in which it is located;



         (d)   The presence or absence of any exceptions to the
development standards for the zoning district in which it is located, any
general development standards, or the Site Design and Improvement Standards;
as evidenced by the listing of any exceptions in the primary plat application;



         (e)   The presence or absence of any protective
covenants for the subdivision which would alter its impact from what would
typically be permitted in the zoning district in which it is located; as
evidenced by the inclusion of any covenants in the primary plat application.



      (4)   Effective Period of Primary Plat Approval.  An approved
primary plat application shall be effective for a period of one year, at the
end of which time a secondary plat of the proposed subdivision must have been
approved and signed by the President and Secretary of the Commission.  The
following words must be included on the primary plat:  "After having given
public notice of time, place, and nature of the hearing and publication in
the newspaper of local jurisdiction on a Primary Plat under the authority
provided by State Statutes and all acts supplemental and amendatory thereof
and upon finding that this proposed primary plat for a subdivision is in
conformance with the subdivision regulations of the Unified Development
Ordinance of the City of Noblesville and its jurisdictional limits.  The
Plan Commission approved the primary plat at its meeting held on the __ day
of ____, 200__."  A signature block for the President and the Secretary. 
Any primary plats not receiving secondary plat approval and signature within
one year shall be null and void, and the subdivider shall be required to
submit a new primary plat application for approval subject to any new zoning
and subdivision regulations.  Upon request of the subdivider, the Commission
may extend the approval of a primary plat in increments of one year beyond
the expiration date, without further notice and public hearing.



      (5)   Primary Plats Exempt from Subsequent Ordinance
Amendments.  Approved primary plats shall be exempt from any subsequent
amendments to this chapter which would otherwise render the plat
non-conforming as to size, shape, or use.



      (6)   Grading of Site Permitted Prior to Secondary Plat
Approval.



         (a)   Prior to the recording of the secondary plat, the
subdivider may apply for an earthwork (topsoil and excavation) permit from
the Department of Planning and Development upon approval of a primary plat.
The subdivider shall also provide a performance bond or other surety before
grading.



         (b)   Upon receipt of an earthwork permit and acceptance
of a performance bond, the subdivider may commence construction in accordance
with the grades and elevations stated in the approved primary plat
application.



      (7)   Model Homes Permitted Prior to Secondary Plat Approval.



         (a)   For the purpose of allowing the early construction
of model homes in a subdivision, the Commission may permit a portion of a
subdivision involving one or more lots to be sectionalized from the primary
plat pursuant to this section, provided that said portion derives access from
an existing public street, that the lots are clustered together near the
entrance of the subdivision, and that no future road or other improvement are
anticipated where said lots are proposed.



         (b)   A secondary plat for the model home lots shall be
submitted to the Commission simultaneously with the primary plat for the
subdivision.  Subsequent to the approval of both of said plats, and the
recording of the model home secondary plat, the model home(s) may be
constructed subject to the additional requirements that the Commission may
require.



         (c)   Model homes shall also require a Temporary Use
Permit subject to this chapter.



      (8)   Sectionalizing of Plats.



         (a)   The Plan Commission may permit any primary
subdivision plat to be divided into two or more sections for the purpose of
secondary plat approval. No plats may be sectionalized having less than ten
lots, unless the total number of lots in the subdivision is less than ten
lots, or the lots are located on a cul-de-sac, or except for model homes in
accordance with division (7) above.



         (b)   In the case of sectionalized plats, each section
shall be considered a separate secondary plat with respect to the following:



            1.   The Commission may require the completion of
improvements located only in the section(s) of plat for which a secondary
plat application has been submitted, and allow the subdivider to defer
completing improvements in the remaining sections of the plat until a
secondary plat application has been submitted for those sections.



            2.   The Commission may require the performance
bond or other security be in an amount commensurate with the section(s) of
the plat for which a secondary plat application has been submitted, and the
subdivider may defer posting a performance bond or other surety for the
remaining sections of the plat until a secondary plat application has been
submitted for those sections.



            3.   The subdivider may file irrevocable offers to
dedicate streets and public improvements in the section(s) of the plat for
which a secondary plat application has been submitted, and defer filing
offers of dedications for the remaining sections of the plat until a
secondary plat application has been submitted for those sections.



            4.   Only sections for which the secondary plat
applications have been approved, subject to this section, shall be filed with
the Hamilton County Recorder.



         (c)   The Commission may also impose any conditions upon
the filing of secondary plat applications for said sections to assure the
orderly development of the subdivision.  This may including requiring the
completion of improvement necessary to the overall subdivision but not
located within the current section of secondary plat, or the posting of a
bond or other security in lieu thereof, and the required dedication of such
improvements.



         (d)   The approval of all sections of a sectionalized
primary plat not filed with the County Recorder shall automatically expire
unless such sections have been approved for filing by the Commission, all
fees paid, all instruments and offers of dedication submitted, and
performance bonds approved and actually filed with the County Recorder within
five years of the date of primary approval of the subdivision plat unless
extended by the Commission.



   (C)   Secondary Plat.



      (1)   Secondary Plat Application Procedure.  Applications for
a secondary plat shall be filed with the Department of Planning and
Development, on a form provided by the Director and shall contain at least
the information listed in Section 3 of Part H of Appendix B of this chapter.



      (2)   Secondary Plat Review Procedure.  An application for
secondary plat approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures
set forth below:



         (a)   Action by the Department of Planning and
Development.  Upon receipt of a completed secondary plat application and all
information required by division (E)(3) of Appendix B, the Director of
Planning and Development or his or her designee shall:



            1.   Review for Consistency with Primary Plat. 
The Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee shall review
the secondary plat application and determine that it meets all the
requirements of this chapter and of the Commission’s primary plat
approval.  The lack of information under any item specified herein, or
improper information supplied by the subdivider, shall be cause for
disapproval of a secondary plat.



            2.   Transmit Secondary Plat Application to
Technical Advisory Committee for Review.  Within 28 days after receipt by
the Department of Planning and Development of a completed secondary plat
application, the Director or his or her designee shall transmit the
application to the Technical Advisory Committee for hearing and review.  The
Technical Advisory Committee hearing and review shall be conducted pursuant
to this chapter.



            3.   Notify Subdivider.  Within 21 days of the
Technical Advisory Committee hearing, the report and recommendations of the
Committee shall be submitted in writing from the Director of Planning and
Development or his or her designee to the subdivider.  The Director shall
return one copy of the secondary plat to the subdivider, with the date of
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval noted thereon; and the reasons
therefor, in writing, accompanying the plat.  The Director shall maintain
one file copy of the secondary plat application.



         (b)   Action by the Subdivider.



            1.   Conditionally Approved and Disapproved
Secondary Plats.  If the secondary plat has been conditionally approved or
disapproved by the Department of Planning and Development, the subdivider
shall make the changes necessary to earn approval of the secondary plat and
shall resubmit the secondary plat to the Department of Planning and
Development in accordance with this section.  Secondary plats not approved
and signed within one year of the primary plat approval shall expire subject
to this section.



            2.   Approved Plats.  If the secondary plat has
been approved by the Director of Planning and Development, the subdivider
shall complete all public improvements in the subdivision or submit a
performance bond or other security in lieu thereof, in accordance with this
section.  The subdivider shall then resubmit the secondary plat and related
materials for signature by the Secretary and Chair of the Plan Commission, in
accordance with this section.



      (3)   Completion of Public Improvements; Performance Bond.



         (a)   General Requirement for Completion of
Improvements.  Following secondary plat approval by the Director of Planning
and Development, but before the secondary plat is signed by the President and
Secretary of the Commission, the subdivider shall complete all public
improvements in the subdivision as they are required by this chapter,
specified in the secondary plat approval, and approved by the Director of
Planning.



         (b)   Performance Bond or Other Securities in Lieu of
Completion of Improvements.  The Commission may waive the requirement that
the subdivider complete all public improvements prior to the signing of the
secondary plat provided that the subdivider shall post a bond securable by
the City of Noblesville or Hamilton County, as applicable, and hereinafter
referred to as performance bond.  The performance bond shall be sufficient
to secure to the city or county the satisfactory completion of any
uncompleted portion of required public improvements, and the amount of the
bond shall be equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the
required public improvements or in accordance with fee schedules adopted,
from time to time, by the Common Council.  The current fee schedule is found
in Appendix A of this chapter.  In lieu of a performance bond, the
subdivider may submit one of the following forms of assurance:



            1.   A certified check made payable to the City of
Noblesville or Hamilton County, as applicable, in an amount equivalent to
110% of the estimated cost of completion of the uncompleted portion of
required public improvements or in accordance with fee schedules adopted,
from time to time, by the Common Council.  The check shall be held by the
City Clerk or County Auditor, as applicable.



            2.   A certificate of deposit made out to the City
of Noblesville or Hamilton County, as applicable, and to the subdivider, in
an amount equivalent to 110% of the cost of completion of the uncompleted
portion of required public improvements or in accordance with fee schedules
adopted, from time to time, by the Common Council.  The certificate shall be
held by the City Clerk or County Auditor, as applicable.



            3.   Irrevocable letters of credit on behalf of
the subdivider and securable by the city or county, as applicable, in an
amount equivalent to 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the
uncompleted portion of required public improvements or in accordance with fee
schedules adopted, from time to time, by the Common Council.



         (c)   Conditions of Performance Bond or Other Securities.



            1.   The performance bond or other security shall
comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City
or County Attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution.



            2.   The period within which required public
improvements must be completed shall be specified by the Commission in the
resolution approving the secondary plat, shall be incorporated into the bond
or other security, and shall not in any event exceed one year from date of
secondary plat approval.



            3.   The bond shall be approved by the city or
county as to amount.



         (d)   Time Extensions and Expiration.  The Commission
may, upon proof of difficulty, grant an extension of the completion date set
forth in the resolution and bond or other security for a maximum period of
one additional year, provided that a bond or security be submitted for this
extension period which meets all other requirements herein.  The Commission
may at anytime during the period of the bond accept a substitution of
principal or sureties on the bond as described in this subchapter.



      (4)   Signing of Plat.



         (a)   Subsequent to the completion of division (B) and
(C) of this section, final copies of the subdivision plat and related
construction plans shall be submitted to the Director of Planning as follows:



            1.   One copy on reproducible mylar; and



            2.   One digital copy as per the Noblesville
Digital As-Built Submittal Requirements.



         (b)   When installation of improvements is required, the
President and the Secretary of the Commission shall sign the plat only after
any conditions on the approved secondary plat have been satisfied and all
improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence as to
the following:



            1.   That the required improvements have been
installed in a manner satisfactory to the local government shall be shown by
a certificate signed by the City or County Engineer; and



            2.   That the necessary dedication of public lands
and improvements has been accomplished shall be shown by a certificate signed
by the City or County Attorney.



         (c)   When a bond is required, the President and the
Secretary shall sign the plat and construction plans only after any
conditions on the approved secondary plat have been satisfied and after the
bond or other security has been submitted and accepted.



         (d)   Upon satisfaction of divisions (C)(2) or (3)
above, as applicable, the President and Secretary shall sign the reproducible
mylar copy(s) of the subdivision plat.



      (5)   Recording of Plat.



         (a)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider
to file the signed plat with the Hamilton County Recorder within 30 days of
the date of signatures.  Simultaneously with the filing of the plat, the
subdivider shall record any agreements of dedication together with any other
legal documents as shall be required to be recorded.



         (b)   Within ten days after the plat has been filed with
the Hamilton County Recorder, the subdivider shall provide a PDF to the
Planning Department, stamped with the Recorder's seal and plat cabinet and
page numbers.



   (D)   Construction Plans.  Construction plans shall be required for
subdivisions, planned developments, and other applications as required by the
Technical Advisory Committee.



      (1)   General Requirements.



         (a)   Construction plans shall be prepared and submitted
for all required improvements to be installed by the subdivider.  They shall
include profiles, cross-sections, specifications, and other supporting data
for all required public streets, utilities, and other facilities.



         (b)   Provisional construction plans shall be submitted
with the primary plat application, and secondary construction plans shall be
submitted with the secondary plat application.



         (c)   Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance
with this chapter and the Noblesville Standards, except that those
improvements under jurisdiction of the county shall be prepared in accordance
with County standards and specifications.



         (d)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is
not in general conformity with the requirements herein.



      (2)   Contents of Construction Plans.  Construction plans
shall be prepared by an engineer at a scale no smaller than one inch to 40
feet.  They shall be prepared and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence
if more than one sheet is used.  The following shall be shown:



         (a)   Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations
along center lines of all roads.  Where a proposed road intersects an
existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing
road or roads within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown, plus
approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on
all streets.



         (b)   The Commission may require, where steep slopes
exist, that cross-sections of all proposed streets at 100 foot stations shall
be shown at five points as follows:  on line at right angles to the center
line of the street; each property line; and points 25 feet inside each
property line.



         (c)   Plans and profiles showing the locations and
typical cross-section of street pavements including curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, drainage easements, setback easements, rights-of-way, manholes,
and catch basins; the location of street signs; the location size, and invert
elevations of existing proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire
hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility systems; and
exact location and size of all water or other underground utilities or
structures.



         (d)   Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate
description of any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not
limited to, existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water
bodies, streams, flood plains, and other pertinent features within the
proposed subdivision.



         (e)   Topography at the same scale as the primary plat
with a contour interval of two feet, referred to sea level datum All datum
provided shall be latest applicable U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum and
should be so noted on the plat.



         (f)   All specifications and references required by the
local government's construction standards and specifications, including a
site-grading plan for the entire subdivision.



         (g)   Title, name, address, and signature of Registered
Engineer and Land Surveyor, and date.



         (h)   Attachment of the current adopted City of
Noblesville Standards as referenced per this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 10-3-02, passed 3-26-02; Am. Ord.
12-02-03, passed 3-11- 03; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 12-04-17,
passed 4-25-17)



§ 159.062  PROVISIONS FOR SATISFACTORY COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Assurance for Completion.



      (1)   Applicability.  As provided in § 159.061(C)(4), the
subdivider has the option of either installing all required public
improvements prior to the signing of the secondary plat, or, in lieu of
installation, posting a bond or other security in an amount sufficient to
assure completion of the improvements.  The following regulations are to
assure the satisfactory completion of all improvements, whether installed
before or after the secondary play has been signed and recorded.



      (2)   Temporary Improvements.  The Plan Commission may
require that temporary facilities be constructed until the time as permanent
public improvements can be completed.  In such case, the subdivider shall
build and pay all costs for temporary improvements and shall maintain them
until completion of permanent improvement or for the period specified by the
Commission.  Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement,
the subdivider shall file with the city or county, as applicable, a separate
bond, suitable to the City or County Attorney, which shall ensure that the
temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed.



      (3)   Failure to Complete Improvements.  In those cases where
a performance bond has been posted but the required improvements have not
been installed within the terms of the performance bond, the city or county
may declare the subdivider to be in default and require that all the
improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building
development at the time the subdivider is declared to be in default.



      (4)   Inspection of Completed Improvements.



         (a)   The Plan Commission shall provide for periodic
inspection of required improvements by the City Engineer or County Engineer,
as applicable, during construction to ensure their satisfactory completion.



         (b)   If the City Engineer or County Engineer finds upon
inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the construction standards and specifications required by
§§ 159.075 through 159.087, the Noblesville Standards, the approved
secondary plat, or the approved construction plans, the subdivider shall
correct any errors immediately upon notification.  Where the completion of
improvements is covered by a performance bond, the subdivider and the bonding
company shall be separately and jointly liable for completing the improvement
according to specifications.



      (5)   Acceptance of Dedication Offers.



         (a)   General Requirements.



            1.   Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of
streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by official action of
the Board of Public Works for parcels within the City of Noblesville or the
County Commissioners when outside the city limits.



            2.   The approval by the Plan Commission of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by
the city/county of any street, easement, or other public areas shown on the
plat.



         (b)   Release or Reduction of Performance Bond or Other
Security.  The Board of Public Works or County Commissioners, as applicable,
shall not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce
a performance bond or other security, except in accordance with the following:



            1.   The Engineer of the applicable jurisdiction
shall submit a certificate stating that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed;



            2.   The subdivider's engineer shall submit a
certificate to the City or County Engineer stating that the layout of all
public improvements are in accordance with construction plans for the
subdivision, and that the improvements have been completed, are ready for
dedication to the city/county, and are free and clear of any and all liens
and encumbrances.



            3.   The subdivider shall submit as-built
construction plans to the department of Planning and Development as follows:



               a.   One copy on paper; and



               b.   One digital copy as per the Noblesville
Digital As-Built Submittal Requirements.



            4.   The subdivider shall file a maintenance bond
and/or agreement with the Board of Public Works or County Commissioners in an
amount considered adequate by the Engineer of the appropriate jurisdiction,
in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required improvements. 
The maintenance bond shall be submitted in accordance with this section.



            5.   A performance bond or other security may be
reduced only upon actual dedication and of public improvements by the Board
of Public Works or County Commissioners, and then only to the ratio that the
dedicated public improvements bear to the total public improvements for the
plat.



   (B)   Assurance for Maintenance.



      (1)   General Requirement.  The subdivider shall be required
to maintain all improvements on the subdivided areas, including all lot
improvements on the individual subdivided lots, for a period of three years
after the date of their acceptance and dedication by the Board of Works or
County Commissioners.  Improvements covered by the maintenance bond shall
include but not limited to: streets to minimum specifications of the
applicable jurisdiction at the end of such period; sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, and water lines, including lift stations, pumps, motors, connections
and main lines installed in the subdivision; sidewalks, shoulders, side
slopes, ditches, street signs, street lights and fire hydrants.



      (2)   Temporary Maintenance.  The Plan Commission may require
the subdivider to provide for traffic control on streets and remove snow from
streets and sidewalks until acceptance and dedication of said improvements by
the Board of Public Works or County Commissioners.



      (3)   Posting of Maintenance Bond and/or Agreement.  The
subdivider shall be required to file a maintenance bond and/or agreement with
the Board of Public Works or County Commissioners, as applicable, and prior
to dedication in order to assure the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements.  Maintenance bonds shall:



         (a)   Run to and be in favor of the city if the
subdivision is within the city, or shall be in favor of and run to the Board
of County Commissioners of Hamilton County if the subdivision is outside of
the city limits;



         (b)   Be in a penal sum established in the fee schedule,
to assure and guarantee the maintenance of all improvements and installations
during such three year period.  The Noblesville Board of Works and Safety
may reduce the penal sum set forth herein for good cause if the intent of the
maintenance bond provision is preserved.



         (c)   Include an amount for maintenance, other than for
streets set forth above, which shall be set by the Commission, but in no
event shall be less than 15% of the total cost of all of the improvements and
installations in the subdivision proposed for secondary plat approval or in
accordance with fee schedules adopted, from time to time, by the Common
Council.  The current fee schedule is found in Appendix A of this chapter.



         (d)   Maintenance bonds shall commence upon acceptance
of improvements by the Board of Works or County Commissioners, as applicable.



   (C)   Deferral or Waiver of Improvements.



      (1)   General Conditions.  The Plan Commission may defer or
waive at the time of secondary approval, subject to appropriate conditions,
the provisions of any or all the improvements as, in its judgment, are not
requisite in the interest of public health, safety, and general welfare, or
which are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities.



      (2)   Assurance for Future Completion.  Whenever it is deemed
necessary by the Plan Commission to defer the construction of any improvement
required herein because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate
or lack of connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall
pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the city/county
prior to signing of the secondary subdivision plat, or the subdivider may
post a bond ensuring completion of the improvements upon demand of the
city/county.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)  Penalty, see § 159.999



SITE DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS



§ 159.075  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Applicability.  Except as otherwise provided below, the site
design and improvement standards in this subchapter are required for all
subdivisions, planned developments, and any other new development or
redevelopment of a site upon which such improvements do not currently
exist.  Exemptions from these requirements may be granted by variance or, in
the case of the subdivision standards from this chapter, by a variance of the
Plan Commission subject to this section.  Existing improvements that do not
meet the standards of this subchapter shall be subject to §§ 159.220
through 159.248 and § 159.999.



   (B)   Conformity with Other Regulations.



      (1)   In addition to the requirements established in these
regulations, the improvement of land shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Applicable statutory provisions;



         (b)   Applicable provisions of this Unified Development
Code and all other laws of the applicable jurisdictions;



         (c)   The official Comprehensive Master Plan and Capital
Improvements Program of the applicable jurisdictions, including all streets,
trails, and parks shown on any official map;



         (d)   The rules and regulations of the State Board of
Health, the Department of Natural Resources, and other appropriate state
agencies;



         (e)   Applicable planning and regulatory guidelines,
including access control or driveway manuals, parking and traffic control
ordinances, and other applicable guides published by the state or local
governmental units;



         (f)   The current edition of the "Indiana Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices" for installation of traffic control devices;
and



         (g)   The rules of the Indiana Department of
Transportation (INDOT) if the development or any lot contained therein abuts
a state highway.



         (h)   The Hamilton County Thoroughfare Plan, as amended;
and



         (i)   Pathway Standards and Design Guidelines as adopted
and amended by the Hamilton County Alternative Transportation Task Force and
the Hamilton County Plan Commission.



         (j)   The Noblesville Public Improvement Standards.



      (2)   To assure, through careful site evaluation and design
the creation of new parcels that are compatible with existing neighborhoods,
the natural environment, health and safety of the community's residents; the
developer, contractor, and/or engineer for the project shall comply with the
policies of the Comprehensive Master Plan, Unified Development Ordinance, the
Noblesville Standards, and the latest issue of the "Indiana Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications" for material and construction
control, except when different specifications are: (1) explicitly described
in these regulations, or (2) adopted by the Engineer of appropriate
jurisdiction and approved by all appropriate boards, commission, agencies,
and offices of the city or county.



      (3)   Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in
conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies, the
regulations of this subchapter, or the purposes of these regulations as
established in this chapter.



   (C)   Political and Jurisdictional Boundaries.  To eliminate
potential jurisdictional disputes and to facilitate effective coordination
and control of development, the Plan Commission shall be guided by the
following policy:



      (1)   Whenever access to the development is required across
land in another local government, the Commission shall request assurance from
that local governmental attorney that access is legally established, and from
the local governmental engineer that the access road is adequately improved,
or that a performance bond has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount
to assure the construction of the access road.



      (2)   Lot lines shall be laid out so as not to cross boundary
lines between adjacent units of local government which has separate governing
bodies for the purpose of regulation and control of land use and development,
as well as for tax purposes.



   (D)   Conditions of Development.



      (1)   Character of Land Suitable for Development.  Land that
the Plan Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due
to flooding, improper drainage, adverse earth formations or topography,
utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the
safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of
the development and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or
developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and
approved by the Planning Commission, upon recommendation of the Technical
Advisory Committee, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land
conditions.  The  land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve any
danger to public health, safety, and welfare.



      (2)   Adequate Public Facilities.  No primary plat shall be
approved unless the Planning Commission determines that public facilities
will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed
development.  The applicant shall, at the request of the Planning
Commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed
development to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public
facilities by possible uses of said development.  Public facilities and
services to be examined for adequacy will include roads, sewerage, schools,
and public safety agencies.



      (3)   Reservation of Land for Public Use.



         (a)   Where a proposed park or other public use is shown
on an Official Plan of the city, and said public use is located in whole or
in part within a proposed development, sufficient area for the public use
shall be dedicated to the public or reserved and offered for public
purchase.  If within five years of plat recording the purchase is not agree
on, the reservation shall be terminated.  Space for public uses which is
improved per public standards may count towards applicable impact fee
requirements.



         (b)   Where it is deemed essential by the Plan
Commission, upon consideration of the particular type of development proposed
in the development, the needs for public services that the development will
generate, and the policies of the Comprehensive Master Plan, the Commission
may recommend and the Common Council may require the reservation of land for
public use.  Land required for dedication shall be of a location, size, and
character consistent with the needs created by the development.  Land for
public uses which is improved per public standards may count towards
applicable impact fee requirements.



      (4)   Extension Policies.  All public improvements and
required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new
development is proposed.  Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage
facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed
through new development to promote the logical extension of public
infrastructure.  The city may require the applicant of a development to
extend off-site improvements to reach the development or oversize required
public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of
plat approval.  The cost of such extensions or oversizing shall be borne by
the developer unless other provision has been made to cover the cost via
impact fee ordinances.



   (E)   Required Improvements.  The following public and other
improvements shall generally be provided in new developments and, when
provided, shall be designed and installed in accordance with the conditions
and specifications in this subchapter.



      (1)   Monuments.  The applicant shall place permanent
reference monuments in the development in accordance with Sheet #8 of the
Noblesville Standards - Monumentation Guidelines.



      (2)   Blocks and Lots.  All blocks and lots shall be designed
in accordance with this subchapter.



      (3)   Streets and Alleys.  Streets and alleys within the
jurisdiction of the city shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the standards and specifications of Noblesville Standards.  Streets within
the jurisdiction of Hamilton County shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Hamilton County Code.



      (4)   Street Name Signs.  Street name signs shall be
installed in one corner of each street intersection and in accordance with
Sheet 9 of the Noblesville Standards - Typical Street Sign Requirements.



      (5)   Street Lights.  Street lights may be required for
safety purposes, and such installations shall conform to:  the requirements
of the City Council/County Commissioners, the public utility providing such
lighting, and the Noblesville Standards Sheet 10 - Street Lighting.



      (6)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall generally be required on
both sides of all streets and shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the Noblesville Standards Sheet 2 - Right of Way and Easement
Guidelines, Sheet 3 - Pavement, Curb and Sidewalk Detail and Sheet 10 -
Sidewalk Detail.



      (7)   Bicycle Pathways.  Bicycle pathways shall be provided
within all developments if such facilities have been specified in an overall
bicycle plan as adopted by the City Council/County Commissioners.  The
facilities shall be installed as part of the public right-of-way or separate
easement, as recommended by the bicycle plan.



      (8)   Pedestrian Walkways.  Pedestrian walkways may be
required within long blocks, and if required shall be designed and installed
in accordance with the Noblesville Standards Sheet 2 - Right of Way and
Easement Guidelines, Sheet 3 - Pavement, Curb and Sidewalk Detail and Sheet
10 - Sidewalk Detail.



      (9)   Bridges and Culverts.  Bridges and culverts, if
necessary, shall be constructed in accordance with engineering standards
approved by the Engineer of the applicable jurisdiction.



      (10)   Median Openings, Auxiliary Lanes, and Curb Cuts. 
Median openings, auxiliary lanes, and curbs, when approved or required, shall
be designed and constructed as specified by the reviewing authority and in
accordance with the Noblesville Standards Sheet 9 - Miscellaneous Details and
Notes and Sheet 11 Street Cut Details.



      (11)   Drainage Facilities.  Storm sewers, detention ponds,
and other drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with Part E, "Drainage Facilities" and the Noblesville Standards Sheet 4 -
Storm Sewer Bedding Details and Notes and Sheet 5 Storm Sewer Details and
Notes.



      (12)   Sanitary Sewers and Septic Systems.  Public sanitary
sewers and septic systems shall be constructed in accordance with Part F,
"Sewerage Facilities," Sewer Use; the Ten State Standards and the Noblesville
Standards Sheet 8 - Sanitary Sewer Bedding Details and Notes and Sheet 7 -
Sanitary Sewer Details and Notes.



      (13)   Water Facilities and Fire Hydrants.  The placement of
fire hydrants and water mains for adequate fire protection shall be in
accordance with the appropriate fire district standards and this subchapter.



      (14)   Utilities.  Energy and communication utilities shall
be installed underground and subject to this subchapter.



      (15)   Preservation of Existing Natural Features.  Existing
natural features which add value to development and enhance the
attractiveness of the community should be preserved in all site plans in
accordance with this subchapter.



      (16)   Erosion Control Plan.  All development which requires
an Improvement Location Permit shall conform to the regulations concerning
types of soils involved and the conditions which are requisite to assure
proper execution of erosion and sediment control and proper drainage, in
accordance with this subchapter.



      (17)   Soil Preservation, Grading, and Seeding.  In lieu of
the Erosion Control Plan described above, the construction of individual
single and two-family homes shall conform to the regulations of this
subchapter.



      (18)   The developer/owner is responsible for the costs
associated with all infrastructure and improvements unless modified by an
agreement between the city and the developer/owner of a specific project.



   (F)   Development Names.  The proposed name of the development
shall not duplicate, or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of
another development in the planning jurisdiction.  The reviewing authority
shall have final authority to designate the name of the development, which
shall be determined at the time of Improvement Location Permit.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.076  MONUMENTS.



   (A)   General Requirements.



      (1)   Monuments shall be placed for the purpose of delineating
each individual lot boundaries, the external boundaries of a subdivision plat
and the centerline of roadways.



      (2)   Monuments shall be installed after final grading is
completed.  Each property corner and internal angle point shall be
monumented by the installation of a two foot by six inch long iron rod,
capped flush at final grade with a durable plastic cover.



      (3)   A land surveyor, registered in the State of Indiana,
shall attest to the accuracy of the installed individual lot monuments. 
Certified Statements of Attestment shall be submitted to the Noblesville
Department of Engineering after the Plan Commission has approved the plat but
prior to the issuance of any building permits.



      (4)   Monuments which are damaged or altered shall be reset by
party responsible for damage/alteration.  If a responsible party cannot be
readily determined, the developer shall bear the costs of having the
monument(s) reset.



      (5)   All monuments including external boundaries, water
bodies, and individual lots shall be installed and inspected/accepted by the
city. Monumentation for individual lots is required as a part of the final
certificate of occupancy approval.



   (B)   External Boundaries.



      (1)   Type of Monument.  The external boundaries of a
development shall be monumented in the field by monuments of concrete, not
less than 30 inches in length, not less than four inches square and marked on
top with a cross, brass plug, or iron rod.



      (2)   Location of Monument.  These monuments shall be placed
not more than 1,320 feet apart in any straight line and at points of
tangency, points of curvature, and intersection of another roadway and those
points to be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any water body,
except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed
future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the street.



      (3)   Guarantee of Accuracy.  A land surveyor, registered in
the State of Indiana, shall attest to the accuracy of the installed
monuments.  Certified statements of attestment shall be submitted to the
Department of Engineering for consideration and acceptance of the roadway by
the Noblesville Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (4)   Damaged Monuments.  Monuments which are damaged or
altered shall be reset by party responsible for damage/alteration.  If a
responsible party cannot be readily determined, the developer shall bear the
costs of having the monument(s) reset.



   (C)   Internal Boundaries.  All internal boundaries and those
corners and points not covered by the preceding division shall be monumented
in the field on iron rods one-half inch in diameter and 30 inches long. 
These monuments shall be placed at all block and lot corners and at all
internal angle points as required by the City Engineer.



   (D)   Monuments Marking Water Bodies.  The lines of lots that
extend to bodies of water shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at
least 30 inches long and seven-eighths inch in diameter or by round or square
iron bars at least 30 inches long.  These monuments shall be placed at the
point of intersection of the water line, with a meander line established not
less than 20 feet back from the bank of the water body.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.077  DEVELOPMENT BLOCK AND LOT LAYOUT.



   (A)   Blocks.



      (1)   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two
tiers of lots of appropriate depth pursuant to Table 8.B. Summary of
Residential Bulk Requirements (see Table 5, § 159.106), Table 8.C. Summary
of Commercial Bulk Requirements (see Table 6, § 159.107), Table 8.D. Summary
of Industrial Bulk Standards (see Table 7, § 159.108), Table 8.E.4. Bulk
Requirement for Corporate Campus Non-Residential Subdistricts (see §
159.107) and Table 8.F.4. Bulk Requirements for Federal Hill Subdistricts
(see § 159.109). Exceptions to this prescribed block width may be permitted
in blocks adjacent to major transportation facilities, water courses, and
industrial and commercial areas.



      (2)   The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be
appropriate for the location and the type of development contemplated, but
shall follow the restrictions and guidelines below:



         (a)   Blocks, on local streets, in residential areas
shall not be more than 1,000 feet nor less than 400 feet in length.



         (b)   Wherever practical, blocks along major arterials
and collector streets should be a minimum of 1,000 feet in length.



         (c)   Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of
such length and width as may be determined suitable by the Planning
Commission for the prospective use.



      (3)   In long blocks, the Plan Commission may require an
easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities or
pedestrian walkways where deemed essential to provide circulation or access
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community
facilities.



      (4)   Where blocks are developed along arterial streets and/or
highways that shall contain alleys, those alleys shall run parallel to said
arterial and not perpendicular or radial to it so as to create an
intersection between the arterial and alley.



   (B)   Lots.



      (1)   Lot Arrangement.  The lot arrangements shall be such
that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or
other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the zoning ordinance and other regulations, in providing safe
driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved street, or in
providing service to public sanitary sewer or approved sanitary disposal
facilities.



      (2)   Lot Dimensions.



         (a)   The areas of all lots shall not be less than the
standards for the zoning district in which they are located.



         (b)   Corner lots shall be a minimum of 50% larger than
the minimum lot area indicated for the zoning district in which it is located.



         (c)   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out
for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide
for the off street parking and loading facilities required for the type of
use and development contemplated, as established in the Zoning Ordinance.



         (d)   Adequate depth shall be allotted to new blocks and
lots to accommodate landscape buffers, where required.



         (e)   Where individual septic tanks have been
authorized, sufficient area shall be provided for a replacement sewage
disposal system.



      (3)   Lot Lines.



         (a)   The lot line common to the street right-of-way
shall be the front line.  All lots shall face the front line and a similar
line across the street.  Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that
the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot.



         (b)   In general, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation
from this rule will give a better street or lot plan.



         (c)   Building setback lines shall be established on all
lots, and the minimum building set back line shall be appropriate for the
location of the development and for type of development and use contemplated,
provided, however, that they shall not be less than the standards established
by the zoning ordinance of the City of Noblesville.



      (4)   Lot Shape.  Double frontage and reversed frontage lots
shall be discouraged except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific
disadvantages of topography and orientation.  Flag lots shall be prohibited.



      (5)   Access to Lots.  Single- and two-family lots shall not
derive access from an arterial or major collector.  Multi-family and
Nonresidential lots should not generally derive access exclusively from an
arterial or major collector street.  Where driveway access from an arterial
or major collector street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the
Plan Commission may require that such lots be served by a common and combined
driveway in order to limit possible traffic hazards on such street. 
Driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to
back into traffic on arterials and major collectors.



      (6)   Waterbodies and Watercourses.  If a tract being
subdivided contains a private water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall
be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the
fees of adjacent lots.  The Planning Commission may approve an alternative
plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the
water body is so placed that it will not become a local government
responsibility.  No more than 25% of the minimum area of a lot required
under this chapter may be satisfied by land that is under water.  Where a
watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it
has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other
structure, of design approved by the City or County Engineer, as applicable.



      (7)   Utility Easements.  Easements across lots or centered
on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and
shall be at least 15 feet wide.  Easements for streetlights shall be located
as approved by the Board of Public Works and Safety.



      (8)   Drainage.  Lots shall be laid out to provide positive
drainage away from all buildings.  Individual lot drainage shall be
coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



§ 159.078  TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   Streets and Roads.



      (1)   Purpose.  In order to provide for streets of suitable
location, width, and improvement to accommodate expected traffic and afford
satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and
road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate street development so as to
compose a convenient system, avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties
and assure compatibility with long range comprehensive plans, all streets
shall be designed according to the standards set forth in these
regulations.  In designing and approving subdivision streets, the following
factors shall receive consideration:



         (a)   Safety for all vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



         (b)   Efficient ability of the roadway and related
facilities to accommodate the modes of transportation it is anticipated to
serve including, but not limited to, pedestrians, passenger cars, buses,
emergency services and freight;



         (c)   Livability or amenities as affected by traffic
elements in the circulation system;



         (d)   Economy of both construction and use of land.



      (2)   Applicability.  Design of major collector and arterial
streets shall require special design and approval by the City Engineer.  The
following design guidelines are specifically intended for streets  within
the subdivision, for example, minor collectors and locals.  Standards for
each classification are found in the Noblesville Standards.



      (3)   General Provisions.



         (a)   Conformance with thoroughfare plan, existing
development, and natural features.



            1.   All streets shall be properly integrated with
the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated
rights-of-way, as established in the Comprehensive Master Plan.



            2.   All thoroughfares shall be properly related
to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts,
schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the
pattern of existing and proposed land uses.



            3.   Minor or local streets shall be laid out to
conform as much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through
traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the
minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to
property.



         (b)   Public Streets Required.  All arterial and
collector streets, as shown on the Official Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan
Map, a part of the Comprehensive Master Plan shall be dedicated to the
public. Local streets may be private streets and shall meet the current
adopted Noblesville Standards for local streets including right-of-way width,
pavement width, pavement construction, etc., and additional requirements of
the Unified Development Ordinance. All private streets shall be inspected by
the Engineering Department for compliance with the Unified Development
Ordinance and Noblesville Standards.



         (c)   Frontage on Improved Roads Required.  No
subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have
frontage on and access from an existing street or a street shown upon a plat
approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the County Recorder of
Deeds' office.  The street or highway must be suitably improved as required
by this Division, or be secured by a performance bond required under the
regulations of this chapter.



         (d)   Improvement of Noblesville Thoroughfares. 
Wherever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, the
road shall be suitably improved as required by the City Engineer and approved
by the Plan Commission.  Whenever a proposed subdivision borders an existing
roadway, which is depicted on the adopted Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan, the
developer shall be required to improve said roadway(s) in accordance with the
Noblesville Standards Sheet 2 - Right of Way.  The reconstruction or
widening of such street as a condition of plat approval and additional
dedication of right-of-way may also be required.  Acceleration/deceleration
lanes and passing blisters shall be constructed for all new developments
directly adjacent to a primary arterial, secondary arterial, major collector,
commercial collector or INDOT right-of-way.



         (e)   Subdivisions Abutting Arterials, Expressways, and
Collectors.  Applicants may install a significant landscape and mounding
treatment in order to visually screen the backyards and the first floor
elevation of the exterior of homes on lots which abut such thoroughfares.
Applicants shall provide elevation drawings of the typical section of the
proposed mounding and landscaping treatment along with the common and
scientific names and plant sizes at the time of planting and maturity of the
plant species to be provided as a part of the subdivision application. The
mound shall be a minimum height at the peak of four feet and shall be planted
as per the requirements of §§ 159.180 through 159.190.  An opaque fence or
wall may be used in combination with the landscaping and mounding subject to
the approval of the Plan Commission.



         (f)   Half Streets.  Half streets shall be prohibited
except where unusual circumstances make such a facility necessary to the
reasonable development of a tract in conformance with these regulations and
where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the
street is provided.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided borders on an
existing half or partial street, the other part of the street shall be
dedicated within such tract.



         (g)   Continuation of Streets and Dead End-Streets.



            1.   Continuation of Streets (Stub Streets). 
Streets in new subdivisions should extend to the boundary line of the parcel
to provide for the future extension of said streets into adjacent areas when
the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective
fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where the
continuation is in accordance with the Thoroughfare Plan.  If the adjacent
property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street,
the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line.  A temporary T- or
L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with
the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street
right-of-way shall revert to abutters whenever the street is continued.  The
Planning Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in
accordance with the design standards of these regulations.



            2.   Permanent Dead-End Streets (Cul-De-Sacs).



               a.   Where a road does not extend beyond the
boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the
Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall be
in a cul-de-sac turnaround.  Permanent dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall
not be longer than 600 feet.  The minimum radii for cul-de-sacs shall be as
follows:



 


Use Type

 

Right-of-Way (ft.)

 

Center of Cul-de-Sac to Back of Curb (ft.)



Residential
 

54

 

40



Commercial
 

54

 

50



Industrial
 

54

 

50




 



               b.   Wherever a minor collector street
serves exclusively an industrial or commercial area, a cul-de-sac may be
allowed and the length may be increased to 1,000 feet.  This special
provision shall be allowed only in areas which have a difficult access or are
otherwise unsuitable for normal subdividing.  However, a 48-foot pavement
width shall be required in all cases under this special provision.



               c.   All streets to be terminated on a
temporary basis shall be constructed with a turnaround.  The  turnaround
shall be constructed beyond all lots intended for development.  In a
development which is not phased, the turnaround shall be developed in a way
that will not preclude the future extension of the road.



         (h)   Guidelines for Street Location and Arrangement in
Commercial/Industrial Areas.



            1.   Alleys shall be provided in multiple dwelling
or commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service
access and off-street loading and unloading.  Dead-end alleys shall be
prohibited.



            2.   In business and industrial developments, the
streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping
of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck
loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize
conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including
pedestrian.



         (i)   Maintenance of State Road 37 Right-of-Way.  For
all new development abutting the right-of-way of SR37, the developer shall
request that the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) remove any
existing fence in said right-of-way.  Thereafter, said right-of-way shall be
maintained in good condition, along with other exterior spaces on the
premises, by the abutting property owner.



         (j)   Right-of-way pavement widths refer to Noblesville
Standards - Sheet 2 Right of Way.



      (4)   Street Design Standards and Guidelines.



         (a)   Design Traffic Volumes.  The design hourly volume
(DHV) or average daily traffic (ADT) is the accepted basis for design.  In
rural areas, the Engineer of appropriate jurisdiction may amend the design
standards as determined by traffic demand analysis.  However, the traffic
volume does not always determine the type of curves to be used in designing
low volume residential local and minor collector streets.  Traffic volumes
are a major factor to be considered for streets serving commercial and
industrial areas, and the Engineer of appropriate jurisdiction is required to
give special attention to these areas.



         (b)   Design Speed.  Design speeds are a factor for
urban residential local and minor collector design.  In general, the same
rule can be applied to rural low volume roads in subdivision design. The
sight distances and curve radii are to be commensurate with average
acceptable design speeds as indicated by the Indiana Design Manual.



         (c)   Vertical Grades.  Drainage design may become
critical where grades exceed 4%.  For this reason, grades lower than the
suggested tabular values are encouraged.  Commercial and industrial streets
shall be held to a maximum grade of 4%.  Residential streets shall in no
case exceed the tabular values.  In order to provide for proper drainage,
the minimum grade should be held to 0.5%.  The maximum grade on the approach
leg of any intersection shall not exceed 5% in hilly terrain and 2% in level
terrain.



         (d)   Super Elevation.



            1.   It should be considered in commercial and
industrial areas and for collector streets where operating speeds may exceed
30 to 35 miles per hour.  Where super elevation is used, street curves
should be design for a maximum elevation rate of:



               A.   Urban: 0.04 to 0.06 foot per foot.



               B.   Rural: 0.08 to 0.12 foot per foot.



            2.   Super elevation shall only be used when the
designer has demonstrated that the property horizontal curvature for the
appropriate design speed and the regulatory speed limit cannot be attained.
Where super elevation is not provided within residential areas, the proper
signage shall be provided with the appropriate advisory speed supplemental
plaque.



         (e)   Horizontal Alignment.  Minimum centerline radii
for horizontal curves shall be 225 feet.  The minimum tangent distance
between reverse curves shall be:



            1.   Minimum centerline radii for horizontal
curves shall be:



               A.   Arterial/major collector: Per Indiana
Design Manual;



               B.   Commercial/industrial collector/
residential minor collector: 225 feet;



               C.   Residential local (serves less than 50
residences): 150 feet.



            2.   The minimum tangent distance between reverse
curves shall be:



               A.   Arterial/major collector: Per Indiana
Design Manual;



               B.   Commercial/industrial collector: 200
feet;



               C.   Residential minor collector: 150 feet;



               D.   Residential local (serves less than 50
residences): zero feet.



               E.   Special design exceptions for these
requirements may be granted for roundabout design. Minimum design speeds and
regulatory speed limits for the applicable roadway section shall apply. The
use of spiral and compound curves is prohibited.



         (f)   Intersections.



            1.   Intersections, including median openings,
should be designed with adequate intersection sight distance. The recommended
minimum intersection sight distance shall be determined from the Indiana
Design Manual related to intersection sight distance based on the roadway
design speed or posted speed limit. In order to maintain these distances, the
engineer of appropriate jurisdiction or the Technical Advisory Committee may
recommend regulations to restrict the height of embankment, location of
buildings and screening fences and landscaping, and other provisions
necessary for intersection sight control.



            2.   The minimum intersection angle shall be 75
degrees.



            3.   Closely spaced offset intersections are
undesirable. The minimum intersection centerline offset (jog) for the
following intersections shall be:



               A.   Residential -
local/commercial/industrial collectors with residential –
local/commercial/industrial collectors: 150 feet;



               B.   Arterial/major collector with any
drive, public or private: Intersection sight distance (ISD) shall be
determined using the design speed for the affected roadways. Intersection
sight distance shall be analyzed and meet the requirements for Intersection
Sight Distance in Chapter 46, Intersections at Grade of the Indiana Design
Manual for all driveways and intersections. Vision corner clearance for all
intersections and drives shall also meet the requirements of § 159.120(H). 
The location for all sight distance evaluations shall be from the estimated
location of the driver while the design vehicle is stopped at the required
yield point. If the location has no defined yield point, the established
yield point for the vehicle shall be the right-of-way line.  Driveways,
entrances, or streets not meeting this section shall have movements
restricted or the entrance relocated.



            4.   To accommodate transitional tapers, turning
lanes, and other potential roadway design requirements where needed, the
engineer of appropriate jurisdiction may recommend longer offsets.



            5.   Throating or center median curb may be
required for all drives, public or private, which connect to a major
collector or arterial to prevent queuing within the right-of-way. If the
distance from the edge of traveled way to the nearest edge of drive is equal
to or less than the values below, the entry drive of street shall be throated
or provided with center curb.



               A.   Arterials: 100 feet;



               B.   Major collectors: 75 feet; and



               C.   Minor collector, commercial/industrial,
local: zero feet.



            6.   The minimum curb return radius at local
streets shall be 15 feet and at residential collector streets 20 feet. The
desirable radius is 25 to 30 feet, respectively. On commercial and industrial
streets, the radius shall be 30 feet, except where traffic conditions may
warrant a smaller radius.



            7.   No intersection shall be constructed with
more than four approach legs, and the development of three legged "T"
intersections is encouraged due to the increased safety of such intersections.



         (g)   Auxiliary Lanes.  Refer to the Noblesville
Standards - Sheet 2 Right of Way.



         (a)   General Requirement.  Streets shall be completed
to grades shown on plans, profiles, and cross-sections approved by the City
Board of Public Works.  Minimum cross section standards and Geometric Design
Standards are found in the Noblesville Standards - APPENDIX F.



         (b)   Classification of Streets; Right-of-Way and
Pavement Widths.  Minimum street right-of-way widths and pavement widths
shall be as illustrated in the Noblesville Standards Sheet 2 - Right of Way.



         (c)   Pavement Surfacing.  The street surface shall be
of Portland cement concrete or a flexible pavement and shall be constructed
in accordance with design characteristics at least equal to those in the
Noblesville Standards Sheet 3 - Pavement, Curbs, Sidewalk Details and Notes.



      (6)   County Streets and Roads.  For streets and roads in
subdivisions under the jurisdiction of Hamilton County, design and
improvement standards shall be as provided in the Hamilton County Standards
for Construction of Road Improvements.



      (7)   Curb and Gutter.  Curb and gutter shall be placed
according to grades shown on plans, profiles, and crosssections as shown in
the Noblesville Standards - Sheet 3 Pavement, Curb and Sidewalk Details and
Notes.  They shall be constructed with plain Portland cement concrete and in
the manner shown for the integral or combined curbs, except in the case of
arterial streets where the separate curb may be required.  Roll curbs may be
used in residential streets when the distance between the back of the curb
and the nearest edge of a sidewalk is four feet or more.



   (B)   Alleys.



      (1)   The minimum right of way of an alley, if provided, shall
be 16 feet.



      (2)   Alleys shall be paved full width to minimum local road
standards.



      (3)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall
be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to
permit safe vehicular movement.



      (4)   Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
end, as determined by the Planning Director.



   (C)   Sidewalks and Pedestrian Access.



      (1)   Sidewalks and Trails Required.  Sidewalks shall be
provided by the developer on both sides of all streets, except that in the SR
District, when such requirement may be waived by the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Location.  Where provided, sidewalks shall be included
within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way, and shall be placed according
to the grades shown on plans, profiles, and cross-sections as illustrated in
the Noblesville Standards.



      (3)   Dimensions; Improvement Standards.



         (a)   All proposed sidewalks shall be constructed of
width and thickness as illustrated in the Noblesville Standards or as
required by the Noblesville Alternative Transportation Plan.



         (b)   All proposed sidewalks shall be a minimum of five
feet in width or as per the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).



         (c)   The maximum Design Cross Slope shall not exceed
1.5% as per the INDOT Design Standards.



      (4)   Responsibility.  The applicant is responsible for the
installation of the initial sidewalks or trails including replacement or
necessary repairs, if there is an existing sidewalk or trail.



      (5)   Pedestrian Walkways.  Pedestrian walkways may be
required through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed
essential by the Plan Commission to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community
facilities.  Pedestrian walkways, where required, shall have easements at
least ten feet in width which shall be indicated on the plat.  Pedestrian
walkways shall otherwise be constructed in accordance with the regulations
for sidewalks, above.



   (D)   Street Names and Numbers, Street Signs, and Traffic Control
Devices.



      (1)   Street Names and Numbers.



         (a)   Street names shall not duplicate any existing name
within the area covered by these regulations except where a new street is a
continuation of an existing street.  Street names that may be spelled
differently but sound the same as existing streets shall not be used.  The
Plan Commission shall have secondary authority to name all streets in the
case of conflict upon recommendation of the Technical Advisory Committee at
the time of primary plat approval.



         (b)   The street numbering system for any property shall
be subject to the approval of the Director of Planning and Development.



      (2)   Street Signs.  The applicant shall fund the
installation of street name signs in accordance with Noblesville Standards
and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices of Indiana.  One sign
shall be installed at each intersection indicating the name of each street
thereat.  Regulatory signs shall also be the responsibility of the
applicant.  Street name signs shall be lighted or reflectorized.



      (3)   Warning Signs and Other Devices.  The city or county
shall be responsible for the installation of all warning signs and other
traffic control devices, in accordance with the Noblesville Standards except
for those which may be warranted in industrial and commercial areas.  In
such cases, the developer whose project has increased traffic to the degree
that a signal may be warranted may be required to pay the cost of traffic
signal installation and interconnection.



      (4)   Street Lights.



         (a)   General Guidelines.  Street lighting shall be
designed so as to provide an appropriate degree of illumination for various
activities based on their location along arterial, collector, or local
streets and the intensity of the surrounding land uses.  This lighting shall
be funded by the developer.  Illumination guidelines shall be as follows:



 


Illumination Guidelines




Area to be Illuminated

 

Commercial1
(footcandles)

 

Intermediate2
(footcandles)

 

Residential3
(footcandles)





Streets
 



 



 





Arterials
 

1.2

 

0.9

 

0.6



Collectors
 

0.8

 

0.6

 

0.4



Locals
 

0.6

 

0.5

 

0.3



Parking Lots
 
In accordance with §§ 159.140 - 159.148


Other Areas
 
As recommended by the Planning Director




 



1 Commercial — Business districts with heavy pedestrian traffic at night.



2 Intermediate — Moderately heavy pedestrian traffic at night for community
recreation centers, libraries, neighborhood stores, and the like.



3 Residential — Predominately residential areas with light pedestrian
traffic at night.



         (b)   Minimum Requirements.  At a minimum the applicant
shall provide lighting in accordance with the Noblesville Standards Sheet 10
- Street Lighting Guidelines.



         (c)   Dusk-to-Dawn Lights.  If the covenants of the
subdivision provide for the installation and maintenance of a free-standing
dusk-to-dawn light on each lot.  The light standards shall be installed
within 25 feet of the edge of the street, shall be uniform in design, and
shall be maintained with a bulb of at least 75 watts.



   (E)   Plans Approved for Acceptance and Dedications.



      (1)   Change of Plans.  Any change in plans of a street from
the original plans approved by the Department of Planning and Development and
the Department of Engineering, as applicable, must be submitted to the Board
of Works & Safety or the Commissioners by the contractor or developer for
approval before being constructed.



      (2)   Acceptance.  All work must be acceptable to and meet
all of the requirements of the city or county pertaining to maintenance
bond.  Upon the completion of all improvements and installations as required
by this chapter, the developer shall furnish the Board of Public Works or
County Commissioners with an engineer's certification that said improvements
and installations have been constructed, installed, and completed in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Samples.  The contractor to furnish samples of concrete
for testing as required.  All concrete specimens shall be made in accordance
with AASHO designation T-23, Cylindrical specimen T-22, Beam specimen T-97. 
The city or county reserves the right to core the slab before accepting. 
The contractor shall furnish all labor and equipment costs to make all tests.



      (4)   Specifications.  All work and materials to meet the
specification requirements of the Noblesville Standards and the Standard
Specifications of the Indiana Department of Transportation or other
applicable ordinance(s).



      (5)   Bonds.



         (a)   City Jurisdiction.



            1.   Prior to the approval of a proposed plat for
subdividing land under the jurisdiction of the city, the person or firm or
corporation requesting the approval of said plat shall furnish a performance
bond, a certified check, certificate of deposit or irrevocable letter of
credit guaranteeing the completion of required infrastructure improvements in
the proposed development as set out in the plat tendered for approval.  The
bond to be in the amount of 110% of the estimated cost of completion of the
required public infrastructure improvements and which bond shall guarantee
that the infrastructure improvements. (Minimum amount - $1,000)



            2.   Prior to acceptance of construction and
release of the performance surety, the person, firm, or corporation
requesting the development shall file a maintenance bond or other accepted
surety in the amount equal to 15% of the total construction costs of the
required public improvements and which surety shall provide for a period of
three years following the release of the performance surety.



         (b)   County Jurisdiction.



            1.   Prior to the approval of a proposed plat for
subdividing land under the jurisdiction of Hamilton County for residential or
business use, the person or firm or corporation requesting the approval of
the plat shall furnish a performance bond or approved letter of credit
guaranteeing the completion of infrastructure improvements in the proposed
development as set out in the plat tendered for approval, the bond to be in
the amount as required in the Hamilton County Standards for Construction of
Road Improvements and which bond shall guarantee that said infrastructure
improvements will be completed not later than two years from the acceptance
of the surety.



            2.   Prior to acceptance of construction and
release of the performance surety, the person, firm, or corporation
requesting the development shall file a maintenance bond or approved letter
of credit in the amount equal to 20% of the construction costs as estimated
by the County Engineer and shall provide for a period of three years
following the release of the performance surety.  The proposed development
plat shall set out the specifications for the construction of the road or
street.  Prior to approval of the plat, the road/street specification shall
be approved by the County Highway Engineer.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 37-8-00, passed 9-11-00; Am. Ord.
25-06-02, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 76-9-05,
passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 89-10-06, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. 95-11-06,
passed 12-12-06; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11- 07; Am. Ord. 10-03-13,
passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.079  DRAINAGE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Purpose.  These stormwater drainage regulations are intended
to minimize off site water run-off, increase on-site infiltration, encourage
natural filtration functions, stimulate natural drainage systems, and
minimize off site discharge of pollutants.  Stormwater shall be managed by
the best and most appropriate technology and environmentally-sound site
planning and engineering techniques, which may include combined retention
facilities, porous paving and piping, and swales; as well as traditional
storm sewers and retention basins.



   (B)   General Requirements.  All new development shall make
adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff in accordance with the
Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards or the requirements of the
jurisdictional agency.  The applicant may also be required by the Plan
Commission to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water
that may exist either previously to, or as a result of, the development. 
The drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary
sewerage system. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not
carried across or around any intersection, or for a distance of more than 400
feet in any gutter.  Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each
lot and block on the development plat or plan.



   (C)   Public Storm Sewers.



      (1)   Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant
shall install storm sewer facilities.  If the Commission determines that a
connection to a public storm sewer will eventually be provided as shown in
existing local plans and programs, the developer shall make arrangements for
future storm water disposal in the development by a public sewerage system at
the time the plat or plan receives secondary approval.  Provision for such
connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the Performance Bond
required for the development.



      (2)   Drainage facilities shall be located in the road
right-of-way where feasible or in perpetual unobstructed easements of
appropriate width.  Drain facilities shall be provided under driveways so
that the flow of water in ditches is not impeded.



      (3)   Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed
according to the Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards or other methods
required by the engineer of appropriate jurisdiction, endorsed by the
Technical Advisory Committee, and approved by the Plan Commission, and a copy
of the design computations shall be completed in accordance with the
Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards and be submitted along with plans
and specifications.



      (4)   All storm sewers shall be self-cleaning systems without
manhole drops.



      (5)   All below-ground drainage systems, except for
underground retention facilities or pipes less then 12 inches in diameter
shall be maintained by the city.



      (6)   All storm sewer facilities shall be provided to comply
with the Noblesville Standards and the Noblesville Stormwater Technical
Standards.



      (7)   Ordinance No. 23-4-05 "City of Noblesville Illicit
Discharge and Connection Stormwater Ordinance" and all amendments thereto.
(See §§ 52.01 et seq.).



   (D)   Detention/Retention Ponds.  If no public storm sewer outlets
are available within a reasonable distance, the disposal of storm waters
shall be accomplished through a detention pond.



      (1)   General Requirement.



         (a)   Where detention/retention facilities or "ponds"
are used for stormwater management, they shall accommodate site runoff
generated from two-year, ten-year, and 100-year storms considered
individually in accordance with the Noblesville Stormwater Technical
Standards, unless the detention/retention basin is classified as a dam, in
which case it must also meet any applicable dam safety standards.



         (b)   Runoff greater than that occurring from a 100
year, 24-hour storm shall be passed over an emergency spillway.



         (c)   Detention/retention shall be provided to limit
stormwater discharge to the rates required by the Noblesville Stormwater
Technical Standards or the requirements of the jurisdictional agency.



         (d)   Detention facilities shall be located as far
horizontally from surface water and as far vertically from groundwater as is
practicable.  Detention facilities shall not interrupt the post-development
groundwater table, where practicable.



         (e)   Detention/retention ponds, where required, shall
be designed according to the methods recommended by the Noblesville
Standards, Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards, and the engineer of
appropriate jurisdiction, endorsed by the Technical Advisory Committee, and
approved by the reviewing authority, and a copy of the design computations
shall be submitted along with plans and specifications.



         (f)   All above-ground drainage systems and below-ground
stormwater detention systems shall be maintained by the owner(s) of real
estate or the neighborhood association or similar group affiliated with the
real estate within the development and/or subdivision.



         (g)   The setback from the right-of-way at the Top of
Bank shall be a minimum of 50 feet. (Refer to the Noblesville Standards.)



         (h)   The setback from a property line not adjacent to a
right-of-way at the Top of Bank shall be a minimum of 15 feet. (Refer to the
Noblesville Standards.) This setback shall be referred to as an easement for
maintenance purposes and so indicated on the construction plans, recorded
plats or other recorded documents.



      (2)   Combined Facilities.  Where possible, a detention pond
may be created so as to serve several adjacent parcels concurrently, subject
to the following criteria:



         (a)   The pond shall be designed with appropriate
capacity to serve all applicable sites, as determined by the Engineer of the
applicable jurisdiction.



         (b)   Provisions for completion of improvements and
maintenance, or any applicable bonds in lieu thereof, shall be coordinated
between all applicable sites, in a manner acceptable to the attorney of the
applicable jurisdiction.



         (c)   Shared detention ponds should be designed and
landscaped as a site amenity to the extent practicable.



         (d)   The subdivision of lots abutting the combined
detention pond shall be subject to § 159.077(B)(5).



   (E)   Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas.  A culvert or other
drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the
development.  The design engineer shall determine the necessary size of the
facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards, Noblesville
Stormwater Technical Standards, and specifications assuming conditions of
maximum potential watershed development permitted by this chapter.



   (F)   Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas.  The design engineer of
the site shall determine if the immediate downstream receiving pipe/culvert,
system, or waterways is sufficient to handle the stormwater runoff and note
that in the drainage calculations.  The engineer of the applicable
jurisdiction shall also study the effect of each development on existing
farther downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the development. 
Local government drainage studies together with such other studies as shall
be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements.  Where it is
anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development will
overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission
may withhold approval of the development until provision has been made for
the expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility.  No development
shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate
drainage watercourse or facility.



   (G)   Poor Drainage Areas.  Whenever a plat is submitted for an
area, or is just upstream of an area, which is subject to ponding or
flooding, the Plan Commission may approve such application provided that the
applicant's design engineer designs a stormwater system to eliminate the
ponding or flooding of the site or the immediate downstream area and that it
is acceptable by the engineer of appropriate jurisdiction.  The plan or
system shall be constructed and accepted by the engineer of jurisdiction
prior to the approval of said plat.



   (H)   Floodplain Access. 



      (1)   The Plan Commission shall, when it deems it necessary
for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of
the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage and sanitary
facilities, prohibit the development of any portion of the property which
lies within the flood plain.  Any approvals within the floodplain shall, at
a minimum, meet the requirements of the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



      (2)   Development plans, primary plats, secondary plats,
preliminary development plans and detailed development plans shall delineate
the 100-year floodplain and base flood elevations on said plans as referenced
on the most current adopted flood insurance rate maps for Hamilton County,
Indiana, a part of the National Flood Insurance Program as provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (I)   Drainage Easements.  Where a development is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, the developer shall provide a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the
lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be
acceptable to the Engineer of appropriate jurisdiction.  The easement shall
be adequately monumented; and, whenever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained by open channel with landscaped banks.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
82-10-05, passed 11-15-05; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.080  SEWERAGE FACILITIES.



   (A)   General Requirements.



      (1)   Mandatory Connection to Public Sewer System.



         (a)   For newly platted developments with access to the
public sewer system, stub-up sewer lines shall be located at each lot and
shall be extended as illustrated in the Noblesville Standards.



         (b)   If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a
sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the
owner of the property shall be required to connect to the sewer for the
purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or
occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal
system.



      (2)   Individual Disposal Systems.  If public sewer
facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed,
minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the Planning
Director and the results submitted to the Health Department.  There shall be
at least one percolation test for every three lots, and the test holes shall
be distributed throughout the development and not concentrated in any one
location.  Distribution should be approved by the County Health Officer. 
Should the test indicate poor percolation in the development, percolation
tests may be required on each lot by the Commission.  The individual
disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile
fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the
Hamilton County Board of Health.



      (3)   Special Conditions.  The Plan Commission shall have the
right and discretion to require better or more stringent methods of sewage
disposal when it determines that site conditions, such as poor soils, poor
drainage, or otherwise, will not adequately or safely handle sewage disposal
methods otherwise allowed by this chapter.



   (B)   Requirements for Public Sewer Systems.



      (1)   General.  The applicant shall install sanitary sewer
facilities in a manner prescribed in the Noblesville Standards.  All plans
shall be designed and sewer facilities (including laterals in the
right-of-way) installed, subject to the specifications, rules, regulations
and guidelines of the Engineer of appropriate jurisdiction and appropriate
Health and other officials.  Sanitary sewers shall be located within the
right-of-way or within a 15 foot easement in the front yard.  The center of
manhole covers shall be no more than 12 feet from the back of curb.



      (2)   SR District.  In the SR District, individual disposal
systems are encouraged, but public sewers may be permitted subject to the
requirement for the SR District found in this chapter.



      (3)   Low and Medium Density Residential Districts (except for
SR).  Sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed as follows:



         (a)   Where a public sanitary sewer system is within
1,000 feet of the proposed project, as determined by the Plan Commission, the
applicant shall connect with it and provide sewers to each lot in the
development.



         (b)   Where a public sanitary sewer system is not within
1,000 feet, as determined by the Plan Commission, but will become available
within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 years, the applicant may choose
to: install individual sewage disposal systems, including conventional septic
systems and other types developed through new technology as approved by the
Indiana State Board of Health and Hamilton County Health Department provided
that sufficient area is available on the lot for two drain fields in the
event that the first field would fail.



         (c)   Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably
accessible and will not become available within an estimated 15 year period,
the applicant may install sewerage systems as follows:



            1.   Medium Density Residential Districts shall
have a central sewerage system. Individual disposal systems will be
permitted, including conventional septic systems and other types developed
through new technology as approved by the Indiana State Board of Health and
the Hamilton County Health Department provided that sufficient area is
available on the lot for two drain fields in the event that the first field
would fail.



            2.   Low Density Residential Districts may have
individual disposal systems including conventional septic systems and other
types developed through new technology as approved by the Indiana State Board
of Health and Hamilton County Health Department, or a central sewerage system
can be used subject to the ISBH approval.



      (4)   High Density Residential District.  Sanitary sewer
facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewer systems.  Sewers shall
be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by
appropriate local officials and agencies.  No individual disposal system or
treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03)



§ 159.081  WATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   General Requirements.  Necessary action shall be taken by the
applicant for any subdivision plat or  development plan to provide water for
domestic use and fire protection.



   (B)   Public Water Utilities.



      (1)   Where a public water main is accessible, the developer
shall install adequate water lines and other facilities, including fire
hydrants, subject to the specifications of state and local authorities. 
Upon completion of the installation of the water lines, they shall be purged
as witnessed by the representative of the city to assure proper installation.



      (2)   The location of fire hydrants and all water supply
improvements shall be confirmed with the appropriate fire and/or engineering
departments and shall be shown on the primary plat or development plan.



      (3)   All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter.



   (C)   Individual Wells and Central Water Systems.



      (1)   In low density zoning districts and in outlying or rural
areas where a public water system is not available, the Plan Commission may
approve individual wells or a central water system provided that an adequate
supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the development, as
determined by the Engineer of the applicable jurisdiction.



      (2)   Water samples shall be submitted to the Health
Department for its approval, and individual wells and central water systems
shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities. Approvals shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission prior to final development plat approval.



      (3)   All rates for individual wells and central water systems
shall be established by the Public Water Commission.



      (4)   The Planning Commission requires that a connection to a
public water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an
individual well or central water system, the applicant shall make rrangements
prior to receiving final plat approval for future water service. 
Performance or cash bonds may be required to ensure compliance.



   (D)   Fire Hydrants and Fire Department Connections (FDC).  Fire
hydrants shall be required for all developments served by a public water
utility or where public water utilities are reasonably accessible as
determined by the engineer or Fire Marshall of the appropriate jurisdiction.
Fire hydrant and fire department connection (FDC) placement shall comply with
the Noblesville Standards and shall be approved by the local fire protection
unit. Adequate water supply as determined by the City Engineer or Fire
Marshal shall be provided to all fire hydrants or fire department connections
(FDC). (See APPENDIX F-1 Fire Department Access and Water Supply and Fire
Hydrant Specifications and the Noblesville Standards.)



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)



§ 159.082  OTHER UTILITIES.



   (A)   Location.  All newly installed utility facilities, including
but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, shall be
located underground wherever possible.  Whenever existing utility facilities
are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and
rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. Underground
service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be
installed at the developer's expense.  At the discretion of the Planning
Commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived
in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended
to be developed for the same primary use.



   (B)   Easements.



      (1)   Except for sanitary sewer utilities, easements provided
for utilities (private and municipal) shall be negotiated and accepted by
those utilities.  Easements shall be indicated on the plat or development
plan.  Proper coordination shall be established between the developer and
the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements
on adjoining properties.



      (2)   When topographical or other conditions are such as to
make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines,
easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided along side lot lines
with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines.  Easements shall be
indicated on the plat or development plan.



      (3)   Easements for sanitary sewer utilities shall be as
provided for in § 159.080(B)(1).



   (C)   Placement of any new utility pole(s) or any new wireless
structure(s) prohibited.



      (1)   The city hereby prohibits the placement of any new
utility pole(s) or any new wireless structure(s) within an existing or future
public right-of-way or utility easement, if the right-of-way or easement only
permits underground or buried utilities.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any other ordinance, policy, rule, or
prohibition of the city, the Common Council expressly prohibits the issuance
of an improvement permit for any future development within the city, unless
all utilities serving the development are underground or buried within
right-of-way or utility easements that are solely for underground or buried
utilities. This provision shall not apply if the site of the development is
currently served by above-ground utilities.



      (3)   From and after October 10, 2017, the effective date of
Ord. 13-04-17A, no person, corporation or utility shall erect or construct,
within the city's right-of-way or a utility easement, any new pole, overhead
line or associated overhead structure used or useful in supplying electric,
communication or similar associated services, and the part of the
rights-of-way used for location of utilities shall be designated strictly for
underground or buried utilities.



      (4)   All overhead poles, wires, and/or utility transmission
lines, existing on October 10, 2017, the date of Ord. 13-04-17A, may remain
within the city's right-of-way, but may not be replaced or relocated without
prior written authorization of the Board of Public Works and Safety (“the
Board”). However, this provision shall not require approval of the repair
or replacement of any utility facilities that are necessary to provide
service to existing customers of the utility, and the location of the
replacement facilities is substantially similar to the previous facilities.



      (5)   Any requests to install new utility pole(s) or new
wireless structure(s) prohibited by this division may be presented as an
appeal to the Board. The Board may, after hearing, approve the application
upon a showing that:



         (a)   There is no other reasonable location for the
construction of the new utility pole(s) or the new wireless structure(s) that
will provide cell service to designated citizens of the city; and



         (b)   The authorization for the construction is in the
best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.



      (6)   Notwithstanding the restriction above, this division
permits the collocation of small cell facilities on existing:



         (a)   Utility poles; and



         (b)   Wireless support structures;



within the rights-of-way or utility easements.



      (7)   This division permits the replacement of existing:



         (a)   Utility poles; and



         (b)   Wireless support structures;



within the rights-of-way or utility easements.



      (8)   Upon receipt of an application for the construction,
placement or use of a small cell facility on one or more new utility pole(s)
or one or more new wireless support structure(s) in an area designated
strictly for underground or buried utilities, the city shall post notice of
the application on the city's website.



      (9)   The prohibition or other restrictions with respect to
the placement of new utility pole(s) or new wireless support structure(s)
within the rights-of-way or easements shall be applied in a nondiscriminatory
manner.



      (10)   The city shall allow a homeowners’ association to
register with the city to receive notice by United States mail of any
application filed with the city for the construction, placement or use of a
small cell facility on one or more new utility poles or one or more new
wireless support structures in the area within the jurisdiction of the or
homeowners’ association.  The city shall post on the city's website
instructions for a homeowners’ association to register to receive notice
under this division.



      (11)   An applicant for the placement of a small cell facility
and an associated supporting structure shall comply with applicable:



         (a)   Federal Communications Commission requirements; and



         (b)   Industry standards;



for identifying the owner's name and contact information.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
33-6-04, passed 7-13- 04; Am. Ord. 13-04-17, passed 4-25-17; Am. Ord.
13-04-17A, passed 10-10-17)



§ 159.083  PRESERVATION OF EXISTING NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES.



   Existing features that would add value to residential development or to
the community as a whole, such as trees (as herein defined) watercourses and
water bodies, beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets,
shall be preserved in the design of the development.  No trees shall be
removed from any development nor any change of grade of the land affected
until approval of the primary plat has been granted.  All trees on the plat
required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required
shall be welled and protected against change of grade.  The sketch plat
shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by these
regulations and shall further indicate all those marked for retention and the
location of all proposed shade trees required along the street side of each
lot as required by § 159.084.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03)



§ 159.084  EROSION CONTROL PLAN.



   All proposed development that requires an Improvement Location Permit
shall meet the applicable criteria set forth herein concerning types of soils
involved and the conditions which are requisite to assure proper execution of
erosion and sediment control and proper drainage.



   (A)   General Requirements.



      (1)   No changes shall be made in the contour of the land; nor
shall grading, excavating, removal, or destruction of the topsoil, trees, or
other vegetative cover of the land be commenced, until an Erosion Control
Plan has been reviewed by the Technical Advisory Committee or there has been
a determination by the Technical Advisory Committee that such plans are not
necessary.



      (2)   Erosion Control Plans shall be reviewed concurrently
with the development plan and become a part thereof, except that an Erosion
Control Plan may be filed and reviewed prior to the rest of the development
plan for the purpose of obtaining a Preliminary Grading Permit.



      (3)   The Erosion Control Plan shall provide all information,
reports or plans necessary for the application, including pre- and
post-elevations and any additional expense necessary to ensure adequate
information, report or plan shall be met by the applicant.



      (4)   No improvement location permit shall be issued for
grading, excavating, removal or destruction of topsoil, trees, or other
vegetative cover of land until approval has been received from the Technical
Advisory Committee.



      (5)   No building permit shall be issued until the Planning
Department has received and reviewed a certified elevation certificate
regarding the parcels of land for which an improvement location permit was
issued and a building permit is sought.



   (B)   Review of Erosion Control Plans.



      (1)   The following measures are effective in minimizing
erosion and sedimentation and shall be included, where applicable, in the
control plan. In reviewing these measures, the Technical Advisory Committee
shall be guided by the information set forth in the findings in the National
Cooperative Soil Survey prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service in
cooperation with the Purdue Experiment Station and the Hamilton County Soil &
Water Conservation District, and the specifications set forth in both the
Indiana Heartland Urban Development Planning Guide and division (B)(2) herein
and in accordance with Chapter 600 of The City of Noblesville Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual. The Director of Planning and Development shall
also be guided by advice from the USDA Soil Conservation Service, Hamilton
County Soil & Water District, Hamilton County Drainage Board, Indiana
Department of Natural Resources - Division of Water, and other agencies or
officials offering technical assistance on the subjects of soils, drainage,
erosion, and sediment control.



         (a)   Stripping of vegetation, re-grading, or other
development shall be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.



         (b)   Development plans shall preserve salient natural
features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle
the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.



         (c)   Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained, protected, and supplemented.



         (d)   The disturbed area and the duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minimum.



         (e)   Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as
practical.



         (f)   Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used to
protect exposed critical areas during development.



         (g)   The permanent final vegetation and structural
erosion control and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical
in the development.



         (h)   Provisions shall be made to effectively
accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface
conditions during and after development.  Where necessary, the rate of
surface water runoff will be structurally retarded.



         (i)   Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped
until the disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment
basins, silt traps, or similar measures.



         (j)   Development plan design shall strive for cut and
fill site balancing with a minimum volume of residual dirt stockpiled.



         (k)   Ordinance No. 24-4-05 “An Ordinance Regulating
Storm Water Run Off Associated with Construction and Post Construction
Activities in the City of Noblesville” and all amendments thereto. (See
§§ 52.30 et seq.).



      (2)   Design Standards.



         (a)   Measures used to control erosion and reduce
sedimentation and to provide drainage shall, as a minimum, meet the standards
and specifications of the Hamilton County Soil & Water Conservation
District.  The Technical Advisory Committee shall ensure compliance with the
appropriate specifications, copies of which are available from the Hamilton
County Soil & Water Conservation District or the Department of Planning and
Development.  The applicable guides are: "URBAN DEVELOPMENT PLANNING GUIDE",
and "URBAN SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION GUIDELINES, SPECIFICATION NO. I".



         (b)   In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses, improve surface drainage, and control erosion, the
following requirements shall be met:



            1.   The location, grading, and placement of sub
grade (base) material of all driveway and parking areas shall be accomplished
as the first work done in a development plan.



            2.   All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded
to provide proper drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without
ponding; and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding.



            3.   All drainage provisions shall be of such
design to adequately handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest
suitable outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural
watercourse.  Where drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away
from buildings, they shall be sodded or planted as required and shall be of
such slope, shape, and size as to conform with the requirements of the City
of Noblesville or Hamilton County, as the case may be.



            4.   Concentration of surface water runoff shall
be permitted only in swales or watercourses.



            5.   Excavation and fills:



               a.   Temporary dirt stockpiles shall be
maintained with a slope no greater than 3:1 and a height of no greater than
20 feet above grade of the adjacent roadway.



               b.   Permanent dirt stockpiles shall be
maintained with a slope of no greater than 4:1 and a height of no greater
than 15 feet above the grade of the adjacent roadway.



               c.   Provisions shall be made to prevent
surface water from damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping
surfaces of fills by installation of temporary or permanent drainage across
or above these areas.



               d.   Cuts and fills shall not endanger
adjoining property.



               e.   Fill shall be placed and compacted so
as to minimize sliding or erosion of the soil.



               f.   Fills shall not encroach on natural
watercourses or constructed channels.



               g.   Fills placed adjacent to natural
watercourses of constructed channels shall have suitable protection against
erosion during periods of flooding.



               h.   Grading will not be done in such a way
so as to divert water onto the property of another land owner.



               i.   During grading operations, necessary
measures for dust control will be exercised.



               j.   Grading equipment will not be allowed
to cross live streams.  Provision will be made for the installation of
temporary or permanent culverts or bridges.



               k.   Cut and fill operations in the
floodplain; refer to Article 8 - Zoning Districts, Part G. Flood Hazard
District (herein § 159.109(A)).



   (C)   Installation, Responsibility, and Maintenance.



      (1)   Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping
vegetation, re-grading, or other development, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant, person, corporation, or other entity causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems, and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense as quickly as possible.



      (2)   Maintenance of all driveways, parking areas, drainage
facilities, and watercourses within any development plan area is the
responsibility of the applicant, or owner developer.



      (3)   It is the responsibility of the applicant and any
person, corporation, or other entity doing any act on or across a communal
stream, watercourse, or swale or upon the flood plain or right-of-way
thereof, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state the stream,
watercourse, swale, flood plain, or right-of-way during the duration of the
activity and to return it to its original or equal condition after such
activity is completed.



      (4)   No applicant and person, corporation, or other entity
shall block, impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit
any material or thing, or commit any act which will affect normal of flood
flow in any communal street.



      (5)   Where a Development Plan Area is traversed by a
watercourse, the total development of the watercourse shall be considered. 
There shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse, and of such width as will be
adequate to preserve natural drainage.



      (6)   Each applicant, person, corporation, or other entity
which makes any surface changes shall be required to:



         (a)   Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it
to the point of discharge into an adequate outlet approved by the City
Engineer.



         (b)   Handle existing and potential off-site runoff
through his development by designing to adequately handle storm runoff from a
fully developed drainage area.



         (c)   Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of
off site improvements to the common natural watercourse, based on a fully
developed drainage area.



         (d)   Provide and install at his expense, all drainage
and erosion control improvements (temporary and permanent) as required by the
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



      (7)   It is the responsibility of the applicant or owner to
keep all major streams, not under the jurisdiction of another official
agency, open and free flowing.



      (8)   The applicant or owner will assume the responsibility
for maintaining an open and free flowing condition in all minor streams,
watercourses, and drainage systems, constructed or improved in accordance
with city and county design criteria on his property, which are necessary for
proper drainage in the discretion of the Director of Planning and Development
if adequate right-of-way exists or can be acquired.



   (D)   Enforcement.  In the event the applicant or developer
proceeds to clear and grade prior to the approval of the Development Plan,
the Board of Zoning Appeals may revoke the approval of all plans.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
76-9-05, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord.
25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.085  SOIL PRESERVATION, GRADING, AND SEEDING.



   The following regulations shall apply to the construction of single and
two-family homes.  They are intended to decrease the possibility of erosion,
sedimentation, and water pollution in the absence of an Erosion Control Plan
which would be required of larger development or construction projects.



   (A)   Soil Preservation and Final Grading.  No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in
accordance with the approved final development plat and the lot recovered
with soil with an average depth of at least six inches which shall contain no
particles more than two inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot,
except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the
grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged.  Topsoil
shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and
at least four inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting.



   (B)   Lawn-Grass Seed and Sod.  All lots shall be established with
sod from the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way and including the
front yard established by the front building setback line the full width
including the established principal building located on said parcel/lot. The
remaining side yards and rear yards may be established with sod or seed. No
final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until re-spreading of soil and
seeding of lawn has been completed. A temporary certificate of occupancy
issued between April 1 and October 31 (six-months period) requires the
installation of the sod and seed shall be completed a maximum of 30 days
after issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary
certificate of occupancy issued between November 1 and March 31 (four-months
period) requires the installation of the sod and seed by the first business
day in June following the date of issuance of said temporary certificate.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.086  NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   General Requirement.  If a proposed development includes land
that is zoned for non-residential purposes, the Plan Commission may require
any reasonable provision on the layout of the development that would help to
further the purposes of this ordinance or the comprehensive plan.  A
nonresidential development shall also be subject to all the requirements of
site plan approval set forth in this chapter.  A nonresidential development
shall also be subject to all the requirements of these regulations, as well
as such additional standards required by the Commission, and shall conform to
the proposed land use and standards established in the Comprehensive Plan and
other plans of the city/county.



   (B)   Standards.  In addition to the principles and standards in
these regulations, which are appropriate to the planning of all developments,
the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that
the block, lot, and transportation network pattern proposed is specifically
adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the
vicinity.  The following principles and standards shall be observed:



      (1)   Each non-residential area or parcel shall be shown and
marked on the plat as to its intended use.



      (2)   Proposed non-residential parcels shall be suitable in
area and dimensions to the types of development anticipated.



      (3)   The engineer of appropriate jurisdiction shall approve
in writing prior to secondary plat approval a provision that the proposed
non-residential development will not conflict with traffic circulation
patterns, and the requirements for driveway location and design can
reasonably be implemented at no cost to the city/county.



      (4)   Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent
residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed nonresidential
development, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing upon
an existing or potential residential development, and provisions for a
permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary.



      (5)   Truck routes shall be established so as to prevent
industrial traffic from encroaching into adjacent residential areas.



      (6)   To the greatest degree possible, nonresidential
developments shall be located on arterials or major collectors.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.
86-11-03, passed 12-9-03)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.087  STREET TREES.



   (A)   City Streets.  Trees shall be planted as a public improvement
along any new subdivision street.  The cost of street trees and installation
shall be born by the developer.  The developer shall follow the standards
set forth in the Street Tree Ordinance No. 08-03-09, the Approved Street Tree
Species List, and the Arboricultural Specifications Manual of September 2014,
or as they are amended.



   (B)   County Streets.  Trees shall be planted as a yard tree along
any new subdivision street.  The cost of these trees and installation shall
be born by the developer.  The spacing of the trees shall be every 40 to 60
feet.  The trees shall be installed between the right-of-way and 15 feet
outside of the right-of-way.



(Ord. 12-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord. 14-4-99, passed 5-10-99; Am. Ord.
55-12-02, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16)   Penalty, see § 159.999



PLANS, MAPS, AND ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 159.095  OFFICIAL PLAN AND MAPS



   (A)   Official Comprehensive Plan.  The Comprehensive Plan of the
City of Noblesville, as amended, establishes the policies for land use which
underlie this chapter.  The Comprehensive Plan is an ordinance of the City,
adopted pursuant to State Law.



   (B)   Official Land Use and Thoroughfare Plan Map.  The
Comprehensive Plan contains the official Land Use and Thoroughfare maps of
the City. These maps shall be consulted when land use decisions are made
pursuant to this chapter.  The maps of the Comprehensive Plan shall be used
as criteria in making decisions upon land use requests.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.096  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Official Zoning Map.  The Planning Jurisdiction is hereby
divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby declared to be a part
of this chapter.



      (1)   Identification Of Official Zoning Map.  The Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by certification and bear the seal of the City
under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official
Zoning Map referred to in Article 7 of Ordinance Number 62-12-95 of the City
of Noblesville, State of Indiana," together with the date of adoption of this
chapter.  Certification  should be by the signature of the Mayor and
attested by the City Clerk-Treasurer.  The title "Official Zoning Map" in
large letters may be placed in an appropriate open space around the map or in
the title block.



      (2)   Maintenance Of Official Zoning Map.  If in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter changes are made in district boundaries
or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be
entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been
approved by the Common Council with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as
follows: On     (date)      by official action of the Common Council,
the following changes were made on the Official Zoning Map:            
                  , which entry shall be initialed by the Director
or Chairman of the Plan Commission and attested by the City Clerk
Treasurer.  No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning
Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set
forth in this chapter.  Any unauthorized change of any kind by a person or
persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable as
provided under § 159.999.



      (3)   Location Of Official Zoning Map.  Regardless of the
existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which from time to
time may be published, the Official Zoning Map shall be located in the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer of the City of Noblesville.  It shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas in the
City, and its administrative jurisdictional area.



      (4)   Replacement Of Official Zoning Map.  Refer to I.C.
36-7-4-608.



   (B)   Establishment of Zoning Districts.  The zones or districts
established in the Noblesville Planning Jurisdiction are as follows:



      (1)   Residential Districts.



         Low Density Single-Family Suburban Residential (SR)



         Low Density Single-Family Residential (R-1)



         Low to Moderate Density Single-Family Residential District
(R-2)



         Moderate to High Density Single-Family Residential District
(R-3)



         Moderate to High Density One and Two-Family Residential
District (R-4)



         Moderate to High Density Multi-Family Residential District
(R-5)



         Residential Mobile Home Park (RMH)



         Residential Planned Development (R/PD)



      (2)   Commercial Districts.



         Local Business (LB)



         General Business (GB)



         Downtown (DT)



         Planned Business (PB)



         Business Planned Development (P/PD)



      (3)   Industrial Districts.



         Light Industrial (1-1)



         Heavy Industrial (1-2)



         Extractive Industrial (1-3)



      (4)   Special Districts.



         Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Overlay



         Historic Preservation (HP) Overlay



         Planned Development (PD)



         Village Center Planned Development



      (5)   Miscellaneous Districts.



         Corporate Campus Planned Development (CCPD)



         Flood Hazard (FH) District



         Federal Hill Planned Development (FeHiPD) District



   (C)   Interpretation of District Sequence



      (1)   General Rule.  This chapter rejects as outdated and
inappropriate the concept of hierarchical and cumulative zoning districts
and, except as noted below, is based on the concept that each district should
be designed to accomplish a specific purpose, to encourage a particular type
of development, and to protect that development from being encroached upon by
incompatible types of development.



      (2)   Special Rule.  Within the foregoing philosophy,
however, it is recognized that, when different districts are juxtaposed,
their differing characters may require special treatment to ameliorate
incompatibilities that might otherwise result.  For this limited purpose,
this chapter recognized the concept of "more restrictive" and "less
restrictive" districts, and the districts established by this chapter shall
be considered "more restrictive" or "less restrictive" in accordance with the
following rules.



         (a)   The residential districts shall be deemed more
restrictive than any nonresidential district.



         (b)   The SR District shall be deemed to be the most
restrictive residential district and the R-5 District shall be deemed to be
the least restrictive residential district, and the residential districts
shall be deemed to become less restrictive as the district number increases.



         (c)   The commercial, industrial and special districts
shall be deemed to be equally restrictive.



   (D)   Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries.  Where
uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:



      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
center lines of thoroughfares or highways, street lines or highway
right-of-way lines, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines.



      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted
lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city
limits shall be construed as following such city limits.



      (4)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall
be construed to be midway between the main tracks.



      (5)   Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be
construed to follow such shore lines; and in the event of change in the
shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.



      (6)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water
shall be construed to follow such center lines, provided, however, when
streams meander from the stream bed as it existed on the effective date of
this chapter, the boundaries shall be construed as following the original
stream bed, except for floodplain boundaries which are somewhat dependent on
streams for their definition.



      (7)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following flood
plain lines shall be construed to follow such contour lines.  In addition to
the boundaries shown on the zone maps, the flood plain boundaries of minor
ditches and streams may be designated as being 100 feet either side of the
edge of the water at mean elevation, or the outer edges of a horizontal plane
established at an elevation of five feet above the mean water level,
whichever is the greater distance.  In this case, the stream, or ditch,
shall be designated as one which flows at least 180 days of the year.



      (8)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of
features indicated in divisions (D)(1) thorugh (7) of this section shall be
so controlled.  Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning
Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.



      (9)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the
ground are at variance with those shown as the Official Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered by divisions (D)(1) through (6) of this
section, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the boundaries.



      (10)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was
in single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the
regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the
district line into the remaining portion of the lot.



   (E)   Annexed Land.  All territory which may hereafter be annexed
to the City of Noblesville shall be zoned consistent with the land use policy
of the comprehensive plan and with the zoning district most similar to the
zoning which was applicable prior to annexation, as long as that zoning is
consistent with the comprehensive plan land use policy map.



   (F)   Zoning District Equivalency Table.  Zoning districts existing
prior to the effective date of this chapter, but which are no longer a
district described by this chapter, shall require a map amendment to an
equivalent and appropriate district which is described in this chapter. 
Additionally, districts newly created by this chapter, but which do not
currently exist on the zoning map, may later be a part of the Zoning map
subsequent to a map amendment.  Prior to the amendment of the zoning map for
such purposes, the following Table 4 shall be used to establish the
relationship between existing and new districts:



 


Table 4
Zoning District Equivalency Table




Previously Existing Zoning District

 

Equivalent Zoning District






FW, FP, FF

 

FH




PRO

 

None existing on map.




AB

 

None existing on map.




AD

 

None existing on map.




R-6

 

None existing on map.




OS

 

Uses previously allowed in the OS District may now be allowed in districts as
listed in Appendix C, Schedule of District Uses. The OS Districts existing on
the City of Noblesville Zoning map as of May 1, 1996 shall be considered R-1
Districts until such time as the zoning map is amended.




MO

 

None existing on map.





 



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 18-5-11,
passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 20-7-11, passed 8-9-11; Am. Ord. 48-10-14, passed
11-10-14; Am. Ord. 20-03-15, passed 4-14-15)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 159.105  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Schedule of Uses.



      (1)   Permitted Uses, as listed in Appendix C, Use Matrix,
shall be permitted in the districts listed, subject to any special
restrictions specified.  No land or building shall be devoted to any use
other than those listed as Permitted Uses in the zoning district in the
district in which the land or building is located, except for:



         (a)   Uses lawfully established prior to the effective
date of this chapter, or



         (b)   Conditional uses as provided below.



      (2)   Conditional Uses, as listed in Appendix C, Use Matrix,
may be allowed in the zoning districts indicated, subject to the issuance of
a conditional use permit in accordance with § 159.042, and any special
restrictions listed in the district in which it is located.



      (3)   The interpretation of proposed uses shall be determined
by the Director of Planning and Development.  When determining the zoning
regulations for real estate abutting property for which the land use does not
match the zoning district, the zoning district regulations shall apply.



   (B)   Uses Generally Permitted.



      (1)   Accessory Uses and Structures.  Accessory Uses and
Structures shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts except as
otherwise restricted in this chapter.  Where permitted, accessory uses and
structures shall be regulated by § 159.121.



      (2)   Home Occupations.  Home occupations shall be a
permitted accessory use in all residential dwelling units, except as
otherwise restricted in this chapter.  Where permitted, home occupations
shall be regulated by § 159.122.



      (3)   Residential Care Homes.  Residential Care Homes shall
be a permitted use in all residential districts and shall be regulated by §
159.124.



      (4)   Manufactured Housing.  Manufactured Homes shall be a
permitted use in all residential districts and shall be regulated by §
159.124.  However, developments of more than one manufactured home shall
also be regulated by § 159.106(G).



      (5)   Bed and Breakfast Establishments.  Bed and Breakfast
Establishments shall be a conditional use in all residential districts, the
Downtown (D) District, and the General Business (GB) District. Where
permitted, bed and breakfast establishments shall be regulated by § 159.125.



      (6)   Agriculture.  Agriculture shall be a permitted use in
all districts pursuant to § 159.120(F).



      (7)   Temporary Uses.  Temporary uses shall be a permitted
use in all zoning districts except as otherwise restricted in this chapter. 
Where permitted, temporary uses shall be regulated by § 159.127.



   (C)   Parking and Loading.  Parking shall be a permitted accessory
use in all districts.  Loading shall be a permitted accessory use in all
non-residential districts.  Parking as a primary use shall be a conditional
use in all districts.  Where permitted, parking and loading shall be
regulated by §§ 159.140 through 159.148.



   (D)   Signs.  Signs may be a permitted accessory use in several
different situations, such as but not limited to:



      (1)   Identification for non-residential uses;



      (2)   Identification for residential subdivisions and
apartment complexes;



      (3)   Temporary advertising;



      (4)   Directional or informational signage.



   The permitted location of various signs, as well as other sign
requirements, shall be regulated by §§ 159.160 through 159.166.



   (E)   Landscaping and Screening.  Landscaping and/or screening may
be required in the following situations:



      (1)   Interior parking lot islands;



      (2)   Perimeter parking lot buffering;



      (3)   Buffering for non-residential uses abutting residential
uses;



      (4)   Surrounding outdoor storage and waste disposal areas;



      (5)   Other situations as required in this chapter or as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development, Technical Advisory
Committee, Plan Commission, or Board of Zoning Appeals, as applicable.



Where required, landscaping and screening shall be regulated by §§ 159.180
thorugh 159.188.



   (F)   Environmental Performance Standards.  No use in any district
shall be permitted which does not meet the minimum performance standards in
§§ 159.200 through 159.208.



   (G)   Application of Overlay Districts.  Some lots and parcels may
be affected by both a base district and one or more overlay districts. 
Overlay Districts include:



      (1)   Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Overlay District.



      (2)   Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) District.



      (3)   Planned Development (PD) Overlay District.



      (4)   Village Center Overlay (VCO) District.  Affected lots
and parcels shall be so indicated on the Zoning Map, and shall be subject to
the regulations of both the overlay district and the underlying base district.



      (5)   Downtown Mixed Use Overlay District (DMU).



   (H)   Site Plan Review.  Site Plan Review shall be required of all
non-residential developments, all residential subdivisions and Planned
Developments (PDs), and all uses located in an Historic Preservation (HP)
Overlay District.  Site plan review shall be conducted as described in §
159.041(C).  Where Site Plan Review is required, the evaluation of site
plans shall consider: 1) all restrictions applicable to the zoning
district(s) in which the use is located, 2) all applicable standards for
parking, signs, landscaping, and other general development standards, and 3)
the criteria for Site Plan Review in that section.



   (I)   Commercial Vehicle Storage.  The storage or parking of
commercial vehicles in residential zoning districts including Planned
Development Districts are subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   The parking of a commercial vehicle shall be limited to
one standard size vehicle or not to exceed 3/4 ton vehicle including cars,
SUV's, step-up vans, work vans, and pickup trucks. The parking of trailers
shall be prohibited. The exception being that any commercial vehicle may be
stored within an enclosed structure.



      (2)   This regulation shall not be interpreted to apply to
commercial vehicles used for conveying the necessary tools and materials to
premises where labor using such tools and materials is to be performed during
the time of parking such vehicles, or to commercial vehicles in the process
of temporarily loading or unloading deliverable goods.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord.
64-11-08, passed 12-9- 08; Am. Ord. 12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)   Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.106  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



 

Table 8.B.
Summary of Residential Bulk Requirements


Requirements
 
Single-Family
 
Two-Family
 
Multi-Family




District in Which Use is Permitted
 
SR, R1, R2, R3, R4, R5***, LB, DT, GB2
 
R4, LB, DT
 
R5, DT


Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit in Districts Indicated

(* indicates the standard for lots served by sanitary sewers)

For Cluster Development in the SR District, refer to specific section
 

SR   10 acres (*5 acres)



R1**   3 acres (*30,000 sq. ft.)



R2   1 acre (*15,000 sq. ft.)



R3   8,000 sq. ft.



R4   6,000 sq. ft.



R5   6,000 sq. ft.



LB   6,000 sq. ft.



DT   8,000 sq. ft.



GB2   3,000 sq. ft.

 
4,000 sq. ft./unit
 
3,000 sq. ft./unit


Minimum Lot Width in the Districts indicated, measured at the front building
setback line

(Lots located on a cul- de-sac/cul-de-loop shall maintain a minimum street
frontage of 45 feet)
 

SR   300 ft. (*200 ft.)



R1   200 ft.



R2   110 ft.



R3   70 ft.



R4   60 ft.



R5   50 ft.



LB   50 ft.

 

R4   60 ft.



LB   50 ft.

 

R5   150 ft.


 


Maximum Building Height
 
35 ft. for all zoning districts
 

R4   35 ft.



LB   35 ft.

 

R5   45 ft.



DT   50 ft.



Minimum Front Yard Setback (Developed

Area) (Refer to Central Core Map, Appendix G)
 
The average of the front setbacks of the nearest existing principal building
on either side of the proposed building.


Minimum Front Yard Setback (New Developing Areas)
 

Local and collector streets   30 ft.



Arterial streets   40 ft.

 
45 ft.


Minimum Side Yard Setback
 
Minimum of 20% of lot width in total side yards, and a minimum setback on
either side of the structure as follows:

SR...10 ft.; R1...10 ft.; R2....8 ft.; R3....6 ft.; R4....5 ft.; R5....5 ft.;
LB....5 ft.; GB....3 ft.


Minimum Rear Yard Setback
 
Primary Structure...20 ft.

Accessory Structure...5 ft.


Floor Area Ratio shall not exceed:
 

SR   20%



R1   30%



R2   35%



R3   35%



R4   40%



R5   45%



LB   45%



GB   60%

 

R4   50%



LB   50%


 
 

R5   60%


 


Minimum Floor Area (per dwelling unit)
 
SR...2,500 sq. ft.; R1...2,400 sq. ft.; R2...1,800 sq. ft.; R3...1,000 sq.
ft.; R4...800 sq. ft.; R5...600 sq. ft.;

LB...600 sq. ft.; DT**** GB...600 sq. ft.


Maximum Lot Coverage (Excludes Central Core Map Area - Appendix G)
 

SR, R1, R2, R3   45%



R4, R5, LB   45%

 
R4, LB..55%
 

R5   65%


 




 



  * Served by sanitary sewer



** See §§ 159.220 et seq., Nonconforming Uses and Structures, for pre-dated
(07-01-2011) R1 and R1/PD subdivisions.



*** Permitted in areas zoned R5 as per Appendix G (Central Core Map).



    1 Individual manufactured homes located on scattered sites shall adhere
to the bulk requirements for the zoning district in which located and §
159.124.



    2Single-family dwelling permitted in areas zoned “GB” as per
Appendix G (Central Core Map).



NOTE:   Residential uses and buildings abutting a private street shall be
subject to the bulk requirements as per Table 8.B.



   (A)   Low Density Single Family Suburban Residential (SR).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the SR District is to permit
limited development in rural areas in order to satisfy individual housing
preferences.  This district is consistent with the Countryside District of
the Comprehensive Plan.  The rural character of the district may be
maintained through several different density options, as described in §
159.106(E).



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in § 159.106(A)(3).



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.184.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            4.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain conditional uses have special restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Fire and Police Stations, Schools, Churches,
Clubhouses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to §§ 159.184.



            3.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            5.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf Courses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



         (c)   Campgrounds.



            1.   Approval must be obtained from the Indiana
State Board of Health.



            2.   The size, procedure, design, installation,
and maintenance of campgrounds shall be as provided for in § 159.106(B).



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all residential districts are listed within Table 5.



      (6)   Special Requirements.



         (a)   Developments which are served by individual septic
systems shall have a minimum lot size of ten acres and a minimum lot width of
300 feet.



         (b)   Developments served by sanitary sewers shall have
a minimum tract size of five acres.  Such developments shall have a base
density established by a two-acre lot.  Such lots may be clustered within
the development to a minimum lot size of 25,000 square feet and a minimum lot
width of 200 feet. The clustering of such lots shall provide for a minimum of
25% open space in the development which is maintained in a natural state.  A
portion of this open space shall be maintained along the development's street
frontage to a minimum depth of 50 feet to maintain a rural atmosphere
throughout the SR District. The remainder may be distributed throughout the
development. The arrangement of housing clusters and open space shall be
approved through site plan review.




FIGURE 1: DISTRICT DENSITY OPTIONS














   (B)   Low Density Single Family Residential (R-1).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-1 District is to permit
the establishment of moderate low density single family residential areas. 
The R-1 District shall have a minimum lot size as per Table 5 Summary of
Residential Bulk Requirements on central water and sewer facilities.  It
shall not exceed one dwelling unit per acre or have a minimum lot size less
than two acres on individual sanitary sewer systems where centralized systems
are not available.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (B)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            4.   Noise: Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may require
additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain conditional uses have special restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Fire and Police Stations, Schools, Churches,
Clubhouses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            5.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf Courses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all residential districts are listed within Table 5.



   (C)   Low to Moderate Density Single Family Residential District
(R-2).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-2 District is to permit
the establishment of moderate density single-family residential areas. The
R-2 District shall not have a minimum size less than as per Table 5 Summary
of Residential Bulk Requirements on central water and sanitary sewer
facilities. It shall not exceed two dwelling units per acre or have a minimum
lot size less than one acre on individual sanitary sewer systems where
centralized systems are not available.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix. Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in (C)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Uses permitted with restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Dwellings over one story in height.  For all side
yards of dwellings over one story in height, there shall be an additional
side yard setback, of eight feet for each story over the first story.



         (b)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to § 159.185,
Landscaping and Screening.



            3.   Lighting:  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            4.   Noise.  Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (c)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042. The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in Appendix
C, Use Matrix. Certain conditional uses have special restrictions which are
listed below.



         (a)   Fire and police stations, schools, churches,
clubhouses. 



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall include
both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180 through
159.188.



            4.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            5.   Noise.  Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf courses.



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



      (5)   Bulk requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all residential districts are listed within Table 5, Residential Bulk
Requirements.



   (D)   Moderate to High Density Single-Family Residential District
(R-3).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-3 District it to permit
the establishment of moderate to high density single-family residential areas
comprised of dwellings on central water and sewer facilities. The R-3
District shall have a minimum lot size as per Table 5 Summary of Residential
Bulk Requirements.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  A complete listing of uses permitted
within the R-3 district are listed in Appendix C, Use Matrix. Certain
permitted uses have special restrictions listed in division (D)(3).



      (3)   Uses permitted with restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district, provided that they meet the conditions below
and plans for their development and use are approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



         (a)   Dwellings over one story in height.  For all side
yards of dwellings over one story in height, there shall be an additional
side yard setback, of eight feet for each story over the first story.



         (b)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188, Landscaping and Screening.



            3.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            4.   Noise.  Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (c)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional uses.  The following uses are permitted
when authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject
to § 159.041(A). The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix. Certain conditional uses have specific restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Fire and police stations, schools, churches,
clubhouses. 



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            5.   Noise.  Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.180 through 159.188, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf courses.



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188, Landscaping and Screening.



            3.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



      (5)   Bulk requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all residential districts are listed within Table 5, Residential Bulk
Requirements.



   (E)   Moderate to High Density One and Two-Family Residential
District (R-4).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-4 District is to permit
moderate to high density one- and two-family residential dwellings on central
sewer and water facilities. The R-4 District shall have a minimum lot sizes
as per Table 5 Summary of Residential Bulk Requirements for single family
dwellings and for two-family dwellings.



      (2)   Permitted uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix. Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in (E)(3).



      (3)   Uses permitted with restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Dwellings over one story in height.  For all side
yards of dwellings over one story in height, there shall be an additional
side yard setback of five feet for each story over the first story.



         (b)   Parks. 



            1.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to §§ 159.185.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188, Landscaping and Screening.



            3.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            4.   Noise.  Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (c)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042. The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in Appendix
C, Use Matrix. Certain conditional uses have special restrictions which are
listed below.



         (a)   Fire and police stations, schools, churches,
clubhouses. 



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape buffers.  Landscape buffers shall
be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188, Landscaping and Screening.



            4.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



            5.   Noise.  Noise shall not infringe upon other
properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental
Performance Standards. The Board may require additional buffers to prevent
noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf courses. 



            1.   Setbacks.  No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking.  No off-street parking area shall
be closer than ten feet to any lot line. Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188, Landscaping and Screening.



            3.   Lighting.  Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208, Environmental Performance Standards.



      (5)   Bulk requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Residential Districts are listed within Table 5, Residential Bulk
Requirements.



   (F)    Multi-Family Residential District (R-5).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-5 District is to
encourage the establishment of multi-family dwellings of high density. The
predominant housing type would be townhouses and garden apartments.  All
such districts should abut major collector or arterial streets as specified
by the local agency responsible for transportation or the Indiana Department
of Transportation (INDOT).  The district must be served with central water
and sanitary sewer facilities of sufficient capacity.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Single-family dwellings are
permitted in this district, provided it is located within the area designated
on the “Central Core Map”, Appendix G.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Multiple Family Dwellings; Convalescent, Nursing,
or Rest Homes.



            1.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            2.   Setbacks: For all side yards of multiple
family dwellings or convalescent/nursing/rest homes over one story in height,
there shall be an additional side yard setback, of five feet for each story
over the first story.



            3.   Parking: Off-street parking areas shall be
located behind or beside the principal building(s), and shall not be closer
than 15 feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall include both
perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180 through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



         (b)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to §§ 159.180 through 159.188.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            4.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (c)   Cemeteries.  Landscape buffers shall be provided
pursuant to § 159.185.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.142.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain conditional uses have special restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Fire and Police Stations, Schools, Churches,
Clubhouses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



            5.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Golf Courses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208..



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all residential districts are listed within Table 5.



   (G)   Residential Mobile Home Park (RMH).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the RMH District is to
encourage the development of well planned mobile home parks, mobile home
subdivisions, and related uses.  Such districts should abut a major arterial
or collector street as identified by the Thoroughfare Plan element of the
Comprehensive Plan.  Mobile home parks and subdivisions shall comply with
all state regulations, as well as those specified in this ordinance. 
Private water systems are highly discouraged, and package sewer and septic
facilities are not permitted.  Notwithstanding any other provision or
restriction provided in this chapter, the following procedures, standards,
and restrictions shall apply to all mobile home developments and no variance
shall be permitted therefrom.



      (2)   Procedure.



         (a)   Mobile Home Park.



            1.   Application.  Applications for a Mobile Home
Park shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Development, on a form
provided by the Director and shall contain at least the information listed in
§ 1(F) of Appendix B of this chapter, “Mobile Home Parks”.



            2.   Public Hearing.  The Plan Commission shall
hold a public hearing prior to granting approval of any mobile home park. 
The applicant shall give notice prior to the hearing, giving notice thereof
in such form as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Director.  The
notice shall include, but not be limited to, mailing the notice to adjoining
property owners,as per the adopted Plan Commission rules of procedure, by a
Certificate of Mailing at least 17 days prior to the meeting.  The notice
shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, and proof
of its publication shall be filed prior to the hearing, and shall be a
condition precedent to the right of the Commission to conduct the hearing. 
At the hearing, the Commission may approve, deny or modify the plans
presented by the applicant.  If it denies or modifies the plans for a mobile
home park, the Commission shall promptly notify the applicant of that action,
together with the reasons for the modification or denial.



            3.   Improvement Location Permit.  Following
approval of a mobile home park by the Plan Commission, the Director, upon
application, including a letter of approval from the State Board of Health
and payment of fees, shall issue to the applicant an improvement location
permit.



         (b)   Mobile Home Subdivision.  The procedure and
design of a mobile home subdivision shall be the same as those provided for
in Article 5, Subdivision Procedures and Article 6, Site Design and
Improvement Standards (see §§ 159.060 through 159.062 and §§ 159.075
through 159.087).



      (3)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (D)(4) of this section.



      (4)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Parks.



            1.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            2.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            3.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208..



            4.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208..  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



      (5)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Official Schedule of Uses Matrix.



         (a)   Fire and Police Stations, Schools, Churches,
Clubhouses.



            1.   Setbacks: No structure shall be located
within 100 feet of any structure on another lot.



            2.   Landscape Buffers: Landscape buffers shall be
provided pursuant to § 159.185.



            3.   Parking: No off-street parking area shall be
closer than ten feet to any lot line.  Off-street parking areas shall
include both perimeter and interior landscaping subject to §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



            4.   Lighting: Lighted areas shall be approved
prior to development and shall not infringe upon other properties, pursuant
to §§ 159.200 through 159.208..



            5.   Noise: Noise not shall not infringe upon
other properties, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.  The Board may
require additional buffers to prevent noise pollution.



         (b)   Campgrounds.



            1.   Approval must be obtained from the Indiana
State Board of Health.



            2.   The size, procedure, design, installation,
and maintenance of campgrounds shall be as provided for in § 159.106(C).



      (6)   Bulk Requirements.  The following requirements apply to
mobile home parks and subdivisions:



         (a)   Minimum Tract Size.  Each mobile home park shall
contain a minimum of five acres.



         (b)   Maximum Density.  A maximum of seven mobile homes
per acre may be permitted if serviced by central sanitary sewers as approved
by the State Board of Health.  This maximum shall be determined from the
gross acreage of the mobile home park.  The Hamilton County Soils
Conservation Officer and the County Health Officer shall review the adequacy
of the soils and may require a lesser density for just cause.



         (c)   Setbacks.



            1.   Mobile home stands must be so located that
when occupied by a mobile home the clear distance between a mobile home and
any adjacent mobile home will be not less than 20 feet.



            2.   No mobile home shall be located closer than
20 feet to any building within the mobile home park.



            3.   The minimum depth of a front yard of a mobile
home park where such part abuts a major arterial street is 60 feet from the
right of way line.  The minimum depth of the front yard of a mobile home
park where such park abuts a collector street is 40 feet.  The minimum depth
of front yard of a mobile home park where such park abuts a local street is
25 feet.



            4.   The minimum depth of side and rear yards of a
mobile home park shall be 25 feet.  Adequate screen planting shall be
provided at the determination of the Commission, where deemed necessary for
compatibility with adjoining properties.



            5.   The clear distance between any mobile home
and the centerline of the abutting mobile home park street shall be a minimum
of 45 feet.



            6.   Maximum lot coverage - 65%.



         (d)   Minimum Ground Floor Area.  In approved mobile
home parks, there shall be no minimum ground floor area requirements for
mobile homes located therein except as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
Any and all manufactured homes constructed on individual lots, outside of the
"Residential Mobile Home" (RMH) zoning district shall comply with the bulk
standards of that district and Article 9 - General Regulations, Part F.
Manufactured Homes, Individual (see § 159.124).



      (7)   Additional Requirements.



         (a)   Each mobile home, mobile home stand or mobile home
space shall be provided with two parking spaces adjacent thereto, which
parking spaces shall have unobstructed access to a mobile home park street. 
No on-street parking shall be permitted in a mobile home park.



         (b)   There shall be a minimum of two entrances to a
mobile home park, unless a different number is approved by the Plan
Commission.



         (c)   Outdoor storage is prohibited.  Applicant shall
provide minimum storage space and requirements for storage buildings in
covenants.



         (d)   Mobile home park streets shall be paved either
with Portland cement concrete or bituminous concrete.  Such streets shall be
a minimum of 24 feet in width and shall be built in conformance with the
current street construction standards of the governmental unit in which such
mobile home park is located.



         (e)   A paved sidewalk shall be installed on at least
one side of each mobile home park street.  The minimum width of such
sidewalks shall be four feet.



         (f)   The Plan Commission may, as part of its approval,
require curbs and/or gutters in mobile home parks where, in the opinion of
the said Commission, drainage of surface water as provided by the applicant
in its development plans is insufficient to properly carry such surface water.



         (g)   Surface drainage as approved by the Plan
Commission shall be installed and maintained by the applicant or his
successor in title.



         (h)   Prior to the issuance of an improvement location
permit, an applicant must file with the Director a letter from the Indiana
State Board of Health evidencing approval by such board and compliance with
the requirements of such board.



   (H)   Residential Planned Development (R/PD).  The purpose of the
R/PD District is to permit the development of single-family residential as
per the Hamilton County Zoning Ordinance and adopted Planned Development
Application and Supplemental Documentation for those particular parcels of
property as evidence by the Maps in Appendix J. The permitted uses and the
bulk requirements shall be established as per the adopted Hamilton County
Zoning Ordinance and the Adopted Planned Development Application(s) and
Supplemental Documentation enacted at the time and are in effect until such
time the property is rezoned to a city zoning district. The property is
located along the north side of East 146th Street and is known as the
"Kingsley Subdivision." Hamilton County zoned the property R3P "Residential
Medium-High Density Village/Urban."  This is a planned development and shall
be required to follow those standards as set forth in the Adopted Planned
Development Application and Supplemental Documentation and the Hamilton
County Zoning Ordinance. Any requirements that cannot be met shall require a
public hearing before the Plan Commission and Common Council. (Refer to
Appendix J)



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord.
16-3-00, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 69-11-00, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord.
48-6-05, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 76-9-05, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord.
23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 24-7-10, passed 8-10-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11,
passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 18-5-11, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed
10-11-11; Am. Ord. 31-09-13, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed
11-10-15 ; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed
8-15-17 ; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)    Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.107  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



 

Table 6
Summary of Commercial Bulk Requirements



ZONING DISTRICTS

 

LB1

 

GB

 

DT

 

PB





Minimum Lot Size
 

10,000 sq. ft.

 

No restriction

 

No restriction

 

20,000 sq. ft.



Minimum Lot Width
 

100 ft.

 

No restriction

 

No restriction

 

1:2, width to depth ratio



Maximum Floor Area Ratio
 

1

 

4

 

4

 

60%



Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage
 

50%

 

60%

 

N/A

 

N/A



Maximum Building Size
 

10,000 sq. ft. maximum

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



Minimum Front Yard:

   Abutting Residential

   Uses or  Districts

   Abutting Other Uses

   or Districts
 





25 ft.



25 ft.

 





25 ft.



0 ft.

 





25 ft.



0 ft.

 





60 ft.



60 ft.



Minimum Side Yard:

   Abutting Residential

   Uses or Districts

   Abutting Other Uses

   or Districts
 





25 ft.



20 ft.

 





10 ft.



0 ft.

 





0 ft.



0 ft.

 





15 ft.



10 ft.



Minimum Rear Yard:

   Abutting Residential

   Uses or Districts

   Abutting Other Uses

   or Districts
 





20 ft.



15 ft.

 





20 ft.



10 ft.

 





20 ft.



10 ft.

 





20 ft.



10 ft.



Maximum Building Height
 

2 stories or 30 ft.

 

4 stories or 50 ft.

 

4 stories or 50 ft.

 

3 stories or 35 ft.



Minimum District Size
 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA



Maximum District Size
 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA



NOTES: The above requirements do not preclude the establishment of more
stringent restrictions for conditional uses or individual permitted uses
where conditions may warrant.

      No structures are permitted within a utility, drainage and/or
landscaping easement.

      1 No new LB districts shall be established after the effective date
of Ordinance No. 48-10-14, passed 11-10-14.




 



   (A)   Local Business (LB).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of this district is to
accommodate convenience business uses which tend to meet the daily
requirements of the residents of an immediate neighborhood.  No new LB
District shall be established after the effective date of this chapter.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (A)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions
below.  Dwelling Units Above the First Story Dwelling units located above
the first floor of a non-residential use shall have a separate primary
entrance to the street and not through the first floor principal use.  Fire
escapes, back stairways, and the like shall not serve as primary access.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042(C).  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain conditional uses have special restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Automotive Fuel Stations



            1.   Minimum Lot Size.  Automotive Fuel Stations
shall be restricted to small dealerships not to exceed one acre in lot size.



            2.   Maximum Building Size and Lot Coverage.  The
maximum building size and the maximum lot coverage shall be determined when
approved by the Board based on: (1) the scale and character of adjacent uses;
and (2) the impact on the function of the adjacent street.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements that apply to
all Commercial Districts are listed within Table 8.C. Commercial Bulk
Requirements (herein Table 6, § 159.107). Refer to Table 8.B. Residential
Bulk Requirements (herein Table 5, § 159.106) for residential single-family
and two-family dwellings.



      (6)   Additional Requirements.  The following requirements
shall apply to all uses in the LB District:



         (a)   The conduct of permitted uses herein shall be
within completely enclosed buildings, except for accessory off-street parking
and loading facilities.



         (b)   Drive-in or drive-through type businesses are not
permitted.



         (c)   All goods produced on the premises as incidental
or essential to the principal use shall be sold at retail on the premises
where produced.



         (d)   Outside storage, vending machines and outside
display of merchandise prohibited.



         (e)   Where an "LB" district adjoins a residential
district or use, landscape buffers shall be provided pursuant to § 159.185.



   (B)   General Business (GB).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the GB District is to
encourage the establishment of areas for general business uses to meet the
needs of a community-wide market area. Activities would include uses of
moderate size such as grocery stores, restaurants, service stations,
specialty stores, and the like, and single-family residential  located
within the Central Core Map per Appendix G of this chapter. Because of their
scale, it is necessary that the GB Districts be located on a major collector
or minor arterial as specified by the Thoroughfare Plan element of the
Comprehensive Plan.  All GB Districts established after the effective date
of this chapter shall be contiguous to existing GB Districts.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  There are currently
no permitted uses in the GB district that are subject to special restrictions.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Commercial Districts are listed within Table 6.



      (6)   Outside storage, vending machines and outside display of
merchandise prohibited.



   (C)   Downtown (DT).



      (1)   Purpose.  The Downtown District is established to
encourage those uses in the town core which will serve to stimulate and
enhance its unique character as a county seat and historic asset.  The
district is further intended to modify certain general development standards
that are inappropriate in the Downtown.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (C)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain conditional uses have special restrictions
which are listed below.



         (a)   Automotive Fuel Stations.



            1.   Minimum Lot Size. Automotive Fuel Stations
shall be restricted to small dealerships not to exceed one acre in lot size.



            2.   Maximum Building Size and Lot Coverage.  The
maximum building size and the maximum lot coverage shall be determined when
approved by the Board of Zone Appeals based on: (1) the scale and character
of adjacent uses; and (2) the impact on the function of the adjacent street.



      (4)   Outside Storage and Display.  Outside storage and
outside display of vending machines is prohibited.



   (D)   Planned Business (PB).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the PB District is to
encourage well-planned business uses, particularly with respect to unified
design, safe ingress-egress, adequate and properly located parking and
service facilities and convenient and safe pedestrian accessibility. 
Shopping centers are good examples of types of uses in the PB District.  The
PB District is also designed to service the motoring public through such uses
as motels, restaurants, or service stations.  The PB District shall only be
permitted along or at the intersection of major arterials as specified by the
Thoroughfare Plan element of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  There are currently
no permitted uses in the PB district that are subject to special restrictions.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be approved are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Commercial Districts are listed within Table 6.



      (6)   Outside storage, vending machines and outside display of
merchandise prohibited.



   (E)   Business Planned Development (B/PD).



      (1)   The purpose of the B/PD District is to permit the
development of commercial uses as per the Hamilton County Zoning Ordinance
and the Adopted Planned Development Application and Supplemental
Documentation for those particular parcels of property as evidenced on the
maps in Appendix J. Originally, these parcels were under the county's
jurisdiction for zoning and uses or during a time period of not being within
the zoning jurisdiction of either the city or Hamilton County thereby
creating a "No Zoning Area." The permitted uses and the bulk requirements
shall be established as per the adopted Hamilton County Zoning Ordinance
and/or Adopted Planned Development Application and Supplemental Documentation
in effect at that time.



      (2)   The parcels will remain as a city zoning district of
"B/PD" until such time the properties are rezoned to an existing city zoning
district including bulk requirements.  These parcels include the following:



         (a)   Hood's Gardens at 11644 Summer Road (County Zoned
A4–Agricultural Business District) (Parcel Numbers 10-11-16-00-00-014.000,
10-11-16-00-00-010.001, 10-11-16-00-00-010.002); and containing 27.33 acres.



         (b)   Depco located at 11827 Greenfield Avenue (County
Zoned – M2-Manufacturing Development – Major Community Impact) (Parcel
Number (11-11-16-00-00-018.001) and containing 4.42 acres.



         (c)   South of the 4.42 acres (County Zoned
M2P–Manufacturing Development – Major Community Impact Planned
Development) (Parcel Numbers 11-11-16-00-00-017.000, 11-11-16-00-00-018.000)
and containing 40.87 acres.



         (d)   11741 Greenfield Avenue (Parcel Number
10-11-16-00-00-016.003) (9.53 acres) "No Zoning" Area at initial construction.



         (e)   15055 Gray Road (Parcel Number
10-10-16-00-00-016.001) (19.32 acres) County Zoned A4–Agricultural Business.



         (f)   14978 Gray Road (Parcel Number
10-10-16-00-00-016.002) (2.72 acres) and (10-10-16-00-00-016.000 (partial
area of ID number and five acres) County Zoned C1P–Commercial
Development/Residential Character Planned Development.



         (g)   5325 East 161st Street (Parcel Number
10-10-09-00-00-019.001) (4.64 acres) County Zoned C3–Commercial Development
- Major Community Impact.



      (3)   The planned developments shall be required to follow the
standards adopted by the Planned Development Applications and Supplemental
Documentation and the Hamilton County Zoning Ordinance. All non-planned
developments shall abide by the requirements of said Hamilton County Zoning
Ordinance for said particular zoning district. Any requirements that cannot
be met shall require a public hearing before the Plan Commission and Common
Council or the Board of Zoning Appeals. (Refer to Appendix J).



   (F)   Corporate Campus Planned Development District (CCPD)



      (1)   Purpose and Procedures. The purpose of the Corporate
Campus Planned Development District (CCPD) is to encourage economic
development activity and high quality, well-integrated development both north
and south of the 146th Street corridor, east of State Road 37 to Prairie
Baptist Road and Atlantic Road, and north of the I-69 interchange. This
district is intended to provide for a broad range of uses, thus expanding
employment opportunities in Noblesville and enhancing its tax base. Within
this district are a number of subdistricts that represent various physical
character areas. Although the CCPD District shall be developed in a unified
and coordinated fashion, each of the subdistricts has tailored a purpose,
use, bulk and site development standards reflective of its location,
function, and desired appearance within the corporate campus park. It is the
intent of this district to augment the other bulk provisions of this chapter.
When not specifically addressed by this district, the bulk standard
provisions of this chapter shall apply.



         (a)   Review Procedures.



            1.   All development within the CCPD District
shall be subject to site plan review, Unified Development Ordinance
subdivision regulations, and site development standards, in addition to the
use, bulk, and site development standards of this section. The following
types of development proposals shall be required to be reviewed as planned
developments in the CCPD district with Planned Development Overlay Districts
(see § 159.109(D)):



               A.   All proposed subdivisions.



               B.   All development proposals in the Mixed
Residential  Subdistrict (unless  otherwise specified).



               C.   All development proposals that include
requests for any exceptions from the standards listed for this district
and/or subdistricts.



               D.   All proposed uses listed as Special
Considerations in Appendix C.  These uses are not assumed permitted by-right
and thus, there shall be no presumption of their approval.



               E.   All development proposals in the
Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict.



            2.   All other development proposals shall be
required to submit all information for a detailed development plan as
outlined in this section; however, the plan shall be subject to review by
city staff, rather than the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Establishment of Subdistricts. The City of Noblesville
hereby creates a set of subdistricts that represent physical character areas
within the CCPD District. The subdistricts are as follows:



         (a)   Interchange Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Interchange Subdistrict is to address development sites that are visible from
Greenfield Avenue/State Road 238 and 146th Street, but are not directly
accessible from them. High quality building design and site improvements are
a priority in this area, which functions as the “eastern gateway” into
Noblesville. Site access and signage must be carefully planned to orient
drivers. Site design and parking lot layout must recognize the
“double-fronted” nature of development sites in this area.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of commercial and
office uses shall be permitted in the Interchange Subdistrict, in this
section with the approved Corporate Campus Land Use and Subdistricts map.
Where indicated on the map, commercial uses shall be designed in a
pedestrian-oriented manner. The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix
C.



         (b)   146th Street Corridor Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
146th Street Corridor Subdistrict is to address development sites that are
visible from 146th Street, but are not directly accessible from it. High
quality building design and site improvements are a priority in this area
because this corridor functions as the “spine” of the overall corporate
campus park. Site access and signage must be carefully planned to orient
drivers. Site design and parking lot layout must recognize the
“double-fronted” nature of development sites in this area.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of commercial,
office, and industrial uses shall be permitted in the 146th Street Corridor
Subdistrict, in accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map.
Any newly established user that may be categorized as a "Tax Exempt User" as
defined by Ordinance No. 16-05-13 within this subdistrict is prohibited.
Where indicated on the map, commercial uses shall be designed in a
pedestrian-oriented manner. The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix
C.



         (c)   View Corridor Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
View Corridor Subdistrict is to address development sites that are highly
visible from key regional arterials (I-69 and State Road 37), but are not
directly accessible from them. The design quality and presence of buildings
in this area is important as viewed from afar as well as upon closer
approach. Site design and parking lot layout must address the
“double-fronted” nature of development sites in this area.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of commercial,
office, and industrial uses shall be permitted in the View Corridor
Subdistrict, in accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map.
Any newly established user that may be categorized as a "Tax Exempt User" as
defined by Ordinance No. 16-05-13 within this subdistrict is prohibited.
Where indicated on the map, commercial uses shall be designed in a
pedestrian-oriented manner. The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix
C.



         (d)   Interchange Flex Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Interchange Flex Subdistrict is to address development sites that , are
visible from key secondary arterials and may have direct access from them
depending upon lot size. Generous landscaped setbacks and high quality site
improvements are key to establishing the appropriate image for this area.
Adequate buffering is required where dissimilar land uses abut one another
(including residential). The Interchange Flex Subdistrict permits only
industrial, office, and related flex uses.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of office and
industrial uses shall be permitted in the Interchange Flex Subdistrict, in
accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. The complete use
matrix is contained in Appendix C.



         (e)   Secondary Corridor Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Secondary Corridor Subdistrict is to address development sites that are
visible from key secondary arterials (including Greenfield Avenue/State Road
238) and may have direct access from them depending upon lot size. Generous
landscaped setbacks and high quality site improvements are key to
establishing the appropriate image for this area. Adequate buffering is
required where dissimilar land uses abut one another (including residential).
The Secondary Corridor Subdistrict permits a broader range of uses including
industrial, office, and commercial uses.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of commercial,
office, and industrial uses shall be permitted in the Secondary Corridor
Subdistrict, in accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map.
Where indicated on the map, commercial uses shall be designed in a
pedestrian-oriented manner. The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix
C.



         (f)   Internal Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Internal Subdistrict is to address development sites that are not highly
visible from key arterials. While a basic standard of quality is expected,
the required level of site improvements and architectural quality is not as
high as in other subdistricts. Emphasis is placed on the design of building
entries and signage more than the overall building design. Adequate buffering
is required where dissimilar land uses abut one another (including
residential).



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of office and
industrial uses shall be permitted in the Internal Subdistrict, in accordance
with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. The complete use matrix is
contained in Appendix C.



         (g)   Mixed Residential District.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Mixed Residential Subdistrict is to address areas where a diversity of
residential development is appropriate within the Corporate Campus Planned
Development District. The range of residential uses that are permitted within
this subdistrict include single family detached, single family attached,
two-family, and multiple family residential, provided it is designed in an
integrated manner. The design standards included within this section are
intended to ensure that residential development within the Corporate Campus
is attractive, and yet remains affordable.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of residential and
complementary institutional uses shall be permitted in the Mixed Residential
Subdistrict, in accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map.
The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix C.



         (h)   Regional Recreation and Entertainment Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Regional Recreation and Entertainment Subdistrict is to address existing
recreation and entertainment uses within the subdistrict and the potential
for future development sites that are visible from key thoroughfares,
including but not limited to Greenfield Avenue/State Road No. 238, 146th
Street, Boden Road, and Olio Road, and may have direct access from them
depending upon lot size. Generous landscaped setbacks and high quality site
improvements are key to establishing the appropriate image for this area as
future development occurs on the existing recreation and entertainment site.
Adequate buffering is required where dissimilar land uses abut one another
(including residential). The Regional Recreation and Entertainment
Subdistrict permits a range of full service entertainment facilities and uses
as well as office and industrial facilities and uses.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of regional
entertainment facilities and uses shall be permitted in the Regional
Recreation and Entertainment Subdistrict in accordance with an approved Land
Use and Subdistricts map. Where indicated on the map, uses shall be designed
in a pedestrian-oriented manner. The complete use matrix is contained in
Appendix C.



         (i)   Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of the
Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict is to address development sites that are in
areas that are presently primarily agricultural or rural in nature. This
district is identified in areas that are generally on the periphery of the
Corporate Campus as a whole with a development timeline that is anticipated
to exceed the more high-profile subdistricts. Agricultural and rural
residential uses will continue to operate as they currently exist until such
time as development in the area occurs. It is expected that development in
this district will be non-residential in nature, with permitted uses ranging
from industrial and office to other related flex uses. Generous landscaped
setbacks and high quality site improvements are key to establishing the
appropriate image for this area, respecting the character of the pre-existing
agricultural and residential uses. Adequate buffering is required where
dissimilar land uses abut one another including residential.



            2.   Use Requirements. A mix of office and
industrial uses shall be permitted in the Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict, in
accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. The complete use
matrix is contained in Appendix C. Residential uses are permitted to continue
according to this section.



      (3)   Public Right-of-Way and Infrastructure Improvements.



         (a)   Improvements.



            1.   Unifying streetscape elements must be
provided at adjacent public rights-of-way, including street lights, street
trees, sodded parkways, continuous sidewalks, and hike/bike trails where
appropriate.



            2.   Street lights are to be installed at all
public rights-of-way per city specifications. These lights shall have a
uniform and consistent design throughout the development.



               A.   Sidewalks.



                  (i)   A continuous five-foot public
sidewalk shall be provided within the public right-of-way, per city
specifications, making connections to sidewalks at adjacent properties. Where
space permits, sidewalks must meander toward and away from the curb line, to
no closer than five feet and no further than 30 feet from the curb. The curve
shall be gradual, to discourage short-cuts. This sidewalk may be replaced
with an asphalt path, as required by the Access Framework Plan and the
Noblesville Alternative Transportation Plan (NAT), if deemed appropriate.



                  (ii)   Public sidewalk configuration
must provide direct access to curbside transit stops where appropriate. These
access points shall be American with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliant and
installed pursuant to City regulations.



                  (iii)   Hike/bike trails and trail
heads shall be provided where indicated on the Access Framework Plan and the
Noblesville Alternative Transportation Plan (NAT), per city specifications,
making connections to trail segments at adjacent properties.



               B.   Landscaping.



                  (i)   Deciduous street trees of two
and one-half to three-inch caliper at the rate of one tree for every 40
linear feet of right-of-way are required to be installed in a mulch bed of a
maximum eight feet in diameter. Street trees must always be located between
the curb and the public sidewalk, and need not be in a straight line if the
sidewalk meanders. Required street trees are in addition to the on-site
landscaping required per the previous section. Permitted tree species shall
be those listed on the approved planting lists of the City of Noblesville.



                  (ii)   Unpaved portions of the
right-of-way shall be established in turf by either sodding (preferred) or
seeding.



                  (iii)   Median strips between divided
roads and driveways shall be landscaped with trees and low shrub masses
accented with annuals/perennials. Plantings shall be focused at intersections
and “gateway” areas, and shall cover a minimum of 30% of the unpaved area
of the median strip. Unplanted areas shall be maintained in turf.



                  (iv)   Along primary arterials, a berm
and landscape treatment shall be installed that will buffer buildings and
parking facilities from view. The berm should be at least four feet in
height, and plantings shall be pursuant to the buffering requirements of §§
159.180 through 159.191. In some cases, this buffer can be installed in lieu
of the buffering requirements for individual uses. The look and feel of the
treatment should be consistent throughout the corridor.



               C.   Detention.



                  (i)   Detention/ retention ponds shall
be located and designed to be natural in appearance and enhance the entry
sequence and/or view of buildings.



                  (ii)   Wet detention facilities and
water features, side slopes above the water line shall not exceed 4:1, and
wetland/aquatic vegetation shall be planted around at least 75% of the wet
area perimeter. The maximum “freeboard” of all detention areas shall not
exceed three feet. All detention facilities shall be required to install
safety ledges pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and as approved by
the City Engineer.



                  (iii)   Dry detention areas shall
maintain a maximum slope of 4:1, and shall be graded to harmonize with the
overall open space design of the site.



      (4)   General Regulations.



         (a)   Non-Residential Site Planning Regulations.



            1.   Commercial uses shall be “master planned”
in conjunction with adjacent office uses to facilitate efficient circulation
and shared parking.



            2.   Where developments include several buildings,
they shall be grouped to create outdoor spaces/plazas.



            3.   Open space shall be located contiguous to
open space on adjacent sites to maximize their combined visual effect.



            4.   A straightforward and visually pleasant
approach to building entrances shall be provided, with a drop-off area near
office building entrances.



            5.   No accessory structure shall be located
within any required setback.



            6.   Equipment.



               A.   No storage areas, garbage containers,
or mechanical equipment shall be located within any required setback.



               B.   Mechanical equipment, garbage
containers, and satellite dishes shall be completely and permanently screened
from view of public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. When attached to
the ground, screening methods shall include a solid wall or fence enclosure
of a material that matches the principal building. When roof mounted,
screening methods may include parapet walls or other architectural treatments
approved by the Planning Director.



               C.   The colors and materials of all
screening methods shall match and be in coordination with the colors and
materials of the principal building.



            7.   Drive-thru. Where drive-thru uses are
permitted, drive-thru windows and lanes are not permitted to face any street.



            8.   Lighting.



               A.   Light standards shall not exceed 25
feet in height, and shall be of a consistent type/style/finish throughout the
site. If adjacent to a residential district, light standards shall not exceed
15 feet in height within 150 feet of the lot line. Light intensity on sites
that are adjacent to a residential district shall be no more than one-half
foot-candle as measured along property lines that abut the residential
district.



               B.   Light standards that are used must be
approved by the city prior to their use, and the illumination of the
standards shall be subject to the standards of this chapter.



               C.   Lighting shall serve only to illuminate
signage, parking/loading areas, walkways and entrances, or to accent
landscaping and architectural details.



               D.   Colored, exposed neon, flashing or
moving lights are prohibited.



               E.   All lights shall be installed in a
manner to best hide and shield point source lighting.



            9.   Circulation.



               A.   The Land Use and Subdistrict and Access
Framework and Thoroughfare Master Plan maps identify a potential roadway
network. The maps identify potential locations of arterials and collectors,
and all other proposed roads that are not identified would most likely be
constructed as local streets.



               B.   Permitted roadway types (per approved
Access Framework and Thoroughfare Master Plan) in all subdistricts are
primary arterial, secondary arterial, collector, and local streets.



               C.   A continuous circulation system must be
maintained within large private developments; cul-de-sacs are strongly
discouraged.



               D.   Off-street pedestrian and auto
connections shall be provided between sites where feasible, especially
between office and commercial uses.



               E.   Safe pedestrian and bicycle routes
shall be delineated within private developments, and connect to the public
sidewalk and regional trail system.



            10.   Service Vehicles/Trucks.



               A.   Adequate on-site areas must be provided
for truck access, maneuvering, loading, and storage.



               B.   Service vehicle/truck traffic must be
separated from automobile traffic.



            11.   Access Regulations.



               A.   Roads and driveway cuts must be aligned
to create four-way intersections. Access points located on opposite sides of
the street should be designed to line up the respective left turn lanes,
where the road has no center median.



               B.   Curb cuts are not permitted within 350
feet of an intersection on any arterial street, or within 300 feet of an
intersection on any collector street.



               C.   Where permitted, outlets in commercial,
and mixed developments shall only be accessed from internal roadways, and
shall share driveways and parking lots wherever feasible.



               D.   In Interchange, 146th Street Corridor,
and View Corridor Subdistricts, direct access from primary arterials to
development sites is prohibited, and direct access from secondary arterials
is only allowed for sites at least eight acres in size. Direct access from
secondary arterials may not occur more frequently than once every 1,000 feet.



               E.   In Interchange Flex, Secondary
Corridor, and Internal Subdistricts, direct access from primary arterials to
development sites is prohibited. Direct access from secondary arterials is
only allowed for sites at least ten acres in size. Direct access from
secondary arterials may not occur more frequently than once every 1,000 feet.



               F.   Parcels containing a minimum of five
acres and a minimum parcel width of 450 feet may be granted one  additional
driveway cut based on the merits of unique and/or unusual circumstances on a
case-by-case basis and approval by the Planning Director. The driveway cut
may not be permitted in all cases.



            12.   Bulk Requirements.



The following requirements apply to all non-residential subdistricts:



 


BULK REQUIREMENTS FOR CORPORATE CAMPUS NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDISTRICTS



Requirements
 
Interchange
 
146th Street Corridor
 
View Corridor
 
Interchange Flex
 
Secondary Corridor
 
Internal
 
Regional Recreation & Entertainment
 
Agricultural/
I-O




Minimum Lot Area
 
5 acres1
 
5 acres1
 
5 acres1
 
5 acres1
 
5 acres1
 
3 acres1
 

 
5 acres1


Minimum Lot Width
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 

 
200 feet


Maximum Impervious Surface
 
70%
 
70%
 
70%
 
70%
 
70%
 
80%
 

 
80%


Building Height Maximum
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Office Bldgs.

 
120 feet
 
120 feet
 
120 feet
 
60 feet
 
60 feet
 
50 feet
 
60 feet
 
50 feet



Hotels

 
120 feet
 
120 feet
 
120 feet
 
N/A
 
120 feet
 
N/A
 
120 feet
 
50 feet



Industrial Bldgs.

 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
N/A
 
50 feet
 
50 feet



Retail Bldgs.

 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
35 feet
 
50 feet
 
35 feet
 
50 feet



Accessory Structures2

 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
20 feet
 
50 feet
 
20 feet



Entertainment Structures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
35 feet, plus 1 ft. for each add’l 5 ft. in setback
 



Minimum
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Entertainment Structures

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
N/A
 




All other structures

 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8
 
24 feet and two stories8


Front Yard Setback Minimum7 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Primary Arterial w/
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
75 feet
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5


Detention Pond,
 
50 feet6
 
50 feet6
 
75 feet6
 
50 feet6
 
50 feet6
 
50 feet6
 
50 feet6
 
50 feet6


Secondary Arterial3
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
50 feet
 
40 feet
 
40 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet
 
30 feet


Collector/Local
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
20 feet3
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet


Maximum
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 




Arterial

 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
75 feet
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5
 
50 feet5


Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback (not abutting a public right-of-way)
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
15 feet4
 
15 feet4
 
15 feet4
 
25 feet4
 
15 feet4


Minimum Building Size
 
40,000 SF
 
40,000 SF
 
40,000 SF
 
15,000 SF
 
15,000 SF
 
35,000 SF
 
---
 
15,000 SF


NOTES:


1   Retail uses shall be a minimum of 5 acres and each outlot a minimum of
1 acre in size. Smaller minimum lot sizes may be approved as part of a master
plan development.


2   Accessory building should not exceed principal building height or the
maximum height allowable, whichever is less.

3   Pedestrian-oriented areas have a maximum front setback of 5 feet.

4   Where side or rear yards abut residentially zoned property, the
setback is 50 feet.

5   See § 159.107(H)(8) for landscaping/screening requirements.

6   Detention ponds are permitted within front yard setbacks; however,
structures must be set back at least 20 feet from the top of the bank.

7   See § 159.107(H(6) for parking/loading requirements.

8   Industrial use building shall maintain a two-story office component
with the potential for a single-story manufacturing/warehousing component at
the rear of the building on a case-by-case basis with approval by the
Planning Director. Retail buildings are encouraged to be two-story buildings
but may be approved as single-story buildings on a case-by-case basis with
the approval of the Planning Director.










         (b)   Residential General Regulations.



            1.   Existing Residential Uses in Non-Residential
Subdistricts. The following site development standards shall apply to all
subdistricts within the CCPD District, with the exception of the Mixed
Residential Subdistrict.



               A.    Authority to Continue. Where, at the
time of adoption of an ordinance that assigns the CCPD (Corporate Campus) to
a Noblesville Jurisdictional zoning map, lawful residential uses of land
which exist and would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by the
CCPD, may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.



               B.   Enlargement/Improvement of Existing
Residential Structure. Such nonconforming uses may be enlarged or increased
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
rezone so long as such improvements do not result in an increase of the value
of the structure by more than 50% of the pre-improvement value.



               C.   Moving a Residential Structure. No such
nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the
lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date of
the rezone.



               D.   Termination by Discontinuance or
Abandonment of Use. If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued
or abandoned for more than one year (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land
is located.



               E.   New Construction of Residential
Buildings. The only new structures that shall be permitted shall be clearly
accessory to the existing residential use of the property and shall adhere to
the standards for accessory structures as outlined in § 159.121. No
additional homes or separate living units shall be constructed in the CCPD
unless such uses are permitted uses in the land use area, and then shall
adhere to the R1 Low Density Single-Family Residential zoning district
regulations.



               F.   Damage or Destruction. Should such
nonconforming residential structures be destroyed or damaged by any means,
then the home may be reconstructed in a manner equal to the fair market value
of the building immediately prior to the damage.



               G.   Underlying Standards. Any residential
improvements inside the CCPD district shall adhere to the underlying
developmental standards of the Rl (Single-Family Residential) district.



               H.   Conflict with §§ 159.220 through
159.226. In the case where the specific provisions of this division (H) are
in conflict with §§ 159.220 through 159.226 (Nonconforming Uses And
Structures), the standards of this division (H) shall apply.



            2.   Mixed Use Residential Subdistrict
Regulations. In the Mixed Residential Subdistrict, the following design
guidelines shall be utilized in evaluation of the proposed planned
development proposal. Conformance with the design guidelines may permit
additional density within the identified density range, above the 2.4
units/acre specified above. Design standards within this Subdistrict are
required. Guidelines are not mandatory. While strict adherence to guidelines
is not required, projects that do not adhere to some or all of the guidelines
should only be presumed to be allowed a base density that is at the low end
of the range permitted and to be required to comply with the established base
bulk requirements.



               A.   Bulk Requirements.



                  (i)   Maximum density.



                     a.   The intent of this district
is to provide for a variety of housing types, often times within an
individual development. To encourage these multiple housing types, as well as
a high quality design and affordability, a set of residential design
guidelines and a density range has been identified. The permitted density
shall be dependent upon adherence to the design guidelines and shall be at
the discretion of the City Council, in accordance with the Planned
Development procedure. The base density in the single-family areas shall be
2.4 dwelling units to the acre where there is access to public sewer. The
base density shall be one unit per two acres where private sewer systems are
proposed. With consideration of the guidelines established for this
subdistrict, as well as consideration of the specific products and
subdivision designs on a case by case basis, planned developments may be
approved that allow the maximum permitted density in the single family areas
to range from 2.4 to six dwelling units per acre.



                     b.   The base density in the
multiple family areas shall be 14 dwelling units per the acre. Dependent upon
compliance with the guidelines established for this subdistrict, as well as
the quality, affordability, and/or mix of specific products and subdivision
design proposed, planned developments may be approved that permit a maximum
permitted density to range from seven to 20 dwelling units per acre.



                  (ii)   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
Because a density range has been identified as a means of encouraging high
quality residential design and a variety of product types, the minimum
permitted lot area and width may vary, dependent upon the density permitted.
However, the base lot areas and lot widths for each housing type are as
follows:



 


HOUSING TYPE

 

BASE LOT AREA

 

LOT WIDTH



Single family detached dwellings (public sewer)
 
15,000 square feet
 
100 feet


Single family detached dwellings (private sewer)
 
2 acres
 
200 feet


Single family attached dwellings (up to four units)

(Permitted only on public sewer)
 
6,000 square feet
 
60 feet


Multiple family dwellings (Permitted only on public sewer)
 
3,000 square feet
 
150 feet



 



                  (iii)   Maximum Building Height.



                     a.   Single family detached
dwellings: 35 feet.



                     b.   Single family attached
dwellings (up to four units): 40 feet.



                     c.   Multiple family dwellings:
45 feet.



                     d.   Accessory buildings shall
be a maximum height: 15 feet.



                  (iv)   Maximum Permitted Floor Area
Ratio.



                     a.   Single family detached
dwellings: 0.5.



                     b.   Single family attached
dwellings (up to four units): 0.6.



                     c.   Multiple family dwellings:
0.6.



                  (v)   Setbacks.



                     a.   Front Yard Setbacks
(minimum).



                        (I)   Single family
dwellings: 25 feet local and collector streets.



                        (II)   Single family
attached: 50 feet arterial streets.



                        (III)   Multiple family
dwellings:  50 feet all streets.



                     b.   Side Yard Setback
(minimum).  Eight feet for all housing types, except multiple family and
single family attached dwellings, which shall provide a minimum separation of
ten feet between individual buildings.



                     c.   Rear Yard Setback (minimum).



                        (I)   Principal buildings:
20 feet.



                        (II)   Accessory
buildings: five feet.



                     d.   For certain product types,
it may be necessary, in certain circumstances and on a case by case basis, to
reduce these standards. For this reason, this standard may be varied as part
of the planned development process subject to approval by the Council.



                  (vi)   Minimum floor area per dwelling.



                     a.   Single Family: 1,800 square
feet.



                     b.   Multiple Family: 600 square
feet.



                     c.   For certain product types,
it may be necessary to reduce this standard. For this reason, this standard
may be varied as part of the planned development process.



         (c)   Design Standards Applicable to AH Residential
Development.



            1.   Each development should have standards for
uniform streetlights,  mailboxes, fencing, and sidewalks.



            2.   A 50-foot buffer yard shall be maintained
around all residential developments, unless otherwise reduced through the
Planned Development process.



            3.   No fences or other structures, permanent or
temporary, shall be permitted within the 50-foot buffer yard.



            4.   Common open space and recreational facilities
may warrant additional density, provided that the common open space areas
consist of a minimum of 15% of the site. This open space area must be active
in nature, and shall not include public rights-of-way, easements, floodplain
areas, or landscape setback areas. Large open space and retention areas
(generally larger than 10,000 square feet) may only be counted if they are
improved to include active and passive amenities. Generally, wet detention
facilities shall not count toward the 15% requirement. Useable open space
should be located no further than 1A mile from the most distant house in the
subdivision.



            5.   Inside the 50-foot landscape buffer, trees
shall be planted at a minimum rate of one tree per 40 feet and mounding shall
be required as approved during the Planned Development process.



            6.   Local streets should be extended to provide
access between adjoining neighborhoods at appropriate intervals. Streets
should generally be designed in a grid network and cul-de-sacs are
discouraged.



         (d)   Guidelines for Single-Family Detached and
Two-Family Attached Dwellings.



            1.   Where detached garages are proposed,
dwellings with detached garages that are located in the rear yard and
accessed via alleys are the preferred garage design. However, the second
preference is detached garages that are located in the rear yard and accessed
from the street.



            2.   Where dwellings are designed with attached
garages, rear loaded garages that have access off of alleys are preferred.
The second preference is for rear loaded garages that access from the front.
The third preference is side-loaded garages. The least desirable design is a
dwelling with an attached front-facing garage. Such garages shall occupy no
more than 33% of the front facade. Individual garage doors designed with
windows are encouraged.



            3.   In an effort to promote diversity of housing,
subdivisions shall vary the following: buildings’ relationship to the
street by staggering setbacks a minimum of 5 feet for 25% of each block face;
driveway orientation or location; the side yard setback and/or lot widths by
ten feet for 25% of the lots on each block face.



            4.   Each development over 100 acres should have a
minimum of two product types that address two different market categories.



            5.   A landscape package including a minimum of
one  shade tree and ten shrubs and/or ornamental trees per dwelling unit
shall be installed on each lot.



            6.   Generally, lots of less than 60 feet in width
should have rear-loaded garages that access from an alley.



         (e)   Guidelines for Single-Family Attached and
Multiple-Family Residential.



            1.   All townhouse and multiple-family residential
units should be designed to be oriented toward the street. Where larger
developments are designed with internal circulation systems, at least some
dwelling units should be oriented to the exterior of the development so as to
promote connection and integration of the multiple family development with
adjacent uses. Townhouse or multiple-family developments, which are oriented
with the sidewalls facing the street, are discouraged.



            2.   All single family attached dwellings should
have one main entrance for each structure that faces the street at an angle
of no more than 45 degrees from the street, or opens onto a porch or a stoop.
At least 50% of the units should be designed with building entrances, rather
than garage doors fronting on the street at the ground floor level.



            3.   Attached garages should be located at the
rear of the dwelling unit, and face the interior of the development, rather
than the street. The least desirable design is a dwelling with an attached
street-facing garage. Such garages shall only be permitted if they do not
protrude beyond the front building line and provide access via an internal
drive or frontage road, rather than with individual curb cuts for each
dwelling unit. Individual garage doors designed with windows are encouraged.



         (f)   Existing Residential Lots in Residential
Subdistricts.



            1.   Planned Development approval shall not be
required for a building permit for a single family home that does not involve
the subdivision of property, is on property of at least five acres in size,
and is located within the Single-Family or Multi-Family Subdistricts.



      (5)   Architectural Standards.



         (a)   Architectural Review Procedure.



            1.   Architectural review shall be required for
all residential developments pursuant to the standards of this subchapter and
§§ 159.025 through 159.033.



            2.   A.   With regard to non-residential
developments, architectural plans for all primary and accessory buildings
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the
style of the development, the design of the buildings, and the number, size,
and type of structures. A complete set of color 360-degree elevations
detailing the front, rear, and opposite side views of each proposed above
ground structure shall be provided. Key exterior elements such as materials,
windows, architectural breaks, etc. must be rendered in sufficient detail and
accompanied by clear descriptions of materials specifications, colors, and
textures.



               B.   If the architectural standards of the
CCPD district are met, the review of the architectural plans shall be
completed by the Planning staff. Appeals of staff’s interpretations shall
go to the Architectural Review Board who shall render a decision pursuant to
the procedures established.



         (b)   Non-Residential General Architecture Requirements.
The following design/architecture requirements shall apply to all
non-residential Subdistricts within the Corporate Campus district:



            1.   High quality building design and construction
shall be provided on all elevations (360 degree architectural treatment) in
all Subdistricts, with the exception that in the Internal Subdistrict,
architectural detailing shall be focused on the building entry and on facades
visible from any roadway.



            2.   The scale, mass, color and proportion of the
building shall reflect the character of the area in which it is located and
shall be compatible with adjoining developments.



            3.   Multiple buildings in developments (including
accessory buildings and detached outlet buildings in commercial centers,
where permitted) must incorporate coordinated architectural styles,
materials, forms, features, colors and applied elements to visually tie the
development together.



            4.   Antennas shall be roof-mounted only, shall
project no more than 12 feet above the height of the building, and shall be
positioned to minimize visibility from public rights-of-way. One antenna is
allowed per building, except that at buildings with more than one tenant, a
maximum of two shall be allowed per building.



            5.   Signage, fencing, walls, and other amenities
(benches, lights) must be integrated with building design and landscaping.



            6.   Building Trim.



               A.   The use of accent and trim elements
(accent panels, banding, cornices, canopies/awnings, etc.) is recommended to
add visual interest and break down the scale of facades.



               B.   Permitted building trim materials
include: brick (clay), stone, simulated cut stone, tile (ceramic or
porcelain), wood, glass, painted aluminum, formed polymers (“Fypon”), and
EIFS as permitted in the individual subdistricts.



            7.   Facades.



               A.   Glazing shall not exceed 75% of any
facade.



               B.   Facade treatments shall be designed to
break large facade areas into smaller facades.



               C.   Exterior materials must be consistent
on all facades, and material/finish changes should relate to the
“structure” of the building.



               D.   Colors used on building facades must be
complementary. Natural, muted colors should serve as the primary facade
color, with brighter colors used only as limited accents.



            8.   Roofs.



               A.   Pitched roofs shall be required on
buildings used for all small-scale retail, service, and office uses.
Small-scale shall generally mean one-story buildings, however, the design and
location of some buildings, which are more than one story in height, may
require pitched roofs to be used as well.



               B.   Rooflines and roof profiles shall be
varied to create visual interest. One-story buildings must incorporate sloped
roofs or tall parapets to architecturally conceal roof-mounted equipment.



               C.   All rooftop equipment, including vents
greater than one foot in height, shall be screened from view from all ground
level vantage points by parapet walls, rooftop walls, or recesses in sloped
roofs.



               D.   Rooftop equipment screens and rooftop
penetrations (vents) shall be of a color compatible with the overall building
or roof color (not an accent color).



               E.   Roof materials should be traditional in
composition and complement the architectural features of the structure.



               F.   Where pitched roofs are required or
requested; appropriate pitches shall be used based on the circumstance.



            9.   All structures will be evaluated on the
overall appearance of the project and shall be based on the quality of its
design and its relationship to the surrounding area.



         (c)   Subdistrict Specific Architecture Requirements.



            1.   Interchange Subdistrict.



               A.   In pedestrian-oriented commercial
areas, a continuous “street wall” of facades shall be created. There
shall be easy access from parking areas to the shopping street or plaza.



               B.   Facades shall incorporate three or more
vertical planes, and create both a “rhythm” of facade bays or structural
elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               C.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               D.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly
tinted), standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles,
architectural asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS (“Dryvit”) as a limited
trim material only.



               E.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems, steel or
aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics, reflective glass.



            2.   146th Street Corridor Subdistrict.



               A.   Facades must incorporate three or more
vertical planes, and create both a “rhythm” of facade bays or structural
elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               C.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly
tinted), standing seam metal roofs, slate or imitation slate roof shingles,
architectural asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS (“Dryvit”) as a limited
trim material only.



               D.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems, steel or
aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics, reflective glass.



            3.   View Corridor Subdistrict.



               A.   Facades must incorporate three or more
vertical planes, and create both a “rhythm” of facade bays or structural
elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               C.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, (subject to approval by the Planning Director and may not be
appropriate when visible from an arterial or expressway), tile (ceramic or
porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs,
slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and
EIFS (“Dryvit”) as a limited trim material only.



               D.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems, steel or
aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics, reflective glass.



            4.   Interchange Flex Subdistrict.



               A.   Facade treatments must create both a
“rhythm” of facade bays or structural elements, and a horizontal division
into a base, middle, and top.



               B.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, (subject to approval by the Planning Director and may not be
appropriate when visible from an arterial or expressway), tile (ceramic or
porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs,
slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and
EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems only if at least eight feet above grade or
as a trim material.



               C.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, steel or aluminum curtain wall systems,
plastics, reflective glass.



            5.   Secondary Corridor Subdistrict.



               A.   In pedestrian-oriented commercial
areas, a continuous “street wall” of facades shall be created. There
shall be easy access from parking areas to the shopping street or plaza.



               B.   Facade treatments must create both a
“rhythm” of facade bays or structural elements, and a horizontal division
into a base, middle, and top.



               C.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               D.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted),
standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural
asphalt roof shingles, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems only if at least
eight feet above grade and consisting of not more than 25% of any facade.



               E.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, steel or aluminum curtain wall systems,
plastics, reflective glass.



            6.   Internal Subdistrict.



               A.   The primary facade treatment shall
create both a “rhythm” of facade bays or structural elements, and a
horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, tile (ceramic or porcelain), steel/masonry composite wall systems,
glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation
slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS
(“Dryvit”) wall systems only if at least eight feet above grade, and
painted concrete masonry units at rear facades only.



               C.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, and steel or aluminum curtain wall systems plastics, reflective glass.



            7.   Regional Recreation and Entertainment
Subdistrict.



               A.   In pedestrian-oriented commercial
areas, a continuous “street wall” of facades shall be created. There
shall be easy access from parking areas to the shopping street or plaza.



               B.   Facade treatments must create both a
“rhythm” of facade bays or structural elements, and a horizontal division
into a base, middle, and top.



               C.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               D.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted),
standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural
asphalt roof shingles, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems only if at least
eight feet above grade and consisting of not more than 25% of any facade.



            8.   Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict.



               A.   Facades must incorporate three or more
vertical planes, and create both a “rhythm” of facade bays or structural
elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting, and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               C.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, tile (ceramic or porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted),
standing seam metal roofs, slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural
asphalt roof shingles, and EIFS (“Dryvit”) as a limited trim material
only.



               D.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include: wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS (“Dryvit”) wall systems, steel or
aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics, reflective glass.



         (d)   Residential General Architecture Requirements.
These standards shall apply to all residential development:



            1.   Architectural review, as outlined in this
subchapter and §§ 159.025 through 159.033 shall be adhered to for all
residential developments inside of the Corporate Campus Planned Development
District. The standards for review established for and by the Architectural
Review Board (ARE) shall be applied and implemented as required by the ARE.



            2.   The proposed dwelling should respect the
scale, height, and setbacks of those buildings on adjacent properties, and
where desirable, serve as an orderly transition to a different scale.



               A.   Accessory structures shall match the
materials and architectural style of the principal buildings.



               B.   Architectural style/design shall be
characterized by the use of traditional design elements (dormers, steep
pitched roofs, front porches, front doors, overhangs, shutters, bay/box
windows, etc.).



               C.   No like color schemes or home
elevations shall be located on lots adjacent to, or across from, each other.



            3.   Facades.



               A.   Facade treatments for homes shall be
designed to break up larger facade areas.



               B.   At least 15% of the area of each facade
that faces a street lot line must consist of windows or main entrance doors.
Windows in garage doors do not count toward meeting this guideline but
windows in garage walls do count toward meeting this guideline.



               C.   The rear facades of buildings shall not
be permitted to front thoroughfare streets. Access may be provided via
frontage roads and alleys.



            4.   The following design elements shall be varied
throughout multiple unit projects: exterior materials and finishes such as
provide a color palette of at least three color combinations per development
or provide exterior accent materials such as brick, stone, or other masonry
materials; elevations such as provide three distinct elevations for each
standard plan; floor plans such as offer at least 4 different floor plans
within each development; and front yard landscaping such as provide three
different plant palettes consisting of trees, shrubs, and perennials.



               A.   The design of dwelling units with
pitched roofs is encouraged.



               B.   A maximum of two single-story homes can
be built in a row.



            5.   Guidelines for Single-Family Detached and
Two-Family Attached Dwellings.



               A.   All single-family dwellings should have
one main entrance for each structure that faces the street that is at an
angle of not more than 45 degrees from the street; or opens onto a porch.
Where a duplex is on a corner lot, the requirement shall be met for both
dwelling units. Both main entrances may face the same street.



               B.   At least one-third of all dwellings
proposed within the development shall be designed with open front porches.
Roofed unenclosed front porches should be a minimum of 25 square feet in
area, have at least one entrance facing the street, and have a roof that is
no more than 12 feet above the floor of the porch.



Where a duplex is on a corner lot, the requirement shall be met for both
dwelling units. Both main entrances may face the same street.



               C.   (i)   A mix of house heights should
be promotes to include a proper balance of single story and multiple story
dwellings.



                  (ii)   Greater attention should be
paid to the design of buildings on corner lots. Treatments such as brick
wraps, shutters, windows, and fence setbacks should all be considered.



      (6)   Parking/Loading.



         (a)   The following parking and loading requirements
shall apply within the CCPD District. All calculations shall be made using
gross floor area (GFA). For those uses not listed in the Schedule of CCPD
District Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, refer to §§ 159.140
through 159.148.



SCHEDULE OF CCPD DISTRICT OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



 


Use

 
Required Parking Spaces
 
Required Loading Spaces




Commercial uses
 
4 per 1,000 SF
 
1 per USER


Office uses
 
3 per 1,000 SF
 
1 per BUILDING


Health/education uses
 
3 per 1,000 SF
 
1 per BUILDING


Manufacturing/assembly/ Production uses
 
2.5 per l,000 SF1
 
1 per 15,000 SF


Distribution uses
 
1 per 1,000 SF1
 
1 per 15,000 SF1


Storage uses
 
1 per 1,000 SF1
 
1 per 40,000 SF1



1   In cases where buildings exceed 50,000-SF, the overall required
parking spaces, and loading spaces required may on a case-by-case basis in
addition, based on the merits of the circumstances be reduced with approval
of the Planning Director.











         (b)   Parking/Loading Setback Requirements.



            1.   Front Setbacks Along Arterials. Along
arterials, no parking, loading, or vehicular use areas may be located between
the building and front property line. Loading facilities shall be screened
from all public rights-of-way.



            2.   Front Setbacks Along Collector and Local (or
Secondary) Streets. Along collector and local streets, the required front
setback for parking, loading, and vehicular use areas is 25 feet. Loading
facilities shall be screened from all public rights-of-way.



            3.   Side and Rear Setbacks. Parking, loading, and
vehicular use areas shall be setback a minimum of 12 feet from any rear or
side lot line.



            4.   Dedicated and conveniently located parking
spaces shall be provided for the physically disabled per established city and
other requirements in pedestrian-oriented commercial areas make off-street
parking access points visible.



            5.   Large parking lots must be divided into
“modules” linked by internal access drives and separated by landscaped
islands. Modules should not exceed 240 feet in width without a separating
island of at least ten feet.



            6.   Parking, driveways and curb cuts shall be
shared between uses where feasible to minimize pavements and reduce
interference with pedestrians.



            7.   The distance from any required parking space
to the nearest building entrance the space serves shall be a maximum of 700
feet. In addition, in Interchange, 146th Street Corridor, View Corridor, and
Secondary Corridor Subdistricts, every parking space shall be within 200 feet
of a sidewalk leading to a building entrance and separated from automobile
traffic.



            8.   Diagonal parking must be provided in
commercial parking lots where high turnover is expected.



            9.   Sufficient stacking spaces must be provided
at driveways.



            10.   Visual obstructions are prohibited within
parking lots and at driveways.



            11.   Snow plowing and storage must be
accommodated within parking lots and loading areas.



            12.   The use of parking lots as “short-cuts”
to circumvent the public roadway system must be discouraged.



         (c)   Parking Structures.



            1.   Parking structures shall be at least
partially below grade to minimize their visual impact.



            2.   Where parking structures are visible from
public rights-of-way, they may not have sloping floor plates visible from
adjacent public rights-of-way.



            3.   Parking structures in commercial areas must
accommodate retail space on the ground level, where permitted.



            4.   The design of parking structures must
integrate the forms and materials used for principal building(s). Lighting
should also be integrated with the overall architectural character of the
site.



            5.   Landscaping must be used at the base of
parking structures, and the use of landscaping should be considered at upper
levels, to soften their appearance.



      (7)   Signage.



         (a)   General Requirements.



            1.   Signage within the CCPD shall be permitted
subject to the standards of §§ 159.160 through 159.172 unless otherwise
stated below. In cases where §§ 159.160 through 159.172 and the standards
of the CCPD are in conflict, the Corporate Campus standard shall apply.



            2.   All signs must be associated with the
permitted use of the property on which they are located.



            3.   Street number(s) shall be prominently placed
on freestanding signage and shall not count toward the four word limit of
designation signs.



            4.   On multi-tenant buildings, all signage must
be visually consistent.



            5.   Signs shall not obstruct views of authorized
traffic signs or traffic control devices, create a visual obstruction at
driveway entrances, be animated, cause glare, or be lit by any flashing or
moving light.



            6.   In no case shall total sign area for any use
exceed 500 square feet. Ground sign area does not include the supporting base
below signage itself. Individual letters are to be measured as total height
multiplied by total width of each letter.



            7.   Lots fronting on two or more streets are
permitted one sign for each street frontage. When designation signs are used,
the designation signs shall not count toward an individual user's permitted
signage.



            8.   Directional signs cannot exceed four square
feet each in size and 48 square feet total for all signs, cannot exceed three
feet in height, and must not advertise an activity.



            9.   A maximum of one color plus white or black
may be used on any sign. The primary colors of the sign should be black or
white with the other color being used as an accent color only. Consideration
may be given to a sign with more than one color other than black and white
and may be approved administratively only if the colors are a muted and dark
earth tone. Full color elevations of the signs must be submitted to the
Planning Department in order to be approved administratively. Garish colors
must be avoided, and the color scheme must relate to the associated building.



            10.   Off-site and temporary signage shall comply
with this chapter’s regulations.



            11.   All signs shall be constructed with
individual lettering flush mounted to either the wall of the building or the
face of the ground sign. Panel, box-type, or back channeling of letters is
prohibited.



            12.   Where designation signs and multiple ground
signs are used in a development, a uniform design theme for the development
shall be established and followed with each sign.



         (b)   Sign Requirements in the Regional Recreation and
Entertainment Subdistrict. The purpose of this division (H)(7)(b) is to
provide signs that adequately regulate circulation and allow signage for
other necessary capabilities while minimizing the impact of such signs on
adjacent land uses.



            1.   Interior Signs. For purposes of this division
(H)(7)(b), interior signage refers to signs that are not visible when
standing immediately off the premises of the Regional Recreation and
Entertainment Subdistrict.



               A.   Temporary Signage. Interior banners and
incidental/directional signs shall be permitted without a sign permit.



               B.   Permanent Signage. Interior wall and
ground signs shall not be regulated in number however they must meet the
height and size requirements as per §§ 159.160 through 159.172.



            2.   Exterior Signs. Exterior signs are any signs
that are visible when standing outside of this Subdistrict and shall be
regulated as per this subchapter. Lot identification signs are exempted and
shall not be defined as a primary sign.



            3.   Sponsorship. The names and logos of sponsors
of entertainment uses and events shall be considered as an item of
information on primary signs.



         (c)   Sign Requirements in the Commercial and
Commercial/Office Subdistricts.



            1.   Designation Signs.



               A.   Location Restrictions.



                  (i)   Designation signage shall be
permitted for integrated, multi-parcel developments of at least 15 acres in
size.



                  (ii)   Designation signage shall be no
closer than 750 feet from any other approved and/or existing designation sign.



               B.   General Requirements.



                  (i)   Each integrated, multi-parcel
development shall be permitted one designation sign on each public street
frontage to which the development is adjacent.



                  (ii)   Designation signage shall be
designed as part of the overall “gateway” treatment that includes
landscaping and other improvements such as fencing or water features.



                  (iii)   Designation signage shall be
readily visible from the roadway, and shall consist of individual letters, up
to a maximum of four items of information, and mounted to a solid wall. Signs
shall identify the development name only; identification for individual users
is prohibited. Letters shall not exceed 18 inches in height, and shall be
either back-lit or illuminated by ground-mounted lights.



               C.   Setback Requirements. All designation
signage shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way.



               D.   Height Requirements. Designation
signage shall not exceed six feet in height.



               E.   Size Requirements. Size requirements
for Designation Signs are pursuant to standards of §§ 159.160 through
159.172.



            2.   Ground Signs.



               A.   Location Restrictions. Individual
ground signs are prohibited in the Commercial and Commercial/Office
Subdistricts.



            3.   Wall Signs.



               A.   Location Restrictions. One  building-
mounted sign shall be permitted on each public street frontage to which the
lot is adjacent.



               B.   General Requirements.



                  (i)   Building-mounted signage shall
consist of individual back-lit or internally illuminated lettering. Panel,
box-type, and back-channeled signs are not permitted in any subdistricts.



                  (ii)   For multi-tenant buildings,
each tenant is permitted one wall sign with a maximum of two items of
information.



               C.   Height Requirements. On buildings up to
three stories in height, building-mounted signage shall not exceed two feet
in height. On buildings over three stories in height, building-mounted
signage shall not exceed three feet in height, with the exception in the
Internal Subdistrict where they shall not exceed two feet in height. Other
building sign size limitations will be per §§ 159.160 through 159.172.



         (d)   Sign Requirements in all other Subdistricts
Designation Signs.



            1.   Designation Sign.



               A.   Location Restrictions.



                  (i)   Designation signage shall be
permitted for integrated, multi-parcel developments of at least 15 acres in
size.



                  (ii)   Designation signage shall be no
closer than 750 feet from any other approved and/or existing designation sign.



               B.   General Requirements.



                  (i)   Each integrated, multi-parcel
development shall be permitted one designation sign on each public street
frontage to which the development is adjacent.



                  (ii)   Designation signage shall be
designed as part of the overall “gateway” treatment that includes
landscaping and other improvements such as fencing or water features.



                  (iii)   Designation signage shall be
readily visible from the roadway, and shall consist of individual letters, up
to a maximum of four items of information, and mounted to a solid wall. Signs
shall identify the development name only; identification for individual users
is prohibited. Letters shall not exceed 18 inches in height, and shall be
either back-lit or illuminated by ground-mounted lights.



               C.   Setback Requirements. All designation
signage shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way.



               D.   Height Requirements. Designation
signage shall not exceed six feet in height.



               E.   Size Requirements. Size requirements
for Designation Signs are pursuant to standards of §§ 159.160 through
159.172.



            2.   Ground Signs.



               A.   Location Restrictions.



                  (i)   No individual ground signs shall
be permitted along 146th Street or any other primary arterial.



                  (ii)   Where ground signs are
permitted, such signs shall be placed at site entries.



                  (iii)   Individual ground signs may be
used in combination with designation signage so long as individual ground
signs are located at the site entrances on collector and local streets only.



               B.   General Requirements.



                  (i)   Ground signage and light
standards shall be located in landscaped areas. The size of the landscape
area around the ground signs shall be at least three times the surface area
of the sign.



                  (ii)   In the case of multi-tenant
buildings there shall be only one ground sign per building.



               C.   Setback Requirements. All ground signs
shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way.



               D.   Height Requirements. All ground signs
are limited to a maximum of six feet in overall height.



               E.   Size Requirements. All ground sign size
limitations, except for height shall be as per §§ 159.160 through 159.172.



            3.   Wall Signs.



               A.   Location Restrictions. All buildings
shall be permitted to have one wall sign that displays only the address
number for that specific building. A single-tenant building over 30,000
square feet shall be permitted to have one wall sign that identifies the
tenant.



               B.   General Requirements. Building mounted
signage shall consist of individual back-lit or illuminated lettering. Panel,
box-type, and back channeled signs are not permitted in any subdistrict.



               C.   Size Requirements. On buildings up to
three stories in height, building-mounted signage shall not exceed two feet
in height. On buildings over three stories in height, building-mounted
signage shall not exceed three feet in height, with the exception of in the
Internal Subdistrict where they shall not exceed two feet in height.
Building-mounted signage shall not exceed 30 square feet in size.



      (8)   Landscaping/Screening.



         (a)   1.   In Interchange, 146th Street Corridor,
View Corridor, and Agricultural/I-O Subdistricts high quality, hardy and
climate-appropriate landscaping must be provided on all sides of buildings
(360 degree landscaping). In Interchange Flex, Secondary Corridor, and
Internal Subdistricts, high-quality, hardy, and climate-appropriate
landscaping must be provided in yards adjacent to public rights-of-way. All
landscaping materials should be of varying size, form, texture, and color to
provide visual interest. Allowable plant types and sizes shall be per
applicable city regulations.



               A.   A coordinated landscaping palette must
be established for use throughout the site/development.



               B.   Where possible and permitted, at least
35% of required plant material for parking lot screen and buffering shall be
installed in front of the primary facade(s) of the building (the primary
“view(s)”), to maximize the visual effect of the planting material.



               C.   Departures from planting requirements
may be justified only by the presence of significant and viable existing
plant material, per city regulations.



               D.   Important elements such as building
entries and signage shall be highlighted with colorful, varied plantings.



               E.   Grouping plant materials into larger
masses that relate to the scale of the site is encouraged. The scale of plant
specimens shall also relate to the scale of the site and building(s).



               F.   Where required, significant plantings
shall be provided both adjacent to and on parking structures, to soften their
appearance.



               G.   Existing vegetation must be preserved,
wherever possible. Existing trees may be limbed up, but limbing-up may not
exceed one-third of the total tree height. Vegetation can only be removed
with prior city approval.



               H.   Mulch shall be a dark, natural color
and may extend no farther than one foot beyond plants to form the edge of
planting beds.



               I.   Earthen berms shall have a maximum
height of 6 feet and a maximum slope of 3:1. Berms shall be planted with sod
rather than mulched, except where clusters of plants require a mulch bed.



               J.   Underground irrigation systems shall be
installed and properly operated and maintained to water plant material in all
required planting areas.



               K.   The 146th Street Corridor will require
50 feet beyond the required right-of-way setback to have a continuous
sculpted and undulating earthen mound at five feet in height. The mound will
have a 5:1 slope that will begin at the right of way line and have a 3:1
slope on the opposite side, which will begin at the 50-foot setback line so
the crest of the earth mound will be approximately 15 feet from the setback
line and extend for approximately ten feet in width. Along the crest of the
earth mound there shall be five deciduous trees at three and one-half inch
caliper, five ornamental trees plus either four evergreen trees or eight
large variety evergreen shrubs ground in massing planted per each 200 linear
feet. Street trees are still required as per the Noblesville Unified
Development Ordinance.



            2.   In addition, the following landscape
requirements shall apply:



         (b)   Interchange, 146th Street Corridor and View
Corridor Subdistricts.



            1.   Overall Landscaping.



               A.   With regard to the mix of landscaping
materials that are to be used for a given site, a variety of planting
materials is encouraged. Generally, shade trees are favored to ornamental
trees; however, ornamental trees are permitted subject to the restrictions of
§§ 159.180 through 159.191. Evergreen trees shall be deemed appropriate,
and in some cases required, when screening and design variability are
necessary. Shrubs should generally be divided evenly between deciduous and
evergreen varieties.



            2.   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. In parking
lots with up to 50 spaces, internal landscape islands equal to at least 5% of
the paved surface shall be provided. In parking lots with 51 to 200 spaces,
internal landscape islands equal to at least 10% of the paved surface shall
be provided. In parking lots with over 200 spaces, internal landscape islands
equal to at least 15% of the paved surface shall be provided. These
percentages are exclusive of perimeter landscaping. The islands shall be at
least seven feet in width (inside dimension), at least 240 square feet in
size. There shall be no unbroken rows of parking longer than 100 feet in
length. Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per 25 square feet and groundcover
and/or perennials are also required. All rows of parking shall be terminated
at both ends with landscape islands. Tree plantings shall be required at a
rate of one shade tree for every 120 square feet of landscape area. Other
planting requirements shall be pursuant to the standards of §§ 159.180
through 159.191.



            3.   Building Foundation Landscaping. Provide
building base plantings to visually anchor buildings to their sites. The
following plant materials (from the total required above) should be dedicated
to building base plantings: One ornamental tree for every 20 feet of facade,
and one shrub for every three feet of building facade. These materials should
be clustered, and placed within ten feet of the building in defined beds of
groundcover.



            4.   Site Screening. Provide a landscape screen at
the perimeter of parking lots and truck staging areas, to conceal loading
areas, and at the site perimeter. Site perimeter buffers should be placed so
as to screen views of truck staging areas and loading docks. These buffers
can incorporate berms, plantings, fences, or walls.



            5.   Parking Lot Screening. Parking lot screening
shall per pursuant to the standards established in §§ 159.180 through
159.191. The plantings required in §§ 159.180 through 159.191 may be
clustered so long as the clustering maintains a minimum 75% screening of the
lot perimeter where adjacent to a public right-of-way, or 50% otherwise.
Where appropriate and permitted, screening shall be accomplished in a buffer
zone of at least ten feet in width, using a combination of shade trees,
evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs, and dense deciduous shrubs, with earthen
berms where appropriate. The exact mix of landscape types shall be determined
on a case by case basis.



            6.   Perimeter Site Buffering.



               A.   Adjacent to a primary arterial,
maintain a minimum width of 40 feet.



               B.   Adjacent to other public rights-of-way,
maintain a minimum width of 25 feet.



               C.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
similar land uses, maintain a minimum width of 15 feet.



               D.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
dissimilar land uses, maintain a minimum width of 40 feet.



               E.   Plantings shall be required subject to
the standards of §§ 159.180 through 159.191.



         (c)   Interchange Flex, Secondary Corridor, and Regional
Recreation and Entertainment Subdistricts.



            1.   Overall Landscaping. With regard to the mix
of landscaping materials that are to be used for a given site, a variety of
planting materials is encouraged. Generally, shade trees are favored to
ornamental trees; however, ornamental trees are permitted subject to the
restrictions of §§ 159.180 through 159.191. Evergreen trees shall be deemed
appropriate, and in some cases required, when screening and design
variability are necessary. Shrubs should generally be divided evenly between
deciduous and evergreen varieties.



            2.   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. In parking
lots with up to 50 spaces, internal landscape islands equal to at least 5% of
the paved surface shall be provided. In parking lots with 51 or more spaces,
internal landscape islands equal to at least 10% of the paved surface shall
be provided. These percentages are exclusive of perimeter landscaping. The
islands shall be at least seven feet in width (inside dimension), at least
200 square feet in size in Interchange Flex and 300 square feet in size in
Secondary Corridor and Regional Recreation and Entertainment Subdistricts,
and contain at least one shade tree per 200 square feet in Interchange Flex,
and one shade tree per 150 square feet in Secondary Corridor and Regional
Recreation and Entertainment Subdistricts. There shall be no unbroken rows of
parking longer than 100 feet in length. Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per 25
square feet and groundcover and/or perennials are also required. All rows of
parking shall be terminated at both ends with landscape islands. For single
use parking lots of more than 1000 spaces, parking rows shall be capped with
a landscape island with dimensions of at least ten feet by 36 feet for a
double parking row and ten feet by 18 feet for a single parking row. These
shall contain at least one shade tree per 150 square feet. There shall be no
unbroken rows of parking longer than 300 feet in length. Other planting
requirements shall be pursuant to the standards of §§ 159.180 through
159.191.



            3.   Building Foundation Landscaping. Provide
building base plantings to visually anchor buildings to their sites. The
following plant materials (from the total required above) should be dedicated
to building base plantings: One ornamental tree for every 25 feet of facade,
and one shrub for every four feet of building facade. These materials should
be clustered, and placed within ten feet of the building in defined beds of
groundcover.



            4.   Site Screening. Screen parking lots, truck
staging areas and loading docks from view of the street. Site perimeter
buffers should be placed so as to screen views of truck staging areas and
loading docks. These buffers can incorporate berms, plantings, fences or
walls.



            5.   Parking Lot Screening. Parking lot screening
shall per pursuant to the standards established in §§ 159.180 through
159.191. The plantings required in §§ 159.180 through 159.191 may be
clustered so long as the clustering maintains a minimum 75% screening of the
lot perimeter where adjacent to a public right-of-way, or 50% otherwise.
Where appropriate and permitted, screening shall be accomplished in a buffer
zone of at least ten feet in width, using a combination of shade trees,
evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and dense deciduous shrubs, with earthen
berms where appropriate. The exact mix of landscape types shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis.



            6.   Perimeter Site Buffering.



               A.   Adjacent to public rights-of-way,
maintain a minimum width of 25 feet.



               B.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
similar land uses, maintain a minimum width of 15 feet.



               C.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
dissimilar land uses, maintain a minimum width of 40 feet.



               D.   Plantings shall be required subject to
the standards of §§ 159.180 through 159.191.



         (d)   Internal Subdistrict.



            1.   Overall Landscaping. With regard to the mix
of landscaping materials that are to be used for a given site, a variety of
planting materials is encouraged. Generally, shade trees are favored to
ornamental trees; however, ornamental trees are permitted subject to the
restrictions of §§ 159.180 through 159.191. Evergreen trees shall be deemed
appropriate, and in some cases required, when screening and design
variability are necessary. Shrubs should generally be divided evenly between
deciduous and evergreen varieties.



            2.   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. In parking
lots internal landscape islands equal to at least 5% of the paved surface
shall be provided. This percentage is exclusive of perimeter landscaping. The
islands shall be at least seven feet in width (inside dimension), at least
200 square feet in size and contain at least one shade tree per 200 square
feet. There shall be no unbroken rows of parking longer than 100 feet in
length. Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per 100 square feet and groundcover
and/or perennials are also required. All rows of parking shall be terminated
at both ends with landscape islands. Other planting requirements shall be
pursuant to the standards of §§ 159.180 through 159.191.



            3.   Building Foundation Landscaping. Provide
building base plantings to visually anchor buildings to their sites. The
following plant materials (from the total required above) should be dedicated
to building base plantings: one ornamental tree for every 30 feet of facade,
and one shrub for every five feet of building facade. These materials should
be clustered, and placed within ten feet of the building in defined beds of
groundcover.



            4.   Site Screening. Screen parking lots, truck
staging areas and loading docks from view of the street. Site perimeter
buffers should be placed so as to screen views of truck staging areas and
loading docks. These buffers can incorporate berms, plantings, fences or
walls.



            5.   Parking Lot Screening. Parking lot screening
shall per pursuant to the standards established in §§ 159.180 through
159.191. The plantings required in §§ 159.180 through 159.191 may be
clustered so long as the clustering maintains a minimum 75% screening of the
lot perimeter where adjacent to a public right-of-way, or 50% otherwise.
Where appropriate and permitted, screening shall be accomplished in a buffer
zone of at least ten feet in width, using a combination of shade trees,
evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and dense deciduous shrubs, with earthen
berms where appropriate. The exact mix of landscape types shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis.



            6.   Perimeter Site Buffering.



               A.   Adjacent to public rights-of-way,
maintain a minimum width of ten feet.



               B.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
similar land uses, maintain a minimum width of ten feet.



               C.   At internal lot lines adjacent to
dissimilar land uses, maintain a minimum width of 40 feet.



               D.   Plantings shall be required subject to
the standards of §§ 159.180 through 159.191.



         (e)   Agricultural/I-O Subdistrict.



            1.   Overall Landscaping. With regard to the mix
of landscaping materials that are to be used for a given site, a variety of
planting materials is encouraged. Generally, shade trees are favored to
ornamental trees; however, ornamental trees are permitted subject to the
restrictions of §§ 159.180 through 159.191. Evergreen trees shall be deemed
appropriate, and in some cases required, when screening and design
variability are necessary. Shrubs should generally be divided evenly between
deciduous and evergreen varieties.



            2.   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. In parking
lots internal landscape islands equal to at least 5% of the paved surface
shall be provided. This percentage is exclusive of perimeter landscaping. The
islands shall be at least seven feet in width (inside dimension), at least
200 square feet in size and contain at least one shade tree per 200 square
feet. There shall be no unbroken rows of parking longer than 100 feet in
length. Shrubs at a rate of one shrub per 100 square feet and groundcover
and/or perennials are also required. All rows of parking shall be terminated
at both ends with landscape islands. Other planting requirements shall be
pursuant to the standards of §§ 159.180 through 159.191.



            3.   Building Foundation Landscaping. Provide
building base plantings to visually anchor buildings to their sites. The
following plant materials (from the total required above) should be dedicated
to building base plantings: one ornamental tree for every 30 feet of facade,
and one shrub for every five feet of building facade. These materials should
be clustered, and placed within ten feet of the building in defined beds of
groundcover.



            4.   Site Screening. Screen parking lots, truck
staging areas and loading docks from view of the street. Site perimeter
buffers should be placed so as to screen views of truck staging areas and
loading docks. These buffers can incorporate berms, plantings, fences or
walls.



            5.   Parking Lot Screening. Parking lot screening
shall per pursuant to the standards established in §§ 159.180 through
159.191. The plantings required in §§ 159.180 through 159.191 may be
clustered so long as the clustering maintains a minimum 75% screening of the
lot perimeter where adjacent to a public right-of-way, or 50% otherwise.
Where appropriate and permitted, screening shall be accomplished in a buffer
zone of at least ten feet in width, using a combination of shade trees,
evergreen trees, evergreen shrubs and dense deciduous shrubs, with earthen
berms where appropriate. The exact mix of landscape types shall be determined
on a case-by-case basis.



            6.   Perimeter Site Buffering.



               A.   Adjacent to public rights-of-way
opposite dissimilar land use, maintain a minimum width of 60 feet.



               B.   Adjacent to internal lot lines of
dissimilar land use, maintain a minimum width of 60 feet.



               C.   Requires a undulating landscaping berm
between three and six feet in height.



                  (i)   Type B or D Trees planted at a
rate of 30 feet on-center.



                  (ii)   Type B shrubs planted per 100%
of length of buffer.



                  (iii)   Minimum height of buffer,
including berm and trees shall not be less than nine feet.



         (f)   Walls and Fencing.



            1.   The following wall and fence types are
permitted: masonry, decorative metal (wrought iron) or finished wood (stained
or painted). In areas requiring security, decorative metal fencing with a
spiked or curved top profile or razor/concertina/barbed wire mounted inside a
solid fence or wall is recommended. This type of fence shall only be
permitted with the express written approval of the Planning Director and may
not be permitted in all cases based on the visibility of the fence.



            2.   The following wall and fence types are
prohibited in areas visible from public rights-of-way: concrete masonry units
(painted or unpainted), non-solid and/or unfinished wood, chain link (with or
without slats), non-decorative corrugated sheet metal, electrified, and
razor/concertina/barbed wire.



            3.   Fences and walls shall not exceed eight feet
in height, but are not permitted to be located between a building and the
street, with the exception of fences that are approved as a component of a
master planned design theme within a Planned Development and more
specifically approved through the Planned Development procedure.



   (G)   Fencing requirements refer to § 159.121(D)(5), Fences, walls,
and hedges for the following zoning districts: Local Business (LB), General
Business (GB),Planned Business (PB), and Downtown (DT).



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 27-5-00, passed 6-12-00; Am. Ord.
33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11- 07; Am. Ord.
64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 25-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord.
23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
24-07-13, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord. 31-09-13, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord.
48-10-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)   Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.108  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



 


Table 7
Summary of Industrial Bulk Standards



Requirements
 
Industrial Districts



 
I-1
 
I-2
 
I-3




Minimum Lot Area
 
10,000 sq. ft.
 
1 acre
 
3 acres


Minimum Lot Width
 
100'
 
200'
 
350'


Maximum Floor Area Ratio
 
One-half (0.5)
 
One-half (0.5)
 
One-half (0.5)


Minimum Front Yard
 
60'
 
60'
 
60'


Minimum Side Yard:
 
----
 
----
 
----


  Abutting a residential district or use
 
20'
 
30'
 
30'


  Abutting other district or uses
 
10'
 
20'
 
20'


Minimum Rear Yard
 
10'
 
10'
 
10'


Maximum Building Height
 
35' or 2 stories
 
75' or 6 stories
 
75' or 6 stories


Maximum Impervious Surface
 
70%
 
80%
 
NA




 



NOTE:   The above requirements do not preclude the establishment of more
stringent restrictions for Conditional Uses or individual permitted uses
where conditions may warrant.



   (A)   Light Industrial (I-1).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the I-1 District is to
encourage the development of manufacturing and wholesale establishments which
are clean, quiet, and free of hazardous or objectionable elements, operate
entirely within enclosed structures, and generate little industrial
traffic.  This district is further designed to act as a transitional use
between heavy manufacturing uses and less intensive uses such as business or
residential.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (A)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Retail Sales.  Retail sales shall be permitted as
an accessory use to the primary industrial use, provided such uses are
located within the principal building and occupy no more than 20% of its net
floor area.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be permitted are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Industrial Districts are listed within Table 7.



      (6)   Outdoor Storage.  Outdoor storage shall be permitted
only as an accessory use to the primary use on the same lot or tract of land.



         (a)   Outdoor storage areas shall not encroach into any
minimum required yard setback, drainage easement, public right-of-way, a fire
land, parking area or maneuvering aisle.



         (b)   All outdoor storage areas shall provide a solid,
opaque wall or fence of not less than seven feet in height measured at the
highest finished grade to screen the view from any adjacent property or
right-of-way.



         (c)   All outdoor storage shall be located behind the
rear line of the principal building or structure and shall not front on any
public right-of-way.



         (d)   A chain link fence or a variation of a chain link
fence combination shall not constitute an acceptable screening device to
satisfy the requirements of this section.



         (e)   Materials stored behind any screening wall or
fence shall be stacked no higher than one foot below the top of the wall or
fence. Vehicles, trailers, mobile machinery, or equipment shall be stored in
their lowest elevation. No vehicle, trailer, mobile machinery, or equipment
shall be used for nor constitute permanent storage.



         (f)   Maintenance of the wall or fence shall be the
responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant and shall be maintained to
create a visual screen.



      (7)   Fencing.  Fencing for either outside storage or fencing
of the real estate shall require that a fence permit be issued prior to
installation as set forth in § 159.121(D)(5)(e).



   (B)   Heavy Industrial (I-2).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the I-2 District is to
encourage the development of major manufacturing, processing, warehousing,
and major research and testing operations.  These activities require
extensive community facilities and reasonably good access to major
thoroughfares and the interstate system.  They may also have extensive open
storage and service areas and may generate heavy industrial-type traffic, but
shall be prohibited if they create nuisances beyond the limitations of this
chapter.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  There are currently
no permitted uses in the I-2 district which require special restrictions.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be permitted are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Industrial Districts are listed within Table 7.



      (6)   Fencing.  Fencing for either outside storage or fencing
of the real estate shall require that a fence permit be issued prior to
installation as set forth in § 159.121(D)(5)(e).



   (C)   Extractive Industrial (I-3).



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the I-3 District is to provide
land for the mining, excavating, processing, and storage of mineral
resources.  This district is designed to assure that these resources be
properly managed and that all land be reclaimed so as not to create a hazard
or nuisance which either immediately or in the future affects the health,
safety, or general welfare of the community.  This case would also be of
conditional use status.  Since what is now agricultural farmland might one
day be exploited as a mineral resource for extraction, it would require
either a rezoning or special exception permit.  Also, after reclamation, a
rezoning to a more usable classification would be in order.



      (2)   Permitted Uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.  Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in division (C)(3) of this section.



      (3)   Uses Permitted with Restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Excavation.



            1.   Before any excavation is begun, there shall
be a plan on file with and approved by both the State Department of Natural
Resources and the Plan Commission for both excavation and reclamation
activities.



            2.   Any excavation shall be carried on in such a
manner so as not to disturb any land or properties immediately adjacent to
the property on which the excavation is being accomplished.  In particular,
no excavation shall take place within 100 feet of the property line.



            3.   Any excavation shall be surrounded by a fence
not less than seven feet high.



            4.   No excavation shall take place by use of
explosives.



      (4)   Conditional Uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042.  The conditional uses that may be permitted are listed in
Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (5)   Bulk Requirements.  The bulk requirements which apply
to all Commercial Districts are listed within Table 6.



      (6)   Outdoor storage.  Outdoor storage shall be permitted
only as an accessory use to the primary use on the same lot or tract of land.



         (a)   Outdoor storage areas shall not encroach into any
minimum required yard setback, drainage easement, public right-of-way, a fire
lane, parking area or maneuvering aisle.



         (b)   All outdoor storage areas shall provide a solid,
opaque wall or fence including chain-link or vinyl coated chain-link fence
with slats of not less than seven feet in height measured at the highest
finished grade to screen the view from any adjacent property or right-of-way.



         (c)   All outdoor storage shall be located behind the
rear line of the principal building or structure and shall not front on any
public right-of-way.



         (d)   Materials stored behind any screening wall or
fence shall be stacked no higher than one foot below the top of the wall or
fence. Vehicles, trailers, mobile machinery, or equipment shall be stored in
their lowest elevation. No vehicle, trailer, mobile machinery, or equipment
shall be used for nor constitute permanent storage.



         (e)   Maintenance of the wall or fence shall be the
responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant and shall be maintained to
create a visual screen.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord.
96-11-05, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16)   Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.109  SPECIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Flood Hazard (FH) District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Flood Hazard (FH) District
is to guide development in the flood hazard areas to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas. This chapter applies to all SFHAs
and known flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of
Noblesville, Indiana. The district boundaries are defined by the boundaries
of "The Flood Insurance Study for Hamilton County, Indiana, and Incorporated
Areas" and includes the Floodplain, Floodway, and Floodway Fringe located
within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the City of Noblesville,
Indiana. The flood hazard areas of the City of Noblesville are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the development and uses in flood hazard areas which are
vulnerable to flood or hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately
elevated or flood-proofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. No
structure shall from this point forward be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this part and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within the
SFHA shall be altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Under the authority granted to local units
of government to control land use within their jurisdiction, which includes
taking into account the effects of flooding, the City of Noblesville hereby
adopts the following floodplain management regulations in order to accomplish
the following:



         (a)   Protect human life and health from the hazards of
flooding;



         (b)   Prevent unwise developments from increasing flood
or drainage hazards to others;



         (c)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly
flood control projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and
utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;



         (d)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base
by minimizing the potential for creating flood blighted areas;



         (e)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains,
stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



         (f)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other
development which may increase erosion or flood damage;



         (g)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood
barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands;



         (h)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;



         (i)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



         (j)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
including streets and bridges located in floodplains;



         (k)   Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that
property is in a flood prone area;



         (l)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance
available for structures and their contents by fulfilling the requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (2)   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data.  This
chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood. The best available
regulatory flood data is listed below.



         (a)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits for the studied Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) within the
jurisdiction of the City of Noblesville shall be delineated on the 1% annual
chance flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) of Hamilton County,
Indiana, and Incorporated Areas dated November 19, 2014 and the corresponding
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November 19, 2014 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date.



         (b)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits for each of the SFHAs delineated as a "Zone A" on the FIRM of
Hamilton County, Indiana and Incorporated Areas prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated November 19, 2014 as well as any future
updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency with the most recent date, shall be according to the best
data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources;
provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is greater than one
square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the
party needs to replace existing data with better data that meets current
engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be submitted to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and subsequently approved.



         (c)   For the SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated
Hamilton County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City
of Noblesville or that may be annexed into the City of Noblesville:



            1.   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and
fringe limits of studied streams shall be as delineated on the 1% annual
chance flood profiles in the FIS of Hamilton County, Indiana, and
Incorporated Areas dated November 19, 2014 and the corresponding FIRM
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 19,
2014 as well as any future updates, amendments, or revisions, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency with the most recent date.



            2.   If the SFHA is delineated as "Zone A" on the
Hamilton County, Indiana, and Incorporated Areas FIRM, prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 19, 2014, the
regulatory flood elevation, floodway, and fringe limits shall be according to
the best data available as provided by the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources; provided the upstream drainage area from the subject site is
greater than one square mile. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party needs to replace existing data with better data
that meets current engineering standards. To be considered, this data must be
submitted to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and
subsequently approved.



         (d)   In the absence of a published FEMA map or absence
of identification on a FEMA map, the regulatory flood elevation, floodway,
and fringe limits of any watercourse in the community's known flood prone
areas shall be according to the best data available as provided by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources; provided the upstream drainage area
from the subject site is greater than one square mile.



         (e)   Upon issuance of a Letter of Final Determination
(LFD), any more restrictive data in the new (not yet effective) mapping/study
shall be utilized for permitting and construction (development) purposes,
replacing all previously effective less restrictive flood hazard data
provided by FEMA.



         (f)   The FH zoning district is established based upon
the boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas as shown on the FIRM for
Hamilton County, Indiana, and Incorporated Areas.



         (g)   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual
ground elevations.



            1.   In cases where there is a discrepancy between
the mapped floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations,
the elevation provided on the profiles shall govern.



            2.   If the elevation of the site in question is
below the base flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and
regulated accordingly.



            3.   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site
in question is above the base flood elevation and not located within the
floodway, that site shall be considered outside the SFHA and the floodplain
regulations will not be applied. The property owner shall be advised to apply
for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA).



      (3)   Administration. 



         (a)   The Director of Planning (or his designee) shall
be the Floodplain Administrator charged with the administration and
implementation of the provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to:



            1.   Review all floodplain development permits to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



            2.   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in
the SFHA and complete substantial damage determinations.



            3.   Provide information and assistance to
citizens upon request about permit procedures and floodplain construction
techniques.



            4.   Ensure that construction authorization has
been granted by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all
development projects subject to § 159.109(A)(12)(a) and §
159.109(A)(12)(c)1., and maintain a record of such authorization with either
a copy of the permit/authorization of floodplain analysis/regulatory
assessment.



            5.   Ensure that all necessary federal or state
permits have been received prior to issuance of the local permit. Copies of
such permits/authorizations are to be maintained on file with the local
permit.



            6.   Maintain and track permit records involving
additions and improvements to residences located in the floodway.



            7.   Notify adjacent communities and the State
Floodplain Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit copies of such notifications to FEMA.



            8.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish
upon request local permit documents, damaged structure inventories,
substantial damage determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, Letters
of Map Change (LOMC), copies of DNR permits, letters of authorization, and
floodplain analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation),
federal permit documents, and "as-built" elevation and floodproofing data for
all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.



            9.   Utilize and enforce all LOMC or Physical Map
Revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective SFHA maps of the
community.



            10.   Assure that maintenance is provided within
the altered or relocated portion of a watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.



            11.   Review certified plans and specifications
for compliance.



            12.   Verify and record the actual elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with § 159.109(A)(5)(d) and (e).



            13.   Verify and record the actual elevation to
which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in
accordance with § 159.109(A)(11)(n)4.



            14.   Post stop work orders and/or revoke permits
for construction, erection, alterations, repair, moving, demolition,
installation, or replacement not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. In addition to nonconformity, a permit may be revoked where there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.



            15.   Perform a minimum of three inspections to
ensure that all applicable ordinance and floodplain development requirements
have been satisfied. The first inspection shall be upon the establishment of
the Flood Protection Grade reference mark at the development site; the second
upon the establishment of the structure's lowest floor; and the final
inspection upon completion and submission of the required finished
construction elevation certificate.



         (c)   The administrator is further authorized to render
interpretations of this chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and
purpose. In addition to the provisions for appeals contained in §§ 159.040
et seq., the provisions of this § 159.109(A) shall be applied in the
following manner for the interpretation and application of provisions:



            1.   Considered as minimum requirements;



            2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing
body; and



            3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under state statutes.



      (4)   Approval procedures.



         (a)   Any alterations to sites and existing structures
within the FH district must appear before the Board of Zoning Appeals for
approval before any construction or alteration of the site may begin. The
only exceptions to this requirement are those sites that are rezoned by the
Plan Commission and Common Council to allow fill or cut and fill operations
or additions to existing structures that do not increase the footprint of the
structure and that are located above the BFE.



         (b)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this chapter.



         (c)   No applicant shall proceed with any fill or cut
and fill operations without receiving rezone approval from the Plan
Commission and Common Council. See § 159.109(A)(8)(a) for further
requirements.



         (d)   All projects shall be required to receive a
building permit or improvement location permit prior to the beginning of any
development on the project.



      (5)   Improvement Location Permit.



         (a)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without
first obtaining an Improvement Location Permit from the Director. The
Director shall not issue an Improvement Location Permit if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



         (b)   The application for an Improvement Location Permit
shall include all applicable information that is required by §§ 159.040 et
seq. and Appendix B of this chapter.



         (c)   Upon receipt of an application for an Improvement
Location Permit, the Director shall determine if the site is located within
an identified floodway, floodway fringe or within the floodplain where the
limits of the floodway have not yet been determined.



            1.   If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Director shall require the applicant to forward the application, along with
all pertinent plans and specifications, to the Department of Natural
Resources and apply for a permit for construction in a floodway. Under the
provisions of I.C. 14-28-1, a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for
any excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing, paving, and any other similar activities undertaken before the
actual start of construction of the building. It does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing, lawful residences in a non-boundary river
floodway, per the requirements of I.C. 14-28-1-26, but if fill is needed to
elevate the addition above the existing grade, a construction in the floodway
permit is required. No action shall be taken by the Director until a permit
has been issued by the Natural Resources Commission granting approval for
construction in the floodway. Once a permit has been issued by the Natural
Resources Commission, the Director may issue the local Improvement Location
Permit, provided the provisions contained in § 159.109(A)(11) have been met.
The Improvement Location Permit cannot be less restrictive than the permit
issued by the Natural Resources Commission.



            2.   If the site is located in an identified
floodway fringe, then the Director may issue the local Improvement Location
Permit provided the provisions contained in § 159.109(A)(11) have been met.
The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any new or
substantially improved structure shall be at or above the Flood Protection
Grade (FPG).



            3.   If the site is in an identified floodplain
where the limits of the floodway and floodway fringe have not yet been
determined, and the drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one
square mile, the Director shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Department of Natural Resources for review and comment. No action shall be
taken by the Director until either a permit for construction in the floodway
or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood
elevation and the recommended Flood Protection Grade has been received from
the Department of Natural Resources.



            4.   Once the Director has received the proper
permit or floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed
development, an Improvement Location Permit may be issued provided the
conditions of the Improvement Location Permit are not less restrictive than
the conditions received from the Department of Natural Resources and the
provisions contained in § 159.109(A)(11) have been met.



            5.   If the site is in an identified floodplain
where the limits of the floodway and floodway fringe have not yet been
determined and the drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile, the Director shall require the applicant to provide an engineering
analysis showing the limits of the floodway, floodway fringe and 100-year
elevation for the site. Upon receipt, the Director may issue the local
Improvement Location Permit, provided the provisions contained in §
159.109(A)(11) have been met.



         (d)   Upon establishment/placement of the lowest floor,
before framing continues, to include any approved floodproofing, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of the lowest floor or
floodproofed elevation, as built. Said certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional
engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a
particular structure said certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the floodproofing
certification or elevation certificate shall be at the applicant's risk. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing
elevation survey data submitted, and notify the applicant of any
deficiencies. The applicant shall correct deficiencies detected by such
review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to submit the
survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to
issue a stop-work order for the project.



         (e)   Upon completion of construction, an elevation
certification which depicts the "as-built" lowest floor elevation is required
to be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. If the project includes a
floodproofing measure, floodproofing certification is required to be
submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator.



      (6)   Permitted uses.  A complete listing of permitted uses
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix. Certain permitted uses have special
restrictions listed in § 159.109(A)(7) below.



      (7)   Uses permitted with restrictions.  The following uses
are permitted in this district provided that they meet the restrictions below.



         (a)   Excavation.



            1.   Before any excavation is begun, there shall
be a plan on file with and approved by both the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, if located within the floodway, and the Plan Commission for both
excavation and reclamation activities.



            2.   Any excavation shall be carried on in such a
manner so as not to disturb any land or properties immediately adjacent to
the property on which the excavation is being accomplished. In particular, no
excavation shall take place within 100 feet of the property line.



            3.   Any excavation shall be surrounded by a fence
not less than seven feet in height.



            4.   No excavation shall take place by use of
explosives.



      (8)   Prohibited uses.  The following uses are prohibited in
this district.



         (a)   Cut and fill.  Cut and fill is prohibited within
the Flood Hazard District. These regulations prohibit the placement of fill
within the FH zoning district. However, in rare circumstances, when it is not
possible to avoid fill within the floodplain the applicant may seek a waiver
of the prohibition. The waiver of this prohibition must be received with a
request to rezone the property, and both requests must be approved by the
Plan Commission and City Council. No changes will be approved without
compliance with the following requirements:



            1.   Compensatory storage is required for any
fill, structure, or other material above the grade in the regulatory
floodplain that temporarily or permanently displaces floodplain storage
volume.



            2.   Compensatory storage must:



               A.   Be equal to at least three times the
volume of flood storage lost below the 10-year and 100-year flood elevations.



               B.   Be operational prior to placement of
fill, structures, or other materials temporarily or permanently placed in the
regulatory floodplain.



               C.   Be provided in addition to the site
detention volume.



               D.   Drain freely and openly to the waterway.



               E.   All regulatory floodplain storage lost
below the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be compensated for below
the proposed ten-year flood elevation.



               F.   All regulatory floodplain storage lost
above the existing regulatory ten-year flood elevation shall be compensated
for above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.



            3.   Compensatory storage is required for
activities in the regulatory floodplain. There is no threshold to
compensatory storage, any volume of fill requires compensatory storage be
provided.



            4.   The compensatory storage requirement does not
apply to floodproofing of an existing building where the floodproofing
measures such as berms or floodwalls are within ten feet of the building, or
crossing improvements where artificially created storage is lost due to a
reduction in head loss.



            5.   Compensatory storage must be located onsite,
adjacent to, or opposite the areas filled or occupied by a structure. In
those rare instances when compensatory storage cannot be located adjacent to
or opposite the areas filled or occupied, the applicant shall provide
engineering computations demonstrating that hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage has been provided. These computations must show no
increase in flood flows or flood depths will result as a result of the
location of the proposed compensatory storage.



            6.   Compensatory storage must be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the main watercourse. In some rare instances it
may be necessary to install pipes to construct and/or operate a compensatory
storage basin. This may occur when site constraints, such as a roadway or
sidewalk, separate the waterway from the compensatory storage area.



         (b)   Fill.  Filling a property using materials from an
outside source that does not provide an area of compensatory storage within
the watershed is prohibited.



      (9)   Conditional uses.  Conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals after a public hearing subject to
§ 159.042. The conditional uses that may be permitted are listed in Appendix
C, Use Matrix. Certain conditional uses have special restrictions that are
listed below. In the floodway no conditional use shall be granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals unless a permit for construction has previously been
obtained from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. The Board may
impose greater restrictions than those required by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources.



         (a)   Campgrounds.



            1.   Approval must be obtained from the Indiana
State Board of Health and from the Department of Natural Resources.



            2.   The size, procedure, design, installation,
and maintenance for recreational campgrounds shall be provided for in §
159.106(G), Residential Mobile Home Park (RMH) District.



      (10)   Bulk requirements.  The bulk requirements that apply
to the FH District shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
Director of Planning and Development. The Director should take into account
the standards for the adjoining zoning districts as well as the existing
pattern of development in the immediate area of the construction when
determining the setbacks.



      (11)   Development standards.  In all SFHA and known flood
prone areas the following are required:



         (a)   New construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.



         (b)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent
with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.



         (c)   New construction and substantial improvement shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the Flood Protection Grade (FPG).



         (d)   New construction and substantial improvement shall
be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



         (e)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, utility meters, and other service facilities shall be
located at or above the FPG or designed so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components below the FPG. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the FPG.



         (f)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



         (g)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system.



         (h)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located
and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



         (i)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating
or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the Flood Protection
Grade (FPG), unless such materials are stored in a flood proofed storage
tank. The provisions of the Wellhead Protection Overlay District shall also
apply and if found to be more restrictive than this section, shall supersede.



         (j)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in
this chapter.



         (k)   Parking lots, driveways, and sidewalks within the
SFHA shall be constructed with permeable materials.



         (l)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement to a structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not further,
extended or replaced. Any structure in the SFHA that is not in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter may not be altered, repaired,
reconstructed, or improved unless such changes are in compliance with these
regulations. The only exception to this is a repair or alteration that does
not increase the footprint of the existing structure, and does not total more
than 40% of the pre-repair fair market value.



         (m)   Whenever any portion of the SFHA is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the structure below the
BFE shall be compensated for and balance by an equivalent volume of
excavation taken below the BFE. The excavation volume shall be at least equal
to three times the volume of storage lost due to the structure.



            1.   The excavation shall take place in the
floodplain and on the same property in which the structure is located.



            2.   Under certain circumstances, to be determined
by the Director, the excavation may be allowed to take place outside of but
adjacent to the floodplain provided that the excavated volume will be below
the regulatory flood elevation, will be on the same property in which the
structure is located, will be accessible to the regulatory flood water, will
not be subject to ponding when not inundated by flood water, and that it
shall not be refilled. In such instances, the Director shall prepare a
document to be signed by the applicant and recorded against the deed for the
property noting the restrictions on the compensatory storage area.



            3.   The excavation shall provide for true storage
of floodwater, but shall not be subject to ponding when not inundated by
floodwater.



            4.   The grading around the excavation shall be
such that the excavated area is accessible to other regulatory floodwater.



            5.   The structure shall not obstruct a drainage
way leading to the floodplain.



            6.   The structure shall be of a material deemed
stable enough to remain firm and in place during periods of flooding and
shall include provisions to protect adjacent property owners against any
increased runoff or drainage resulting from its placement.



            7.   Plans depicting the areas to be excavated
shall be submitted prior to the start of construction or site work. Once site
work is complete, but prior to the start of construction on any structure,
the applicant shall provide the floodplain administrator a certified survey
of the excavation and fill sites demonstrating the fill and excavation comply
with this subchapter.



         (n)   All structures located in the SFHA shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPG. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:



            1.   Construction or placement of any new
structure having a floor area greater than 400 square feet.



            2.   Addition or improvement made to any existing
structure:



               a.   Where the cost of the addition or
improvement equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the existing
structure, excluding the value of land.



               b.   Addition or improvement made to any
existing structure with a previous addition or improvement constructed since
the community's first floodplain ordinance.



               c.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a
damaged structure where the costs of restoring the structure to its before
damage condition equals or exceeds 40% of the market value of the structure,
excluding the value of the land, before damage occurred.



               d.   Installing a travel trailer or
recreational vehicle on a site for more than 180 days.



               e.   Installing a manufactured home on a new
site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. This regulation does not
apply to returning an existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.



               f.   Reconstruction or repairs made to a
repetitive loss structure.



            3.   New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest
floor, including the basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the base
flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate
a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of
floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection
(o) below.



            4.   New construction or substantial improvement
of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure shall either have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the FPG (two feet
above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be
used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of
subsection (o) below. Structures located in all "A Zones" may be floodproofed
in lieu of being elevated if done in accordance with the following:



               a.   A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the structure has been designed so that below
the FPG the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and
capable of resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure
design shall take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressures, and impacts from debris or ice. Such
certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.



               b.   Floodproofing measures shall be
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.



         (o)   New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated structures shall have the lowest floor at or above the FPG. Elevated
structures with fully enclosed area formed by foundation and other exterior
walls below the FPG shall be designed to preclude finished living space and
designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwater to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs must meet the
following minimum criteria:



            1.   Provide a minimum of two openings located in
a minimum of two exterior walls with a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area.



            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no more
than one foot above the exterior grade or the interior grade immediately
beneath each opening, whichever is higher.



            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.



            4.   No opening shall have a dimension of less
than three inches in any direction. This requirement applies to the hole in
the wall, excluding any device that may be inserted, such as typical
foundation air vent devices.



            5.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the
minimum necessary to allow for parking vehicles (garage door) or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises
(standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



            6.   The interior portion of such enclosed area
shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms.



            7.   The interior grade of such enclosed area
shall be at an elevation at or higher than the exterior grade.



            8.   The property owner shall be required to
execute a flood openings/venting affidavit acknowledging that all openings
will be maintained as flood vents, and that the elimination or alteration of
the openings in any way will violate the requirements of this section.
Periodic inspections will be conducted by the floodplain administrator to
ensure compliance. The affidavit shall be recorded in the office of the
Hamilton County Recorder, and a copy of the recorded document shall be
presented to the floodplain administrator prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.



            9.   Where the interior height of the enclosure
exceeds six feet, the property owner shall execute and record with the
structure's deed a non-conversion agreement declaring that the area below the
lowest floor or the detached accessory structure shall not be improved,
finished, or otherwise converted to a living space and the city will have the
right to inspect the enclosed area. The non-conversion agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the Hamilton County Recorder, and a copy of the
recorded document shall be presented to the floodplain administrator prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



         (p)   A residential or nonresidential structure may be
constructed on a permanent landfill in accordance with the following:



            1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater
than one foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable
with either the Standard or Modified Proctor Test method, which shall be
retained in the permit file.



            2.   The fill shall extend at least ten feet
beyond the foundation of the building before sloping below the FPG.



            3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion
and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or bulk heading. If
vegetative cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical.



            4.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow
of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



            5.   The top of the lowest floor including
basement shall be at or above the FPG.



            6.   Fill shall be composed of clean granular or
earthen material.



         (q)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be
installed or substantially improved on a site for more than 180 days must
meet one of the following requirements:



            1.   Manufactured homes to be placed on a site
outside a manufactured home park, in a new manufactured home park, expansion
to an existing manufactured home park, or in an existing manufactured home
park on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result
of a flood must meet one of the following requirements:



               a.   The manufactured home shall be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the
FPG and securely anchored to an adequate foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



               b.   Fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures above.



               c.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting
not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not
required to have openings.



            2.   Manufactured homes to be placed on a site in
an existing manufactured home park that has not been substantially damaged by
a flood:



               a.   The manufactured home shall be elevated
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



               b.   Fully enclosed areas formed by
foundation and other exterior walls below the FPG shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit
of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls as required for elevated structures above.



               c.   Flexible skirting and rigid skirting
not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured home are not
required to have openings.



            3.   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall
either:



               a.   Be on site for less than 180 days; or



               b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway
use (defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



               c.   Meet the requirements for manufactured
homes as stated above.



         (r)   Relief from the elevation or dry floodproofing
standards may be granted for accessory structures. Such structures must meet
the following standards:



            1.   Shall not be used for human habitation.



            2.   Shall be constructed of flood resistant
materials.



            3.   Shall be constructed and placed on the lot to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.



            4.   Shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation.



            5.   Service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the FPG.



            6.   Shall be designed to allow for the entry and
exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls as required for elevated structures above.



         (s)   Construction of new critical facilities shall be,
to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction
of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no
feasible alternative site is available. Those facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the
site. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



      (12)   Permit and data standards and requirements.



         (a)   Standards for identified floodway.  The floodway
is an extremely dangerous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which
carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. If the site
is an identified floodway, the floodplain administrator shall require the
applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for
a permit for construction in a floodway. Under I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction, or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing, paving, and similar activities undertaken before the actual start
of construction of the structure. These regulations will not apply to any use
that is exempted from permitting requirements under the provisions of I.C.
14-28-1. No action shall be taken by the floodplain administrator until a
permit or letter of authorization, when applicable, has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in
the floodway. Upon receipt, the floodplain administrator may issue a local
building permit provided the provisions of the local floodplain ordinance
have been met. The local building permit cannot be less restrictive than the
permit for construction in a floodway issued by the Indiana Department of
Natural Resources. However, if the language of our floodplain ordinance has
more restrictive regulations they shall take precedence. Within the floodway
identified on the FIRM or engineering analysis:



            1.   No development shall be allowed, which acting
alone or in combination with existing or future development, that will
adversely affect the efficiency of, or unduly restrict the capacity of the
floodway. This adverse effect is defined as an increase in the elevation of
the regulatory flood of at least fifteen-hundredths (0.15) of a foot as
determined by comparing the regulatory flood elevation under the project
condition to that under the natural or pre-floodway condition as proven by
hydraulic analyses.



            2.   For all projects involving channel
modifications or fill (including levees) the applicant shall submit the data
and request that the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) revise the
regulatory flood data.



         (b)   Standards for identified fringe.  If the site is
located in an identified fringe the floodplain administrator may issue the
local building permit provided the provisions of this chapter have been met.
The top of the lowest floor of any new or substantially improved structure
shall be at or above the FPG.



         (c)   Standards for SFHA without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes:



            1.   If the drainage area upstream of the site is
greater than one square mile the floodplain administrator shall require the
applicant to forward the application, along with all pertinent plans and
specifications, to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and
comment. No action shall be taken until either the permit for construction in
a floodway or a floodplain analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 1%
annual chance flood elevation and the recommended FPG has been received from
the Indiana Department of Natural Resources. Upon receipt, the floodplain
administrator may issue a local building permit provided the provisions of
this chapter have been met.



            2.   If the drainage area upstream of the site is
less than one square mile the floodplain administrator shall require the
applicant to provide an engineering analysis showing the limits of the
floodplain and 1% annual chance flood elevation for the site. Upon receipt,
the floodplain administrator may issue the local building permit provided the
provisions of this chapter have been met.



            3.   The total cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the regulatory flood more than 0.10 of one
foot and will not increase flood damage or potential flood damages.



         (d)   Standards for flood prone areas.  All development
in known flood prone areas not identified on FEMA maps, or where no FEMA
published map is available, shall meet applicable standards as required in
the General Standards.



         (e)   If during the design stage it is determined that
the FIRM is incorrect, then a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) to correct the
FIRM is to be filed with FEMA. No development will be allowed until an
approved copy of the LOMR is received.



      (13)   Standards for subdivision proposals.



         (a)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage.



         (b)   All subdivision proposals shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



         (c)   All subdivisions proposals shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



         (d)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development which includes either 50
lots or five acres.



         (e)   All subdivision proposals shall minimize
development in the SFHA. All the property identified in the SFHA shall not be
counted towards overall acreage when determining permitted density.



         (f)   All subdivision proposals shall ensure safe access
into/out of the SFHA for pedestrians and vehicles, especially emergency
responders.



      (14)   Nonconforming uses.  Uses legally existing in the FH
District as of the effective date of this chapter shall be considered legal
nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   No nonconforming use in the FH District and
located in an identified floodway may be altered or enlarged without a permit
for construction in a floodway from Natural Resources.



         (b)   A nonconforming use in a FH District may be
altered, enlarged, or extended, on a one time only basis, provided such
alteration, enlargements, or extensions do not increase the value of the
building or structure, excluding the value of land, by more than 40% or its
pre-improvement market value, unless such building or structure is
permanently changed to a conforming use.



         (c)   Any nonconforming use in the FH District which is
damaged by flood, fire, explosion, Act of God, or the public enemy may be
restored to its original dimensions and conditions, provided the cost of the
repair does not exceed more than 40% of the pre-damage assessment, excluding
the value of the land.



         (d)   Such uses may be granted variances subject to §
159.043(C),Variances, but may require additional notice requirements beyond
those required for uses in other districts.



      (15)   Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC).  In order for
buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC coverage as a "repetitive
loss structure" the National Reform Act of 1994 requires that the building be
covered by a contract for flood insurance and incur flood related damages on
two occasions during a ten year period ending on the date of the event for
which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
building at the time of each such flood event.



      (16)   Warning and disclaimer of liability.  The degree of
flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any liability on
the part of the City of Noblesville, the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources, or the State of Indiana, for any flood damage that results from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.



      (17)   Violations.  Failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, obtain a permit, comply with the requirements of a permit, or
conditions of a variance will be considered a willful act to increase flood
damages. The owner will be notified by the Planning Department that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended. In
addition, the owner is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and
therefore subject to the penalties and provision of § 159.999.



   (B)   Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Overlay.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the ZLL Zero Lot Line District
is to accommodate this unique form of development for smaller families and
affordable living as recommended by the Comprehensive Plan.  ZLL Districts
may be appropriate in developed areas and for unusual parcels, as further
described below.  There is no guarantee that approval of a ZLL development
will be granted.  The Commission may deny a ZLL request that is not
consistent or compatible with the surrounding uses and/or that the health,
safety, or general welfare of the immediate neighborhood or community is at
risk.  The principal purposes of the Zero Lot Line (ZLL) District are:



         (a)   To support a more efficient use of land, as
compared with the typical single family development, making available needed
housing at a more affordable cost;



         (b)   To encourage the design of dwellings that
integrate and relate internal-external living areas resulting in more
pleasant and enjoyable living facilities; by placing the dwelling against one
of the property lines, permitting the outdoor space to be grouped and
utilized to its maximum benefit;



         (c)   To promote scattered ZLL developments and not to
isolate all ZLL in a single area;



         (d)   To utilize ZLL to infill existing areas.



      (2)   Location.



         (a)   District in Which Permitted.  A Zero Lot Line
development district (ZLL) for one-family dwellings only, may be permitted in
the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 districts as an overlay district if approved
by the Plan Commission and Common Council following a public hearing subject
to § 159.044.



         (b)   Other Locational Criteria.  In addition to
division (B)(2)(a) of this section, the location of Zero Lot Line
developments shall be guided by the following criteria.  Such districts
shall:



            1.   Be located in an urbanized area where
sanitary sewer service and public water supply is available;



            2.   Provide common open space on site for the
occupants of the project or to contribute land or fees in lieu of land to the
governmental unit of jurisdiction;



            3.   Provide landscaping not normally provided in
conventional residential developments;



            4.   Be located on sites no more than ten acres;
provided, however, that larger ZLL developments may be allowed provided
recreational facilities are included within the development.



      (3)   Uses.



         (a)   Single Family Detached Dwellings on individually
platted lots shall be permitted.



         (b)   All dwelling units shall have at least a one car
attached garage.



         (c)   Detached accessory structures of any kind shall
not be permitted.



         (d)   Carports and utility storage structures shall be
permitted accessory uses if connected to the principal structure and the
required side and rear setbacks are followed.



         (e)   Fencing, walls, trellises, and other similar uses
may be used as connecting elements between one-family dwellings on adjacent
lots, subject to Site Plan Review.



      (4)   Bulk Requirements.



         (a)   Minimum Tract Sizes.  The minimum tract size
shall be five acres.  Usable or buildable space of any individual tract
shall be 75% of the total tract area.  (Lake areas may be included in the
required tract sizes; however, the lake area will not be included in
determining buildable tract size.)



         (b)   Maximum Density and Dwelling Unit Size.  The
maximum density is based upon which district the Zero Lot Line project is
proposed.  In the R-1 district, 4.48 units per acre are permitted; in the
R-2 district, 5.35 units per acre; in the R-3 district, 6.05 units per acre;
in the R-4 and R-5 districts, 7.25 units per acre are permitted. 
Arrangement of the units is somewhat flexible, however, no individual lot may
be smaller than 5,000 square feet.  Private streets, open spaces, recreation
areas or bodies of water shall not be used in calculating the net lot area. 
Dwelling unit sizes shall be similar to the adjacent development but in no
instance less than required by the base zoning district.



         (c)   Lot Width.  The minimum lot width for one-family
dwellings shall be 40 feet, except for corner lots where the minimum lot
width shall be 50 feet.



         (d)   Setbacks.



            1.   Front Yard or Corner Side Yard.  All
dwelling structures shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the property
line.



            2.   Rear Yard Adjacent to other ZLL
Development.  There shall be a minimum rear setback of ten feet.



            3.   Interior Side Yard Adjacent to other ZLL
Development.  The dwelling unit shall be placed on one interior side
property line with a zero setback, and the dwelling unit setback on the other
interior side property line shall be a minimum of ten feet, excluding the
connecting elements such as fences, walls, and trellises.  Patios, pools,
garden features and other similar elements shall be permitted within the ten
foot setback area, provided, however, no structure with the exception of
fences or walls, shall be placed within easements required by §
159.082(B).  No zero yard is allowed against a perimeter yard or against a
public right-of-way.



            4.   Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to Conventional
Development.  Where a ZLL development is adjacent to a conventional
subdivision, no structure shall be closer than 25 feet to the adjacent lot
line.



         (e)   Maximum Lot Coverage.  The total lot coverage
permitted for all buildings on a site shall not exceed 50% of the lot area,
including accessory uses.



         (f)   Building Height.  The maximum building height
shall not exceed two stories and 35 feet in height.



      (5)   Procedure for a ZLL District.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for a Zero Lot Line
Development shall be filed in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040.



         (b)   Site Plan Review.  Applications for a Zero Lot
Line Development shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to §
159.041.  The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic,
imagination, innovation and variety in the design process and insure the
congruity of the proposed development and its compatibility with the
surrounding area.



         (c)   Site Plan Review Criteria.  The following
criteria shall be considered for the Site Plan review of ZLL Districts:



            1.   Planning Studies.  Planning studies approved
by the Plan Commission that include development patterns or environmental and
other design criteria shall be utilized in the plan review process.



            2.   Definition of Private Outdoor Living
Spaces.  The Zero Lot Line unit shall be designed to integrate interior and
exterior living areas. The configuration of the exterior walls of the unit
shall define and enclose and/or partially enclose outdoor living areas.



            3.   Landscape.  Landscape shall be preserved in
its natural state insofar as is practical by minimizing removal of existing
vegetation. Landscaping shall be used to shade and cool, direct wind
movements, enhance architectural features, relating structure design to the
site, visually screen non-compatible uses, and ameliorate the impact of noise.



            4.   Buffers.  Architectural and/or landscape
elements that provide a logical transition to adjoining, existing, or
permitted uses shall be provided.



            5.   Energy Conservation.  Design methods to
reduce energy consumption is encouraged.  Energy conservation methods may
include, but not be limited to, natural ventilation of structures, siting of
structures in relation to prevailing breezes and sun angles, insulation of
structures, use of landscape materials for shade and transpiration, and
orientation of breezes.



            6.   Graphics.  Outdoor graphics shall be
designed as an integral part of the overall design of the project.



            7.   Visual Access.  Visual access shall be
provided for the driver of an automobile backing out of the individual lot
into the adjacent roadway.  Dwelling units on corner lots shall be so
situated and set back as to provide unobstructed visual clearance at a
roadway intersection.



            8.   Private Open Space.  Open space intended for
the private use of each individual dwelling unit should be so located and
designed as to maximize its utility to the dwelling unit it serves and
maximize its privacy, especially in relation to adjacent dwelling units.



            9.   Trash Containers.  Trash containers shall be
screened and so designed as to be conveniently accessible to their users and
collectors.



            10.   Visual monotony created by excessive block
lengths shall be avoided.



         (d)   Commencement of Development.  Development may not
commence until after final approval of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
is received.  If development is not commenced within 12 months from the date
of approval of a site development plan, the approval thereof shall become
null and void and the same may not be developed in accordance with said plan;
provided, if development is permitted in stages, subsequent stages may be
commenced within 18 months after the completion of the previous stage;
otherwise, such subsequent stage may not be developed in accordance with the
previously approved plan and such approval shall be null and void. 
Commencement of construction shall include but not be limited to active and
continuous road improvement, excavation, grading and leveling, installation
of utilities and the like.



      (6)   Additional Requirements.



         (a)   Platting Requirements.  Each dwelling shall be
located on its own individual platted lot.  If areas for common use of
occupants of the development are shown on the plat, satisfactory arrangements
shall be made for the maintenance of the common open space and facilities as
provided in division (B)(6)(e) of this section.  The plat shall indicate the
zero lot lines and easements appurtenant thereto.



         (b)   Openings Prohibited on Zero Lot Line Side.  The
wall of the dwelling located on the lot line shall have no windows, doors,
air conditioning units or any other type of openings, provided, however, that
atriums or courts shall be permitted on the zero lot line side when the court
or atrium is enclosed by three walls of the dwelling unit and a solid wall of
at least eight feet in height is provided on the zero lot line.  Said wall
shall be constructed of the same material as exterior walls of the unit.



         (c)   Maintenance and Drainage Easements.  A perpetual
four foot wall maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to
the zero lot property line, which, with the exception of walls and/or fences,
shall be kept clear of structures.  This easement shall be shown on the plat
and incorporated into each deed transferring title to the property.  The
wall shall be maintained in its original color and treatment unless otherwise
agreed to in writing by the two affected lot owners.  Roof overhangs may
penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of 24 inches, but the
roof shall be so designed that the water runoff from the dwelling placed on
the lot line is limited to the easement area.



         (d)   Trees.  Yard trees shall be provided on the basis
of three trees for each platted lot. In addition, street shade trees shall be
provided along each side of the roadways at a minimum spacing of 40 feet on
center for private roads. In case of developments with public roads, the
trees may be placed on private lots in lieu of the public right-of-way
provided the 40 foot spacing and the rowing of trees are maintained.  This
shall be in addition to the three trees required for each platted lot. 
Existing trees shall be preserved to the maximum extent practical and shall
count towards meeting the total tree requirements.  Removal of any existing
trees shall be in accordance with the approval directives of the Plan
Commission.



         (e)   Common Open Space and Maintenance of Facilities. 
Common open space is not always required, unless the development is larger
than ten acres in size, see § 159.121(A), but is permitted and encouraged. 
Where the development is larger than ten acres, the required open space shall
include a recreational area consisting of at least two of the following:



            1.   A playground area with equipment;



            2.   A tennis court;



            3.   A basketball court;



            4.   A swimming pool.



Where common open space is provided, provisions satisfactory to the Plan
Commission shall be made to assure that non-public areas and facilities for
the common use of occupants of Zero Lot Line development shall be maintained
in a satisfactory manner, without expense to the general taxpayer of the city
or its zoning jurisdiction.  Such may be provided by the incorporation of an
automatic membership home association for the purpose of continually holding
title to such non-public areas and facilities and levying assessments against
each lot, whether improved or not, for the purpose of paying the taxes and
maintaining such common open space.



Such assessments shall be a lien superior to all other liens save and except
tax liens and first mortgage liens, which are amortized in monthly or quarter
annual payments over a period of not less than ten years.  Other methods may
be acceptable if the same positively provide for the proper and continuous
payment of taxes and maintenance without expense to the general taxpayers. 
The instrument incorporating such provisions shall be approved by the Plan
Commission Attorney as to form and legal sufficiency, before submission to
the Board of Public Works and Safety or the County Commissioners, and it
shall be recorded in the public records of Hamilton County, if satisfactory
to the Board of Works or the County Commissioners.



         (f)   Drainage.  On-site storm water detention or
retention is mandatory, but facilities may be shared.



   (C)   Historic Preservation (HP) Overlay District.



      (1)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Historic Preservation
Overlay District (HPO) is to further the purposes of this chapter and of the
Comprehensive Plan by preserving buildings which are important to the
education, culture, traditions and economic values of the city and to the
rehabilitation, conservation and redevelopment of the Downtown District, and
to afford the city, interested persons, historical societies, or
organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation
of such buildings.



This chapter promotes the conservation, protection, restoration,
rehabilitation, use, and overall enhancement of historic structures, sites,
and districts within the city and provides regulatory protection to areas of
the city that compliments, but does not supersede the contents of the
underlying zoning district.



      (2)   District Requirements.  The permitted and conditional
uses and bulk regulations for all Historic Preservation Overlay Districts
shall be pursuant to the underlying zoning district.  Any application for
new construction, additions, or alterations of a structure in an Historic
Preservation Overlay District must complete a site plan review process as
described in § 159.041.



      (3)   Procedure for HPO District.  A Historic Preservation
Overlay District may be created by either of the following means.



         (a)   The Common Council may designate an area as an
Historic Preservation District upon the recommendation of the Plan
Commission, following the adoption of a study delineating the historic
resource area.



         (b)   The petition by more than 50% of the property
owners in a proposed district shall cause the Common Council to consider an
overlay for the area petitioned, pursuant to § 159.044.



      (4)   Site Plan Review Criteria.  The following criteria
shall be considered for any Site Plan Review in the HPO District:



         (a)   Massing.  The massing of the building shall be
regulated by the Floor Area Ratio standards found in the underlying zoning
district.



         (b)   Height.  The height of a proposed building shall
be regulated by the underlying zoning district.



         (c)   Proportion of building’s front facade.  The
relationship of the height of a building to its width at the front elevation
shall be the same as currently exists within the district.



         (d)   Proportion of openings within the structure.  The
width of a window and its height shall match that currently existing within
the district.



         (e)   Rhythm of buildings along street.  The
relationship of a building to open space between it and adjoining buildings
shall be visually compatible to the buildings currently existing within the
district.



         (f)   Porches, entrances, and porch projections.  In
districts where porches, door platforms or steps, exterior stairs or decks,
or roof-walks and platforms are a characteristic element of building design,
these must be incorporated into the new design.  Porches must be at least
four feet deep.  A projection less than four feet in depth will be
considered a door platform.



         (g)   Materials and Texture.  The materials and
textures used in the design must be the same as those that predominate in the
district.  This applies to roofs, wall surfaces, and foundations.



         (h)   Roof Shapes.  The roof shape of a building must
be that which predominates in the district.  This shall apply to the shape,
pitch, overhang, dormers, skylights, and chimneys.



         (i)   Trims and Miscellaneous Details.  The trim and
miscellaneous details of a building must be that which predominates in the
district.  This shall apply to the trim, gutters and leaders, louvers,
vents, house lights, and public utilities.



         (j)   Garages, other accessory buildings.  In
residential districts, all garages must be detached and located at the rear
property line.



      (5)   Demolition.  Upon the receipt of an application for the
demolition of any structure within an Historic Preservation Overlay District,
the Director of Planning and Development will send public notice to the
property owners within the district and to the Indiana Historic Preservation
Agency.



   (D)   Planned Development (PD) Overlay Districts.



      (1)   Purpose.  This district is intended to provide
flexibility in specific locations for development which is in the public
interest and would not otherwise be permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
Such flexibility is provided to achieve certain comprehensive plan policies,
accommodate rapid changes in design and technology in the construction
industry, and address new and varied demands in the housing and commercial
markets, all in a manner that will be consistent with the objectives of the
City and the Townships.  This district is further intended to:



         (a)   Encourage a more creative approach in land and
building site planning.



         (b)   Encourage an efficient, aesthetic, and desirable
use of open space.



         (c)   Promote variety in the physical development
pattern of the community.



         (d)   Achieve flexibility and provide incentives for
development which will produce a wider range of choice in satisfying the
changing urban needs.



         (e)   Encourage renewal of older areas where new
development and restoration are needed to revitalize the area.



         (f)   Permit special consideration of property with
unique features, such as historical significance, unusual topography,
landscape amenities, size, and shape.



         (g)   Recapture bypassed land so poorly planned and
developed as to be a public liability.



         (h)   Simplify processing of development proposals for
developers and the Commission by providing for concurrent review of land use,
subdivision, public improvements, and site considerations.



      (2)   Applicability.  The provisions of this section shall
only apply to new development proposals.  It shall not apply to any Planned
Development Plan which is now fully or partially developed, nor to any such
development for which a final authorization has been granted pursuant to a
previous ordinance, provided, however, that a petitioner may, upon
application and approval of the Commission, become subject to all the
benefits and requirements of this section, subject to such rights as shall
have vested in the owners of the area affected by development under said
ordinance.



      (3)   Limitations on Flexibility of Planned Developments.  It
is not intended that the city automatically grant the initial plan of
development proposed by a petitioner.  The City Plan Commission shall
approve only such plans of development which are consistent with the public
benefits resulting from the planned development.  Therefore, the City Plan
Commission may require as a condition of approval and subsequent amendment of
the zoning map, any reasonable condition, limitation or design factor which
will promote proper development of a Planned Development.



      (4)   Classes of Planned Development Districts and Uses
Permitted.  This chapter provides for the following four classes of Planned
Development Districts:



         (a)   To designate a parcel of real property as a
Planned Development (PD) including the underlying zoning district;



         (b)   To specify uses or a range of uses permitted in
the Planned Development District;



         (c)   To specify development requirements in the Planned
Development District;



         (d)   To specify the documentation including an overall
plan and supporting documents;



         (e)   To specify any limitation(s) applicable to the
Planned Development District; and



         (f)   To specify any variation(s) from the underlying
zoning district requirements.



      (5)   Minimum Size of District.  No district shall be
established unless it contains the minimum area specified below:



         (a)   Residential Planned Development: Five acres.



         (b)   Mixed Use Planned Development: Ten acres.



         (c)   Commercial Planned Development: Three acres.



         (d)   Industrial Planned Development: Five acres.



      (6)   Development Standards.  A proposed Planned Development
Plan shall be designed to produce an environment of stable and desirable
character in keeping with the principles of good neighborhood design, and
must provide standards of open space, efficiency in street patterns, and
areas for parking adequate for the occupancy proposed, or equal to the
requirements of this chapter.  It must also provide for a development
density and related bulk and coverage characteristics in keeping with the
requirements of the comprehensive plan and reflecting that of the base zone
that contains the land subject to rezoning as a particular Planned
Development.



         (a)   Establishment of Site Development Intensity.



            1.   Before approval of a Preliminary Planned
Development Plan, a detailed determination of land use intensity shall be
declared.



            2.   Except as otherwise provided below, the
development standards for lots in a PD may be varied from one another and
from that allowed by the underlying base zone, provided that the density of
the overall PD parcel shall not exceed 100% of that allowed under the density
provisions of the base zone. The minimum base zone density permitted under
the PD process is as follows:



 


DISTRICT

 

ON PUBLIC SEWER

 

ON PRIVATE SEWER




SR

 

1 unit per acre

 

1 unit per 2 acres




R-1

 

2.4 units per acre

 

1 unit per acre




R-2

 

2.9 units per acre

 

1 unit per acre




R-3

 

3.5 units per acre

 

Not permitted




R-4

 

5 units per acre



(singe-family)



8 units per acre



(two-family)

 

Not permitted




R-5

 

14 units per acre

 

Not permitted




 



[In calculating the density, certain areas inappropriate for development
including but not limited to bodies of water, floodplains, and rights-of-way,
shall be discounted from the gross acreage.]



            3.   The Commission shall make a finding that said
intensity is consistent with the Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan
of current adoption and in the best interest of the City and surrounding
areas.



            4.   If such zoning is not related to the
character of development sought by the Planned Development, then the Plan
Commission shall determine whether to require a rezoning of the site to a
more appropriate zone or to establish a development intensity pursuant to
division (D)(6)(d)2. of this section.



         (b)   Establishment of Peripheral Landscape Buffer
Yard.  A minimum 50-foot peripheral landscape buffer yard shall be provided
along the perimeter of the Planned Development District. The 50-foot
peripheral landscape buffer yard shall be maintained as common area, labeled
on the development plan/subdivision plat/parcel as common area/landscaping
buffer, and a minimum of 25-foot used exclusively for landscaping and
labeled. The declaration of covenants or other recordable instrument shall
state that the peripheral landscape buffer yard is common area and maintained
by the association or developer of said project. Exception to the minimum
buffer yard size requirements include those subdivisions or parcels abutting
an expressway or arterials and those subdivisions having rear yards abutting
a collector, arterial or expressway then those specific requirements apply as
set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance. A variety of landscaping
plants are required and shall adhere to § 159.185.



         (c)   Establishment of Maximum Height, Building Size. 
Maximum heights and maximum/minimum building sizes shall be as required in
the base zone unless modified by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Common Council as part of the Preliminary Plan approval, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.



         (d)   Establishment of Other Site Development
Regulations.



            1.   Other site development regulations, including
but not limited to parking, signs, accessory uses, landscape requirements,
environmental standards, flood plain protection, and public and private
infrastructure shall be as required in the base zone, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.



            2.   The Plan Commission may recommend, and the
Common Council may authorize, exceptions to other applicable regulations of
this chapter controlling development within the boundaries of a Planned
Development, provided that the Plan Commission shall find that such exception
shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site plan no less
beneficial to the tenants or occupants of such development, as well as the
neighboring property, than would be obtained under the regulations of this
chapter for buildings developed on separate zoning lots.



      (7)   Procedure.  The authorization of a Planned Development
shall require approval of a sketch plan, preliminary development plan and
detailed development plan as stipulated in this section.



         (a)   Sketch Plan.



            1.   Upon petition by the owners of the area
involved in the petition, or upon a petition initiated by the Commission, a
sketch plan for any area proposed for a Planned Development shall be
presented to the Director of Planning and Development.  The sketch plan may
be an approximate drawing but it shall be prepared in a manner which will
explain the features to be contained and which would allow the testing of
engineering feasibility.



            2.   Two copies of the concept plan of the
proposal shall be presented to the Director or his or her designee containing
the following information:



               a.   Proposed locations, amounts, and types
of uses within the area proposed to be developed.



               b.   Proposed plan for handling vehicular
traffic, parking, sewage disposal, drainage, water supply, perimeter
treatment of the site, and other pertinent development features.



               c.   Preliminary layout at a scale not to
exceed 1" = 60', illustrating streets, structures, open space, lots,
drainage, and other elements basic to the proposal in relationship to
existing site conditions.



               d.   If the Planned Development is intended
to supersede an original plat being vacated, the original plat shall be shown
by dotted lines in relationship to the proposed plan.  The new plan shall be
clearly shown in solid lines.



               e.   The plan shall show the ownership and
zoning and use of adjacent land and of the area proposed to be developed. 
In case of a petition by owners, the plan shall show the property within the
proposed development which they own.



               f.   Proposed deed covenants, in general
terms, proposed to be made part of the Planned Development Plan.



               g.   A complete set of color, 360-degree
elevations detailing the front, rear, and opposite side views of each
proposed above-ground structure. Key exterior elements, such as siding, roof,
windows, chimney, and the like must he rendered in sufficient detail and
accompanied by clear descriptions of materials, colors, and textures. A
percentage breakdown of the elevations proposed should be submitted along
with the elevation drawings. These elevations must be accompanied by a
detailed set of covenants that outline proposed architectural details.  The
covenants shall also outline the procedure for review of future additions,
alterations and accessory structures to the prospective homes.  (This item
is required only if the PD has a residential component.)



               h.   A complete set of 360-degree renderings
detailing the conceptual theme of homes to be constructed. These renderings
must be accompanied by a detailed set of covenants that outline proposed
architectural details.  The covenants shall also outline the procedure for
review of future additions, alterations and accessory structures to the
prospective homes.  (This item is not required if division (D)(7)(a)2.g. of
this section is submitted. Acceptance of this item in lieu of division
(D)(7)(a)2.g. of this section is solely within the discretion of the ARB).



               i.   A completed ARB review checklist. (This
item is required only if the PD has a residential component)



               j.   A statement of development sequence and
timetable.



            3.   The petitioner shall meet with the Director
of Planning and Development or his or her designee to discuss the concept
plan, its relationship to the requirements of the comprehensive plan, other
public policy, and best planning practices.



         (b)   Preliminary Development Plan.



            1.   Purpose.  A Preliminary Development Plan is
required for the purposes of establishing basic goals and policies, bulk and
architectural standards, variations/waivers from the underlying zoning
district standards and layout of the proposed Planned Development.



            2.   Submission of Application.



               a.   The petitioner shall refer to the
Schedule of Meeting Dates and submit the completed application, filing fee,
and supporting documentation for consideration by the Technical Advisory
Committee, Architectural Review Board (if applicable) and the Plan Commission.



               b.   All drawings shall be submitted on a
minimum paper size of 24 x 36 inches and drawn to a scale of 1" = 40'
maximum. The landscaping plans shall be drawn to a scale of 1" = 20' maximum.



               c.   Submission of Materials: The applicant
shall prepare and submit 25 copies of the information outlined below. The
maximum plan size shall be 24 x 36 inches. At least five of these plans are
to be reduced to no larger than 11 x 17 inches. All plans should be drawn to
scale, scale noted, fully dimensioned, and drawings labeled. Each set of
plans must include the following:



                  i.   Written application for approval
of a Planned Development to be made on forms available from the Director of
Planning and Development and in the manner prescribed by the City Plan
Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by a written description of
the project. The length of the description will vary with the size of the
project; however, it is very important that the description include the
design concept, the rationale for the design, the project proposal in written
language, the relation of existing conditions on-site, and the existing and
proposed uses.



                  ii.   Proposed maximum site
development intensity and demonstration that it is in keeping with the
comprehensive plan and will not exceed 100% of the base zone.



                  iii. A list of requested exceptions
including justifications from the requirements of the base zone.



                  iv.   Site (development) plans of the
Planned Development shall show such designations as proposed streets, all
buildings and their yards and uses common open space, recreation facilities,
parking areas, service areas, floodways, detention/retention facilities, and
other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development.



                  v.   Character: Explanation of the
character of the Planned Development and the reasons why it has been planned
to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations.  This item shall
include a specific explanation of how the proposed Planned Development meets
the objectives of all adopted land use policies which affect the land in
question.



                  vi.   Ownership: Statement of present
and proposed ownership of all land within the project, including the
beneficial owners of a land trust.



                  vii.   Schedule: Development schedule
indicating:



                     (aa)   Stages in which project
will be built, with emphasis on area, density, use and public facilities,
such as open space to be developed with each stage.  Each stage shall be
described and mapped as a unit of the project.  Overall design of each unit
shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material.



                     (bb)   Dates for beginning and
completion of each stage.



                  viii.  Service Facilities: Information
on all service facilities, driveways, private streets, paths and off-street
parking facilities.



                  ix.   Architectural Plans:
Architectural plans for all residential and nonresidential buildings shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the
development, and the design of the buildings. Key exterior elements such as
masonry, siding, roof, windows, chimney, etc. must be rendered in sufficient
detail and accompanied by clear descriptions of materials, colors, and
textures. 360-degree colored elevations are required and submitted on a
minimum paper size of 24 x 36 inches including the height, materials used,
and colors.  A percentage breakdown of each elevation as proposed within the
subdivision should be submitted along with the elevation drawings. A sample
materials board and floor plan are required.  All building elevations for
residential planned developments shall be reviewed by the Architectural
Review Board who shall comment upon the proposed plans and forward a
recommendation to the Plan Commission for their consideration.



                  x.   Facilities Plan: Preliminary
Development Plans and feasibility reports for:



                     (aa)   Roads, including
classifica-tion, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, and construction
details.



                     (bb)   Sidewalks/trails
including those trails indicated on the Noblesville Alternative
Transportation Plan.



                     (cc)   Sanitary sewers.



                     (dd)   Storm drainage.



                     (ee)   Water supply system.



                     (ff)   Street lighting.



                     (gg)   Public utilities.



                     (hh)   Proposed development
amenities (i.e. parks, playgrounds, pools, and the like).



                  xi.   Landscape Concept Plan:  A
general planting plan for the site showing landscape intent, types of plant
material to be provided, intensity and scale of landscape with site details
where appropriate to fully explain the concept. The landscape concept should
be provided at the same scale of the overall site plan. All existing trees
over four inches in diameter shall be indicated on the development plans.
Retention of all trees is encouraged, and any tree larger than 12 inches in
diameter should not be removed.



                  xii. Traffic Analysis:  If requested by
the Director of Planning and Development or the Plan Commission, a study of
the impact caused by the Planned Development on the street and highway
systems operating in the city.



                  xiii. Environmental Assessment:  If
requested by the Director of Planning and Development, a study of the impact
upon natural vegetation, watercourses, topography, noise, lighting and
another features as identified by the Department of Planning and Development.



                  xiv.   Ordinance: An ordinance shall
be submitted for consideration by the Plan Commission and Common Council
which outlines all standards and uses requested, bulk standards and
variations. The ordinance shall include as appendices and commitments all
drawings and renderings used in presentation of the application.



                  xv.   All drawings and plans shall be
submitted to the Planning Department on a CD or DVD as a Portable Document
Format (PDF), Version 7 or later at the time of submission of the application.



            3.   Preliminary Development Plan Review.  The
Director of Planning and Development or designee shall coordinate a review of
the Preliminary Development Plan materials to include review by all relevant
departments, Technical Advisory Committee, and the Archi-tectural Review
Board (ARB). Written findings and recommendations will be submitted to the
Plan Commission.



            4.   Public Hearing.



               a.   The Plan Commission shall hold a public
hearing on each application for approval of a Planned Development Zone in
accordance with § 159.044.



               b.   The Commission may approve the plan
submitted, amend and approve the plan as amended, imposing any reasonable
conditions upon its approval, including the recording of covenants or
disapprove the plan.  If approved, the Preliminary Development Plan, with
any amendments, shall be stamped “Approved Preliminary Development Planned
Development” and signed by the President and the Secretary of the Plan
Commission.  One copy shall be permanently retained in the office of the
Plan Commission.



            5.   Action by the Common Council.  The Common
Council shall act upon the recommendation within 30 days after receipt of the
Plan Commission’s report.  The Common Council may approve, approve with
modifications, refer back to the Plan Commission, disapprove, or provide
written explanation to the petitioner on why an extension is required for
Common Council action.  The time period for action shall be exclusive of any
time extensions or continuances requested by the petitioner. Common Council
action shall be based upon the record of the Plan Commission.



            6.   Effect of Preliminary Development Plan
Approval.  Approval of the Preliminary Development Plan for a Planned
Development shall not constitute approval of the Planned Development Detailed
Plan.  Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the concepts
and details of the Preliminary Development Plan of the Planned Development
and the proposed map amendment, which are set forth in the Application for
Approval of the Planned Development.  It shall also be deemed as a specific
guide to the preparation of final documents which are required as part of the
Application for Approval of the Detailed Development Plan. Further, it
indicates approval of the details set forth in the application, and a
commitment by the applicant to such details.



            7.   Recording of Preliminary Development Plan
Approval.  Upon approval of the Preliminary Development Plan by the Common
Council, the conditions, modifications, density premiums and exceptions, if
any, shall be indicated on the plan shown in the application.  It is the
applicant’s financial responsibility to pay for the formal recording of
this document and to return the original recorded ordinance to the City
Clerk-Treasurer’s office within 30 days of approval.  The plan shall be
kept on file in the office of the Director of Planning and Development and no
permits shall be issued for the subject development until proof of recording
is submitted.



         (c)   Detailed Development Plan.



            1.   The purpose of the Detailed Development Plan
is to specifically designate the land subdivided into conventional lots or
blocks as well as the division of other lands into common open space areas,
floodplain areas, and building sites.  The Detailed Development Plan shall
show the exact location of each building to be constructed, and a designation
of the specific internal use for each building.  The Detailed Development
Plan also informs all who deal with the Planned Development of the
restrictions placed upon the land, and acts as a zoning control device.



            2.   Time Period for Detailed Development Plan
Approval.



               a.   Approval of a Detailed Development
Plan, or first phase of that plan, shall be obtained within six months after
adoption of the Preliminary Development Plan by the Common Council. 
However, the Common Council may grant an extension of time for such period as
it deems in the public interest.



               b.   In the event that a detailed
development plan is not approved within the six month period or an approved
extension of time, the action of the Common Council, adopting the relevant
Preliminary Development Plan as a particular class of Planned District shall
be declared null and void, and the land shall revert to the category or
categories it held before being zone as a “PD” District subject to
submission of approved Detailed Development Plan.



            3.   Submission of Application.



               a.   Following Common Council approval of
the Preliminary Development Plan, an application for Detailed Development
Plan may be submitted.  This application and supporting documentation shall
be shall be reviewed by the Director of Planning and Development or his or
her designee for compliance with the approved Preliminary Development Plan
and sign a copy of the detailed plan, if it is in substantial compliance with
the adopted Preliminary Development Plan and subject to the requirements
below.



               b.   Submission of Materials: The applicant
shall prepare and submit 15 copies of the following plans and documents:



                  i.   Written application for approval
of the Final Detailed Development Plan is to be made on forms available from
the Department of Planning and Development and in the manner prescribed by
the Plan Commission.



                  ii.   Final Detailed Development Plan:
A Final Detailed Development Plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer
and architecture including civil drawings (signed and sealed), landscaping
plans, lighting plans, signage plans, and elevations including the following:



                     (aa)   The land subdivided into
conventional lots as well as the division of other lands, not so treated,
into common open space areas and building areas;



                     (bb)   The location of all
buildings to be constructed and the specific internal uses of each building,
structure, and use of land;



                     (cc)   Infrastructure
improvements including construction details, showing center line elevations,
pavement type, curbs, gutters, culverts, etc.;



                     (dd)   Such additional
information as the Common Council or the Plan Commission may have required
when approving the Preliminary Development Plan.



                  iii.   An accurate legal description
and survey of the entire area being developed as a part of the Planned
Development.



                  iv.   If subdivided lands are included
in the Planned Development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the
same form and meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat in
accordance with the City’s applicable regulations.



                  v.   An accurate legal description of
each separate unsubdivided use area, including open space.



                  vi.   Landscape Plan: A detailed
landscape planting plan for the site including a plant list containing the
common and botanical names, sizes, at the time of installation and at
maturity, and quantities of all plants, permanent signs, site lighting and
street fixtures.  Scale 1" = 20'.



                  vii.   A complete set of approved
360-degree color elevations of any proposed structures.



                  viii. Certifications, seals, and
sig-natures required for the dedication of land and recording of the document.



                  ix.   Tabulation on each separate
subdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings, number of
dwelling units per acre.



                  x.   Construction schedule.



                  xi.   Common Open Space Documents: All
common open space, at the election of the City, may be:



                     (aa)   Conveyed to a municipal
or public corporation; or



                     (bb)   Conveyed to a
not-for-profit corporation or entity established for the purpose of
benefiting the owners and tenants of the Planned Development or adjoining
property owners or any one or more of them.  All lands conveyed thereunder
shall be subject to the right of the grantee or grantees to enforce
maintenance and improvement of the common open space; or



                     (cc)   Guaranteed by a
restrictive covenant describing the open space and its maintenance and
improvement, running with the land for the benefit of residents of the
Planned Development or adjoining property owners and/or both.



                  xii.   Improvements—Guarantee of
Performance.  The owner and/or developer shall guarantee the completion of
all required improvements and facilities, as set forth in applicable city
regulations, except where varied  by this application of these procedures, 
whether said improvement or facilities shall become public or remain private,
by either completing the improvements in advance of approval of the Detailed
Site Plan or submitting irrevocable letters of credit in a form and from a
financial institution acceptable to the City’s legal department (or an
escrow department) in an amount equal to at least 110% of the construction
cost estimate approved at the time said improvements and facilities are
scheduled to be installed.



            4.   Staff Review.  The Director of Planning and
Development shall coordinate a review of the Detailed Development Plan to
include review by relevant City Departments and Technical Advisory
Committee.  If the Director of Planning and Development, upon review, finds
major changes on the Detailed Development Plans, he shall forward the plans
to the Plan Commission as per division (D)(13) of this section.



            5.   Appeal Procedure.  The Plan Commission may,
upon the applicant’s request, hear an appeal of the decision of the
Director of Planning and Development, in regard to the Detailed Development
Plan review action.  This appeal procedure is provided as a safeguard
against arbitrary, ill-considered, or erroneous administrative decisions. 
An application for appeal to the Plan Commission shall be filed no later than
30 days after the action being appealed.  The Plan Commission shall hold a
public hearing on the application in accordance with § 159.040.  The Plan
Commisson may reverse, affirm, wholly or partially modify the decision of the
Director of Planning and Development.



      (8)   Designation of Permanent Common Open Space.  No plan
for a Planned Development shall be approved, unless such plan provides for
permanent landscaped open space equivalent to the following types of Planned
Developments:



         (a)   Residential Planned Development: Twenty-eight
percent of gross acreage.



         (b)   Mixed Use Planned Development: Twenty-eight
percent of gross acreage.



         (c)   Industrial or Commercial Planned Development:
Twenty-two percent of gross acreage.



         (d)   Corporate Campus Planned Development: 
Twenty-five percent of gross acreage.



         (e)   The relief provided by this subsection should only
apply to:



            1.   Residential PD overlays for land which is
zoned Rl or R2.



            2.   There shall be two areas of land eligible for
the benefits in this subsection, which are referred to as Zone A and Zone B.



               A.   Zone A shall include land located
contiguous to, or has the point of the PD zone within 1,320 feet of a city
park, and will have direct pedestrian access to the city park prior to the
completion of the first residence in the PD.



               B.   Zone B shall include land which has a
point of the PD zone within 2,640 feet of a city park, and will have direct
pedestrian access to the city park prior to the completion of the first
residence in the PD.



               C.   This section shall only apply if the
city park is at least 20 acres of real estate.



         (f)   The developer of an eligible PD under §
159.109(H) may request a reduction in the permanent common open space within
the development by making Payments In Lieu of Open Space (PILOS) as provided
below.



         (g)   The PD may provide a maximum reduction of
landscape open space from 28% to 13% of the gross acreage of the project in
Zone A and 19% of the gross acreage of the project in Zone B.



         (h)   In exchange for the reduction in open space, the
developer shall, prior to the final approval of the preliminary development
of the project, enter into a PILOS Agreement. The PILOS Agreement shall be
recommended by the Director of Planning and approved by the Board of Public
Works and Safety of the City of Noblesville.



         (i)   The total amount of PILOS payments for the PD
shall equal the number of acres of open space reduced from a decrease in the
requirements in subsection (a) above, times 72% of the fair market value of
the developable land included in the PD. The valuation date shall be based on
the value of the land subsequent to the approval of the planned development,
and prior to any construction of the PD. The appraised value of the land
shall be substantiated by the developer through an appraisal by a licensed
appraiser. The appraised value shall be considered; but is not binding upon
the city in determining the value of the PILOS.



         (j)   The PILOS Agreement shall also describe the
improvements to the city park which will be constructed, or have been
constructed through use of the PILOS payments; the source of funds in
addition to the PILOS payments to fund the improvements, and a schedule for
completion of the park improvements funded fully, or partially, by the PILOS
payments.



         (k)   The PILOS payments shall be paid upon submission
of the secondary plats for any part of the PD. Each payment shall equal the
total PILOS for the entire PD, times the percentage of land in the secondary
plat compared to the entire PD. The city shall not finally approve a
secondary plat for any part of the PD unless the PILOS payments for that
section have been paid.



         (l)   All PILOS payments shall be deposited in a
non-reverting fund to be created by ordinance and shall only be used to pay,
or reimburse, the city all or part of the costs identified in the PILOS
Agreement.



      (9)   Covenants and Maintenance.



         (a)   Covenants shall be required by the Commission as
an ingredient for stability and longevity of the Planned Development Plan,
and shall set forth in detail provisions for the ownership and maintenance of
facilities held in common to insure continuity and conservation.  Covenant
provisions shall include special remedies in the event facilities held in
common are permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in a condition
consistent with the best interests of the City and Townships.  In such
event, the City shall take those remedial steps provided for.  A draft of
the covenants shall be submitted as part of the Preliminary Plan application
to the Plan Commission.



         (b)   The Plan Commission shall require the recording of
covenants for any reasonable public or semi-public purpose, including, but
not limited to, the allocation of land by the petitioner for public
thoroughfares, parks, schools, recreational facilities, and other public and
semi-public purposes wherever necessary in conformity with the Comprehensive
Plan and the Thoroughfare Plan of current adoption.  Such covenants shall
provide that if a governmental unit or agency thereof does not proceed with
acquisition of the allocated land within a specified period of time, the
covenants shall automatically terminate.  If such termination occurs, the
petitioner shall then submit for approval by the Plan Commission a modified
Detailed Development Plan for such land consistent with the approved
Preliminary Development Plan.  Such modified detailed site plans, when
approved, shall be treated in the same manner as approved detailed site plans
for an entire Planned Development Plan.



         (c)   The Plan Commission may require the recording of
covenants for any other reasonable purpose, including, but not limited to,
imposing standards for development of property in Planned Development Plan. 
Such development standards may include, but are not limited to, requirements
as to the following:



            1.   Lot area;



            2.   Floor area;



            3.   Ratios of floor space to land area;



            4.   Area in which structures may be built
(“Buildable area”), including areas for cluster type Residential
Development without lot lines;



            5.   Open space;



            6.   Setback lines and minimum yards;



            7.   Building separations;



            8.   Height of structures;



            9.   Signs;



            10.   Off-street parking and loading space;



            11.   Design standards;



            12.   Phasing of development.



         (d)   The petitioner shall provide financial assurance
for the satisfactory installation of all facilities in the form of bonds or
such other assurances as are required in the normal procedures of platting
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



         (e)   Adequate provision shall be made for private
organization with direct responsibility to, and control by, the property
owners involved to provide the operation and maintenance of all common
facilities including private streets jointly shared by such property owners,
if such facilities are a part of the Planned Development Plan.  In such
instance, legal assurances shall be provided which show that the private
organization is self-perpetuating and adequately funded to accomplish its
purposes.



         (f)   Common facilities which are not dedicated to the
public shall be maintained to standards assuring continuous and adequate
maintenance at a reasonable and non-discriminatory rate of charge to the
beneficiaries.  Common facilities not dedicated to the public shall be
operated and maintained at no expense to any governmental unit.



         (g)   All private streets shall be maintained by the
private organization in a manner that adequate access is provided at all
times to vehicular traffic, so that fire, police, health, sanitation, and
public utility vehicles conserve the properties contiguous or adjacent
thereto, and so that said vehicles will have adequate turning area.  Said
private streets shall be developed in accordance with this chapter.



      (10)   Changes in the Planned Development.



         (a)   A Planned Development shall be developed only
according to the approved and recorded Detailed Development Plan and all
supporting data. The recorded Detailed Development Plan and supporting data,
together with all recorded amendments, shall be binding on the applicants,
their successors, grantees and assigns and shall limit and control the use of
the premises (including the internal use of buildings and structures) and
location of structures in the Planned Development, as set forth therein.



         (b)   In the exercise of its continuing jurisdiction,
the Commission may from time to time modify the approved Detailed Development
Plan in a manner to be consistent with the approved Preliminary Development
Planned Development Plan to provide for circumstances and conditions
unforeseen at the time of original approval.  Such modifications shall
constitute major or minor changes which shall be acted upon as follows:



            1.   Major Change to Planned Development.  Major
changes, Amendment as defined in § 159.016 may be approved only by
submission of a new Preliminary Development Plan and supporting data, and
following the Preliminary Development Plan approval steps, holding of a new
public hearing and subsequent amendment of the Development Plan.



            2.   Minor Change to Planned Development.  The
Director of Planning and Development may approve minor changes to the Planned
Development as defined in § 159.016 that do not change the concept or intent
of the adopted preliminary development plan/ ordinance, governing agreements,
provisions, waivers, conditions, and/or stipulations, without going through
the Preliminary Development Plan approval steps.  Any minor changes approved
shall be properly recorded with the County Recorder or it shall be
automatically deemed a major change.



               a.   The following test as to the
acceptability of the change to an approved preliminary development plan under
a Minor Amendment includes:



                  i.   Is the proposed change
significant in terms of its magnitude in relation to the original approval;



                  ii.   Does the proposed change modify
any use that the development originally approved;



                  iii.   Would the proposed change
result in an impact either visually or in terms of an amenity;



                  iv.   Would the interests of any third
party that participated in the public hearing or received notice of the
original preliminary development plan/ordinance be disadvantaged in any way;



                  v.   Would there be any alteration to
the site boundary;



                  vi.   Would the proposed changes
reverse design improvements secured during the public hearing process;



                  vii.   Would there be any changes to
the external materials which would adversely affect the character or
appearance of the development or erode the quality to what was originally
approved; and



                  viii.   Is the proposed change
contrary to a condition, stipulation, provision, waiver, or governing
agreement of the original approval.



               b.   Process for Submitting a Minor
Change.  A minor change is administratively approved by the Director of
Planning and Development upon receipt of the following:



                  i.   A completed application;



                  ii.   A letter of explanation
outlining the request for each modification;



                  iii.   Single-paper copy of all plans
and other documents;



                  iv.   Digital format in PDF; and



                  v.   Filing fee.



            3.   Changes to Approved Architectural Plans. 
The Director of Planning and Development may approve changes to
Council-approved architectural plans if they are determined to meet the
intent of the originally approved plans and are substantially compliant with
those plans. In the event that the new plans are determined not to be
substantially compliant, an applicant may appeal for consideration by the
ARB, subject to § 159.031(B).



      (11)   Abandonment or Expiration.  Abandonment of a
development authorized under this section shall occur when one or more of the
following conditions occur:



         (a)   No improvements are made pursuant to the approved
Detailed Development Plan for 12 consecutive months, or upon the expiration
of two years from the approval date by the Commission of a Detailed
Development Plan.



         (b)   If a construction of public improvements,
including streets, parks, walkways, and utility installation identified in
the approved Detailed Development Plan is less than 50% completed in terms of
the approved development schedule.



         (c)   For a development which has not been completed
Common Council may either grant a time extension for such development not to
exceed one year increments, or initiate an amendment to revoke the Planned
Development Zoning and rezone the land to the base zone.



      (12)   Limitation on Rezoning.  The Plan Commission shall not
initiate any amendments to this chapter concerning the property involved in a
Planned Development Plan before completion of the development as long as
development is in conformity with the approved Detailed Development Plan, and
proceeding in accordance with the time requirements imposed herein.



      (13)   Standards for Review of Planned Development District
Applications.  No Planned Development District shall be approved unless the
applicant shall establish that the proposed development will meet each of the
criteria for a map amendment as listed in § 159.044, and the following
standards specific to Planned Developments.



         (a)   Conformity with City Policies and Ordinances.



            1.   The proposed development shall not injure the
use, value and enjoyment of the surrounding property in accordance with the
policies of the City, shall be consistent in all respects with the purpose,
intent, and applicable standards of this chapter and shall advance the
general welfare of its immediate vicinity and of the City as a whole.



            2.   Any deviation from the standard development
requirements included in this chapter shall be justified by the benefits and
design of the proposed development.



         (b)   Timely Progression of the Development.  The order
in which stages of development will likely proceed, and the time estimated to
complete the development and its various stages, should be based on a
reasonable schedule in which improvements may be substantially completed.



         (c)   Unified Ownership.  The entire tract or parcel of
land to be occupied by the proposed development shall be held in single
ownership, or if there are two or more owners, the application for such
proposed development shall be filed jointly by all such owners.  This shall
ensure that the property is developed as a unified whole.



         (d)   Site Design.  The location, configuration,
construction, manner and time of operation of off-street parking and loading
areas, service areas, circulation systems, entrances, exits, open space,
amenities, lighting, or other potentially detrimental influences shall be
designed to avoid adverse effects on: (1) residential uses within or
adjoining the development, (2) traffic congestion, and (3) hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



         (e)   Utilities.  The proposed development shall
provide, if possible, for underground installation of utilities (including
electricity and telephone) within both public ways and private extensions
thereof.  Provisions also shall be made for acceptable design and
construction of storm water facilities including grading, gutter, piping, and
treatment of turf and maintenance of facilities.



         (f)   Preservation and Maintenance of Open Space and
Amenities.  The Detailed Development Plan shall include provisions for the
ownership and maintenance of common open space and amenities, including all
improvements thereto, as are reasonably necessary to ensure their continuity,
maintenance, and operation in accordance with predetermined standards. 
Also, to ensure that remedial measures will be available to the City of
Noblesville if such open space, amenities, or other improvements are
permitted to deteriorate or are not maintained in a condition consistent with
the best interests of the planned development, its immediate vicinity, or the
City as a whole.



   (E)   (1)   Purpose. The Village Center Planned Development
District allows for specific categories of uses, structures, and site design
criteria that serve to implement the Village Center Plan. The Village Center
nodes as designated per the adopted Comprehensive Master Plan shall be
utilized for the Village Center Planned Development District locations. The
Village Center Planned Development District is intended to provide for a
variety of limited commercial neighborhood-serving uses such as daily retail
and convenience needs, and second story or above residential units and/or
other commercial/office uses while maintaining compatibility with the
surrounding land uses through the Preliminary Development Plan approval
process and the design standards. The Village Center Planned Development
District shall benefit the general health and welfare of the area residents
and protect the environment by accommodating a more compact development that
reduces the impacts of sprawl and provides connectivity, pedestrian/bicycle
access, and parking and/or landscaping flexibility.



      (2)   Intent.



         (a)   Provide an area that accommodates the philosophy
of work, live, shop, and recreate in close proximity.



         (b)   Provide convenient and general merchandise for
residents within a two-mile radius.



         (c)   Provide compact, walkable centers for adjacent
neighborhoods.



         (d)   Provide places for social interaction and
recreation.



         (e)   Develop land use arrangements that consider
compatibility of adjacent activities.



         (f)   Encourage a design that enhances pedestrian
interest and provides a pleasant and diverse pedestrian experience.



         (g)   Encourage and develop connections between
environmental quality and economic vitality.



         (h)   Support the development of comprehensive
pedestrian and bicycle network linkages to and between residential and
commercial areas and the adjacent neighborhoods.



      (3)   Location and size.



         (a)   The newly established district shall contain
between six to 20 acres.



         (b)   Locations of Village Center Planned Development
Districts are per the nodes on the Adopted Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map.



      (4)   Uses.



         (a)   Commercial uses.



            1.   Fire/police substation.



            2.   Government offices (satellite).



            3.   Post office (satellite).



            4.   Gallery/museum.



            5.   Bar, tavern, brewery.



            6.   Financial, insurance, real estate services.



            7.   Launderette.



            8.   Dry cleaners.



            9.   Offices of medical, dental, or other health
care practitioners.



            10.   Professional and technical services.



            11.   Personal services.



            12.   Convenience store.



            13.   Cafe.



            14.   Retail sales and service (less than
5,000-square feet of gross floor area per business use on a single
floor/level).



            15.   Restaurant (no drive-thrus).



            16.   Pharmacy.



            17.   Bakery.



            18.   Outdoor seating associated with restaurants
and cafes.



            19.   Artist live/work space.



            20.   Outdoor markets within open space area.



         (b)   Residential uses.



            1.   A.   Residential units above first floor.



               B.   Multi-story assisted living units
(separate building).



               C.   Townhomes or multi-story condominiums
(separate building).



            2.   Separate residential buildings shall only be
constructed if it is a part of the overall development plan that includes the
construction of commercial/office buildings.



      (5)   Bulk standards.



         (a)   Commercial uses.



            1.   Minimum/maximum structure height:  24/35 feet



            2.   Minimum/maximum front yard setback from
interior roadway:  0/15 feet



            3.   Minimum/maximum side and rear yard
setbacks:  0/10 feet



            4.   Minimum setback from arterial roadway as per
landscape buffer requirements in §§ 159.180 et seq., Landscaping and
Screening.



         (b)   Residential uses.



            1.   Minimum/maximum structure height and yard
setbacks as per above



            2.   Minimum/maximum density:  8 to 20 units per
acre



      (6)   Parking requirements. Parking areas shall be designed to
maintain a pedestrian-friendly environment. Large parking areas shall be
located behind the buildings. Diagonal parking shall be encouraged adjacent
to the building and along the interior roadways. Parking standards for a
specific use shall apply to the uses in the Village Center District as per
§§ 159.140 et seq., Off-Street Parking and Loading. Reductions to the
required parking and alternative methods of meeting the parking requirements
shall be encouraged as follows:



         (a)   Shared on-site parking. 



            1.   Applicants may propose a reduction in the
parking requirements based on an analysis of peak demands for the
non-competing uses. Up to 75% of the parking requirements for the predominant
use may be waived by the Plan Commission and Council if the applicant can
demonstrate that the peak demands for the two uses do not overlap.



            2.   Applicants may propose a reduction in the
parking requirements based on an analysis of peak demands for the competing
uses which do overlap.  Up to 50% of the parking requirements for the
predominant use may be waived by the Plan Commission and Council.



         (b)   Off-site parking.



            1.   Off-site parking shall be located within 500
feet of the property for which it is being requested.



            2.   Off-site parking shall be subject to a
legally binding agreement by all property owners and presented to the Plan
Commission as a condition of the Preliminary Development Plan. The agreement
shall be recorded in the Hamilton County Recorder's Office. Should the
agreement expire in a specified timeline, the current owners shall continue
to provide the Planning Department evidence that the agreement has been
extended and recorded.



            3.   Bicycle parking. Two bicycle parking or
storage spaces shall be created for each two commercial uses and be located
as close as possible to the building entrance(s). Shared bicycle parking
facilities may be proposed with another commercial use within the same block
and shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Council.



      (7)   Design standards. The following design standards shall
apply to the Village Center Planned Development District. Buildings shall
follow the stylistic practice of traditional American commercial architecture
and be of a design similar to or compatible with traditional architecture in
terms of scale, massing, roof shape, spacing and exterior materials. The
design standards are intended to promote quality development consistent with
the surrounding land uses, human scale, plaza/open space areas, and
pedestrian/bicycle-oriented village characteristics.



         (a)   Buildings shall follow the traditional practice of
commercial facades being constructed in a continuous plane thus meeting the
front yard setbacks as established. No building facades shall project forward
or back from the plane established by adjacent and nearby buildings by more
than ten feet. Building designs shall not mix elements from different styles.
Buildings should present diverse but consistent appearances. Changes in
materials, color or relief are acceptable when used as accents to the primary
materials, color, and walls. Use of visual features such as awnings,
ornamental doors and windows, and architectural details are encouraged to
create diversity.



         (b)   Building materials may include but are not limited
to wood, brick, stone, or high-quality brick face or high quality stone face.
Alternate materials such as fiber cement siding (composite of sand, cement,
and cellulose materials) and other similar modern materials may be
appropriate when they are used in the same way as traditional materials and
shall match the historical practice when those elements were made of wood. 
Vinyl, unfinished metal or fiberglass and reflective materials such as
porcelain enamel or sheet metal are prohibited materials.



         (c)   All buildings shall include a base, body, and
crown. Transitions between these areas should occur at floor changes or at
the cornice line of the roof. Transitions may be created by material or color
changes or the use of ornamental features. The architectural style and
materials shall be consistent on all sides of a building.



         (d)   Ground floor commercial building facades shall
contain transparent windows encompassing a minimum of 40% of the facade
surface. The second story or above building facades shall contain transparent
or faux windows encompassing at least 25% of the facade surface.



         (e)   Multiple non-residential tenants located on the
first floor of the building shall articulate the facade in a manner that
distinguishes the location of each tenant with decorative, raised or
depressed vertical surfaces, variations in acceptable signage, awnings,
colonnades or arcades.



         (f)   Maximum commercial building length shall not
exceed 200 feet.



         (g)   Roofs shall be either pitched between 6:12 to
12:12 or be flat with parapets or decorative cornices.



         (h)   Mechanical equipment located on the roofs shall be
screened, organized and designed as a component of the roof design and not
appear to be a leftover or add-on element. All permanent mechanical equipment
at ground level and roof-mounted shall be screened from public view and from
the views of surrounding properties and ways.



         (i)   Awnings and canopies shall be compatible with the
architectural style of the building and compatible with the existing awnings
on adjacent buildings. Colors shall be muted earth tones and patterns shall
be prohibited.



      (8)   Site design.



         (a)   Buildings shall be arranged in a manner that
optimizes the ability of adjacent residents and consumers to access public
spaces and pedestrian amenities.



         (b)   Buildings shall be oriented toward each other in a
way that minimizes conflicts between pedestrians and automobiles.



         (c)   Open space provided shall be designed as a public
gathering place. Arcades, courtyards, parks, greenspace or other common areas
shall be located in a manner that connects buildings to each other and to
public/private sidewalks without interruption from parking areas or
automobile travel lanes to the greatest particular extent possible.



         (d)   Features used to create open space areas may
include, without limitation, fixed benches, fixed tables, fountains,
pathways, bikeways, period lighting, shade trees, perennial gardens and other
similar fixtures or features.



         (e)   Open space ownership and maintenance shall require
the applicant to document the ownership of said common areas and provide a
detailed maintenance schedule to ensure the long term care of open space and
shall be approved by the Plan Commission and Council.



         (f)   Where residential neighborhoods abut the parcel
devoted to the Village Center Planned Development District appropriate
transitional features shall be used and may include landscaping, open space,
and clearly defined and designed pedestrian features.



         (g)   Pedestrian connections shall be established
between any rear parking areas and the sidewalk areas in front of the
building.



         (h)   Minimum width of sidewalk is ten feet.
Pedestrian-friendly features such as patios, courtyards, outdoor seating,
and/or porches shall be provided.



         (i)   Parking for the commercial structures shall be
primarily along the internal streets (diagonal) or at the rear of the
building for larger parking areas.



         (j)   Private drives behind the buildings must provide
shared cross-access agreements to be submitted to the Plan Commission and
Council.



         (k)   Impervious surface maximum is 85%.



      (9)   Signs.



         (a)   Primary signs include wall, canopy, window, and/or
blade signs per commercial use:



            1.   Wall Sign - Sign shall not exceed 20% of the
signable wall area, unless windows, doors, awning, and other architectural
details make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable wall area.



            2.   Blade Sign - four square feet maximum size



            3.   Canopy/Awning Sign - 20% of the area of the
angled face constructed of cloth or canvas no reflective or glossy materials
or illuminated plastic.



            4.   Window Sign (vinyl, gold leaf or
substantially similar materials)



               A.   Second floor tenant - 20% of the total
window area on which the sign is located.



               B.   Ground floor tenant - 15% of the total
window area.



         (b)   One ground sign is permitted not exceeding 12
square feet, maximum height four feet and containing the name of the
development only and a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way provided it
does not interfere with easements or vision corner clearance requirements. A
landscape bed shall be provided around the base of the ground sign radiating
a minimum distance of four feet from the sign base.  Landscaped areas shall
be substantially covered with annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs,
ornamental grass, and ornamental trees providing a mixture of the above.



         (c)   All signs shall be externally lit.



         (d)   Signs shall be made of materials consistent with
the character of the buildings and district. Materials may include painted or
natural wood, stone, copper, brass, galvanized steel, or engraved facade
surface.



         (e)   Maximum of two signs per tenant based on the
standards above. No tenant shall have the same type of sign on the same
facade.



      (10)   Landscaping.  Landscaping should enhance but not
obscure buildings and vistas while walkways should take advantage of, and
derive access to views, open space, and environmental features that are
important to the Village Center Planned Development District. It is
encouraged that the landscape design enhance the pedestrian environment and
complement the building and site design.



         (a)   1.   Building base landscaping shall be
provided at the base of all buildings elevations that do not directly abut
hardscapes such as sidewalks or plazas/public greenspace. Building base
landscaping shall contain a minimum of one small shade tree, one ornamental
tree, and six shrubs per 100 linear feet of stand-alone building perimeter.
If building base landscaping requirements cannot be installed due to its
proximity to a hardscape, then landscaping may be installed elsewhere to
fulfill the building base landscaping requirements as approved by the Plan
Commission and Council.



            2.   Alternate locations (adjacent to site)
include interior courtyards, public parks, plazas, parking lots, alleys,
and/or roof gardens/green roofs. Other suitable alternatives include window
boxes, planters, trellises, climbing vines, espaliered trees and shrubs, and
roof gardens. Sculpture groupings may also be used as a part of the
landscaping. A range of landscaping materials, trees, deciduous and evergreen
shrubs, ornamental grasses, groundcovers, and/or seasonal flowers shall be
provided for color and visual interest.



         (b)   Planters shall be constructed of masonry or stone
and have a minimum height of 30 inches and the minimum height of shrubs
and/or ornamental grasses shall be 12 inches at the time of planting.



         (c)   Window boxes with flowers and freestanding
planters of a scale and character appropriate to the street and main
structure are encouraged.



         (d)   Parking lot landscaping is one tree for every 50
linear feet of adjacent right-of-way. A landscaping strip sufficient to
maintain the landscaping shall be provided and covered with groundcover or
mulch. A parking lot abutting an arterial road shall also provide shrubs
three feet on center, staggered, at a minimum height of 30 inches at the time
of planting. A decorative fence may be substituted for the shrubs required in
the perimeter parking lot landscaping or a combination thereof.



         (e)   Internal parking lot landscaping shall include one
parking island (minimum size 180-SF) for every 20 parking spaces to include
one small shade tree and vegetative ground cover.



         (f)   Twenty percent of the lot area must be in
landscaping including a combination of building base landscaping, perimeter
parking lot landscaping, interior parking lot landscaping, hardscape, planter
boxes, planter containers, etc.



         (g)   The maintenance and care of all landscape elements
are the responsibility of the owner of the property. All landscaping is to be
approved by the city prior to installation.



         (h)   Street trees are required to be installed as per
the Noblesville Standards and Unified Development Ordinance, as amended.



      (11)   Establishment of Village Center.  Establishment of a
Village Center Planned Development (VCPD) District shall require submission
of a Preliminary Development Plan. This plan will establish land uses,
location of buildings, architectural elevations, open spaces,
detention/retention facilities, and other aspects to indicate the character
of the proposed development. The approval procedure shall follow the
procedure set forth for a Planned Development overlay district under §
159.109(D)(7).



      (12)   Changes to Village Center Development Plan.  Refer to
§ 159.109(D)(10), Changes in the Planned Development.



   (F)   Governmental Use Overlay (GUO) Districts.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   Governmental Use Overlay Districts are used to
allow the Plan Commission and the Common Council to consider government uses
which may be either:



            1.   Uses which are not expressly permitted with
the proposed district; or,



            2.   Variations from the development standards
which exist for the proposed Government Use within a district.



         (b)   The approval of a GUO Zone is intended to take
into consideration the fact that governmental uses are different than private
uses, because a governmental unit has the right of eminent domain and has
duties to provide services to its citizens.



      (2)   Definition of Governmental Use.  A “GOVERNMENTAL
USE” is defined as the use of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the
city by a unit of government, or a subdivision thereof, having the power of
eminent domain, including any Board, Commission, or Authority which is
authorized by statute.



      (3)   Applicability.  An applicant for a Governmental Use may
construct a Governmental Use which is a permitted use within a district and
complies with the development standards of that district without using the
GUO process set out in this division. In the event a unit of government seeks
to locate a use in a district where the use is not expressly permitted, or
the applicant does not meet all of the development standards for the
underlying district, the unit of government may seek approval of a GUO
Overlay District.



      (4)   Procedure for Establishment of a GUO Overlay District.



      A GUO may be established in any zone district within the city
under the following procedures:



         (a)   Preliminary Development Plan.  An applicant shall
provide a petition to be filed with the Plan Commission with a plan
indicating the proposed location of all improvements within the zone. The
plan shall include setbacks, a landscape plan, and signage proposed within
the zone. The petitioner shall also include an ordinance effecting the
Governmental Use Overlay District and containing a list of any deviations
from the applicable standards.



         (b)   The Director of Planning and Development or his
staff shall review the plan and shall file a report identifying any concerns
regarding the governmental use, taking into consideration the following:



            1.   Whether or not the governmental use is
substantially consistent with the orderly development of the lands contiguous
to and near the proposed development;



            2.   Whether or not the proposed use promotes
orderly development and preservation of property values near the governmental
use;



            3.   The reasonableness of the proposed land use,
taking into consideration all surrounding land uses and the zoning district
in which the governmental use is proposed;



            4.   The economic and environmental impact of the
use on the surrounding area;



            5.   The kind or function of the land use involved;



            6.   The availability of alternative locations for
the petitioning governmental unit to locate their land use;



            7.   Any attempts to minimize the detriments to
adjacent landowners;



            8.   The nature and scope of the use by the
petitioning government unit;



            9.   The essential use to the community of the
governmental use;



            10.   The need for the specific site chosen by the
petitioning governmental unit as compared to any adverse impact;



            11.   The social utility of the proposed
governmental use;



            12.   The possible frustration of the governmental
function of the unit of government;



            13.   The existing or immediate past use of the
proposed site;



            14.   Any other factors which the staff deems
reasonable to evaluate the proposed governmental use and the public utility
thereof.



         (c)   Public Hearing.  The City Plan Commission shall
hold a public hearing on each application for approval of a Governmental Use
Overlay district in accordance with § 159.044 “Amendments.” The
Commission may forward to the Common Council a favorable recommendation, an
unfavorable recommendation, or no recommendation on the plans submitted. It
may also recommend amendments to the plan or imposition of reasonable
conditions upon its approval, including the recording of covenants. Upon
action by the Plan Commission, a petition shall be forwarded to the Common
Council within 15 days.



         (d)   Action by the Common Council. The Common Council
shall act upon the recommendation by considering a GUO Overlay Ordinance with
30 days after receipt of the Plan Commission’s report. The Ordinance shall
include any and all deviations from the applicable development standards set
forth in this chapter. The Common Council may approve with modifications,
refer back to the Plan Commission, disapprove, or provide written
explanations to the petitioner on why an extension is required by the Common
Council for action. The time period for action shall be exclusive of any time
extensions or continuances requested by the petition. The Common Council
action shall be based upon the record of the Plan Commission and shall take
into consideration all of the factors set out in division (F)(4)(b) above.



      (5)   Affect of the Preliminary Development Plan.  Approval
of the Preliminary Development Plan shall not constitute approval of the
Governmental Overlay District or the detailed development plan. The approval
of the Preliminary Plan shall be deemed as an expression of the concepts and
details of the Preliminary Development Plan.



      (6)   Detailed Development Plan.  A Detailed Development Plan
that specifically designates the Development Plan for the governmental use
shall be filed with the Director of Planning. In the event the Director
believes that the Detailed Development Plan substantially complies with the
terms and conditions of the action by the Common Council, the Detailed
Development Plan shall be approved and improvement location permits may be
issued consistent with the plan, upon compliance with all other legal
prerequisites for the issuance of improvement location permits.



   (G)   Wellhead Protection Overlay District.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the Wellhead Protection Overlay
District is to provide protection to the public water supply system from land
uses which might threaten its ability to provide the community safe drinking
water.



      (2)   Applicability.



         (a)   The following requirements apply to all land
within the Wellhead Protection Zones, as defined in division (3) below and
Exhibit A Wellhead Protection Areas for the City of Noblesville as attached
to Ordinance 54-7-05, with the exceptions of single and multi-family
residential land uses connected to municipal sanitary and storm sewers.



         (b)   No building, structure, premises, or part thereof
shall be constructed, erected, enlarged, extended, or relocated except in
conformity with these regulations and for uses permitted by this division (H)
and until the proposed site and land use description has been filed with and
approved by the Director of Planning and Development.



      (3)   Location. For purposes of this section, the following
areas are designated as Wellfield Protection Zones as per Exhibit A Wellhead
Protection Areas for the City of Noblesville as attached to Ordinance 54-7-05:



         (a)   Zone 1.



            1.   The area contained within a one year
time-of-travel to a public water supply well or wellfield as defined by a
modeled delineation performed in compliance with 327 IAC 8-4.1; or



            2.   The areas within 1,000 feet of a public water
supply well.



         (b)   Zone 2.



            1.   The area contained within a five-year
time-of-travel to a public water supply well or wellfield as defined by a
modeled delineation performed in compliance with 327 IAC 8-4.1; or



            2.   The areas within 3,000 feet of a public water
supply well.



      (4)   Development Plan.



         (a)   Development Plan Required.  Unless otherwise
exempted under division (4)(b) below, any proposed land use within a Wellhead
Protection Zone must submit a Site and Development Plan, as described in
division (4)(d) below.



         (b)   Exemptions.  The following are not required to
submit Site and Development Plans:



            1.   Zone 1 district. Any land use, in the
ordinary course of their business, that has, or will have, less than the
threshold amount of one gallon of liquids in the aggregate or six pounds of
water soluble solids; and



            2.   Zone 2 district.  Any land use, in the
ordinary course of their business, that has, or will have, less than the
threshold amount of 100 gallons of liquid in the aggregate or 600 pounds of
water soluble solids in the aggregate.



            3.   Exemptions. In determining thresholds, the
following substances shall be exempted:



               a.   Reasonable quantities of substances
used for routine building and yard maintenance stored inside a facility;



               b.   Liquids required for normal operation
of a motor vehicle in use in that vehicle;



               c.   Substances contained within vehicles
for bulk deliveries to the site;



               d.   Beverages and food at restaurants,
supermarkets, convenience stores, and other retail food establishments;



               e.   Uncontaminated public water supply
water, groundwater and/or surface water;



               f.   Substances, which are packaged in
pre-sealed containers, sold at retail establishments;



               g.   Substances utilized for the production
and treatment of public water supply; and



               h.   Substances, which due to their inherent
chemical or physical properties, that are determined to pose no significant
threat to groundwater quality.



         (c)   Plan Review.  Property located within Zones 1 and
2 proposed for new construction or expansion of existing facilities shall
prepare and submit a description of said construction or expansion and the
new or expanded use of the property. The site description shall be submitted
to the Director of Planning and Development for review and either approved,
disapproved, or approved with conditions. The Director of Planning and
Development may solicit comments from the Hamilton County Health Department
and the applicable water utility on the site and development plan. In
reviewing the site and land use description, the Director of Planning and
Development shall assess whether the site and proposed land use:



            1.   Will prevent potential ground water
contaminants association with human activity from interfering with each
community public water supply system’s ability to produce drinking water
that meets all applicable Federal and State drinking water standards after
undergoing conventional ground water treatment, as employed by the public
water supply system. These treatment processes include, but are not limited
to aeration, detention, pressure filtration, and disinfection;



            2.   Will not unreasonably endanger the quality of
groundwater in a designated wellhead protection area. an unreasonable risk
includes, but is not limited to, the inappropriate storage, handling, use
and/or production of metals, inorganic compounds, semi-volatile organic
compounds or other substances listed at 40 CFR Part 355, or defined at
Chapter 4 of the Hamilton County Code, “Hazardous Material Emergencies”
(10-4-4-1) within a wellhead protection area; and



            3.   The site complies with the standards and
prohibitions listed in division (G)(5) below.



         (d)   Plan Documentation and Supporting Information. 
Said Site and Development Plans shall include the following:



            1.   A narrative report of the proposed site,
including:



               a.   A narrative description of the site
including any existing uses, setbacks, available sewage disposal facilities,
and a brief history of the site (including any former uses, historical
environmental concerns, abandoned wells, underground storage tanks, septic
systems, etc.);



               b.   Description of the proposed operations,
including chemical/products used or generated, chemical/product storage area
descriptions, waste generation quantities, equipment cleaning/maintenance
procedures;



               c.   Methods and locations of receiving,
handling, storing and shipping chemicals/products and wastes;



               d.   Spill or release response measures and
reporting;



               e.   Description of slopes near containment
vessels and waste storage areas.



            2.   A Site Plan including:



               a.   A Vicinity Map (USGS quadrangle
preferred);



               b.   A site Map (drawn to scale) depicting:



                  (i)   All existing and proposed
structures;



                  (ii)   Paved and non-paved areas;



                  (iii)   Utility lines (inside and
outside structures) including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, storm retention
ditches/basins/french drains/dry wells, etc. (both proposed and existing);



                  (iv)   Floor drain locations and
outlets;



                  (v)   Chemical/product storage
locations;



                  (vi)   Waste storage locations;



                  (vii)   Liquid transfer areas;



                  (viii)   Site surface water bodies
(streams, rivers, ponds);



                  (ix)   Underground storage tanks (and
associated piping);



                  x.   Aboveground storage tanks (and
associated piping);



                  xi.   Slope and contours of finished
grade at two-foot intervals.



            3.   Proposed containment area detail drawings,
including area, heights, materials, specifications, if applicable.



      (5)   Development Standards and Prohibitions.



         (a)   Except for single-family residences (with sewage
flows under 750 gallons per day), all development shall be connected to
municipal sanitary sewers or combined sewers. Floor drains, if present, must
be connected to sanitary sewers or combined sewers or routed to a temporary
holding area for removal;



         (b)   No surface impoundments, pits, ponds or lagoons
shall be established except for:



            1.   Storm water detention and retention ponds; and



            2.   Recreation, landscaping, or public water
supply purposes.



         (c)   In Zone 1, detention and retention ponds shall be
constructed in a manner that provides an effective barrier to the migration
of potential ground water contaminants into ground water, as demonstrated by
sealing the bottom of the structure with clay or other approved low
permeability material.



         (d)   The following restrictions apply to new storage
areas in Zone 1:



            1.   No above ground storage of liquid and/or
petroleum of greater than 1,000 gallons in aggregate;



            2.   No storage of water-soluble solids of more
than 6,000 pounds per container in any one containment area;



            3.   No new underground storage tanks (USTs) are
permitted.



         (e)   All above ground storage of liquids in excess of
40 gallons for more than 24 hours within Zones 1 and 2 must provide secondary
containment that meets the following requirements:



            1.   Containment must be   capable of
containing 110% of the volume of the tank or tanks;



            2.   Constructed to meet one of the following:



               a.   Designed to prevent and control the
escape of the contaminants into ground water for a minimum of 72 hours before
removal; or



               b.   Designed and built with an outer shell
and a space between the tank wall and outer shell that allows and includes
interstitial monitoring;



            3.   The secondary containment structure shall be
properly maintained and shall be free of vegetation, cracks, open seams, open
drains, siphons, or other openings that jeopardize the integrity of the
structure; and



            4.   Secondary containment systems shall be
designed so that the intrusion of precipitation is inhibited or that
stormwater is removed to maintain system capacity.



         (f)   In Zone 1, the following requirements apply to
existing fuel dispensing facilities and associated underground storage tanks
(UDTs) which are to be replaced or upgraded:



            1.   All USTs shall be double walled;



            2.   All USTs shall include the following three
methods of release detection:



               a.   Inventory control as defined in 40 CFR
280.43(a);



               b.   Monthly 0.2 in-tank leak test as
defined in 40 CFR 280.43(d);



               c.   Interstitial monitoring of a double
walled approved UST as defined by 40 CFR 280.43(g).



            3.   Connected piping must include the following
three methods of release detection:



               a.   Inventory control;



               b.   Continuous detection for 3 gallon per
hour line leak, as specified in 40 CFR 280.44(a) except that automatic
shutoff is required at 95% tank capacity; and



               c.   Double walled line that is continuously
monitored to detect the presence of liquid in the interstitial space and
provided an alarm as specified in 40 CFR 280.44c via 40 CFR 280.43g.



         (g)   In Zone 2, the requirements of 40 CFR Part 280
apply to all existing, registered USTs that are replaced or upgraded and USTs
installed at new fuel dispensing facilities. In addition, the construction 
standards of 40 CFR Part 280, applicable to non-petroleum USTs, shall be
applicable to the following in Zone 2:



            1.   Such a tank that is covered by State or
federal hazardous waste regulations; and



            2.   Heating oil tanks for on-site use.



         (h)   All Class V Injection Wells (including but not
limited to dry wells, large-capacity cesspools, motor vehicle waste disposal
wells, or other injection wells as defined at 40 CFR 146) shall be prohibit d
with the exception of the following:



            1.   Air conditioning return flow wells used to
return to the supply aquifer the water used for heating or cooling in a heat
pump, if non-contact;



            2.   Cooling water return flow wells used to
inject water previously used for cooling, if non-contact;



            3.   Barrier recharge wells used to replenish the
water in an aquifer or to improve ground water quality, provided the injected
fluid does not contain potential ground water contaminants;



and



            4.   Wells associated with the recovery of
geothermal energy for heating, aquaculture and production of electric power,
if non-contact.



         (i)   The transfer area for bulk delivery of liquids
shall be required to accommodate and contain a release that occurs during
loading and unloading of a tank as follows:



            1.   The liquid transfer are shall be constructed
in a manner to prevent a release in the transfer area from reaching the
ground water; and



            2.   The portion of the liquid transfer area
intended to contain releases shall be maintained so that it is free of
vegetation, cracks, open seams, open drains, siphons, or other openings that
jeopardizes the integrity of the area.



         (j)   No disposal of solid waste, as defined at 329 IAC
10-2-174, or other hazardous materials as defined at 40 CFR Part 355, or
defined at Chapter 4 of the Hamilton County Code, “Hazardous Material
Emergencies” (10-4-4-1) shall be permitted in either Zone 1 or Zone 2.



         (k)   The following requirements apply to all excavation
activities associated with the removal of sand and gravel materials:



            1.   If the extraction of sand and gravel involves
the removal of materials below the normal groundwater level, the work shall
be performed by means of a dragline, floating dredge, or an alternative
“wet” excavation method.



            2.   There shall be no de-watering of sites
utilized for sand and gravel extraction.



            3.   No form of solid waste (as defined at 329 IAC
10-2-174) or any other form of waste material of any kind, including but not
limited to construction/demolition debris, shall be used on the site. Clean
natural earth fill materials may be used without restriction as to origin or
placement on-site.



            4.   All fuels, oils, lubricants, hydraulic
fluids, petroleum products, or other similar materials on site shall have
appropriate secondary containment, as specified in division (H)(5)(e) above.



Table 7a.  Development Standards and Prohibitions by Land Use and Overlay
Zoning District



 


Land Use

 

Overlay Zoning District




Zone 1
(One Year TOT)

 

Zone 2
(Five Year TOT)





Sanitary land fills
 
Prohibited
 
Prohibited


On-Site Sewage Disposal (Commercial Facilities)
 
Prohibited
 
Prohibited


Sand and Gravel Mining
 

Allowed
•   Must use “wet” excavation
•   Excavation can be filled only with clean fill

 

Allowed
•   Must use “wet” excavation
•   Excavation can be filled only with clean fill



Surface Impoundments

(e.g. pits, ponds & lagoons)
 

Prohibited
•   Exceptions for stormwater, recreation, etc.

 

Prohibited
•   Exceptions for stormwater, recreation, etc.



Detention and Retention Basins
 
Allowed
•   Must be lined
 
No Restrictions


New ASTs(>1,000 gallons)
 
Prohibited
 
Allowed
•   Must have secondary containment at 110% of volume


New ASTs(<1,000 gallons)
 
Allowed
•   Must have secondary containment at 110% of volume
 
Allowed
•   Must have secondary containment at 110% of volume


Existing ASTs
 
Allowed
•   Must have secondary  containment at 110% of volume
 
Allowed
•   Must have secondary containment at 110% of volume


Storage of Water Soluble Solids
 
Prohibited
(In excess of 6,000 lbs)
 
Allowed
•   must prevent release to ground, and
•   be appropriately maintained


New USTs
 
Prohibited
 
Allowed
•   Must meet all requirements of 40 CFR Part 280


Existing USTs
 
Allowed
•   Must be double-walled
•   Must include leak detection (40 CFR 280.43)
•   Must have release detection on connection piping (40 CFR 240.44)
 
Allowed
•   Must meet all requirements of 40 CFR Part 280


Class 5 Injection Wells

(e.g., dry wells)
 
Prohibited
 
Prohibited


Liquid Transfer Areas
 

Allowed
•   Must prevent release to ground, and
•   Must be appropriately maintained

 
Allowed
•   Must prevent release to ground, and
•   Must be appropriately maintained




 



   (H)   Federal Hill Planned Development District (FeHiPD).



      (1)   Purpose and procedures.  The purpose of the Federal
Hill Planned Development (FeHiPD) district is to enhance redevelopment
potential and to integrate development with downtown Noblesville. This
district is intended to provide for a western extension of downtown
Noblesville by offering standards for building architecture, location of
accessory parking and pedestrian-oriented features as well as provisions for
land uses complimentary to the downtown, Riverview Hospital, and Forest Park.
Within this district are a number of subdistricts that represent various
physical character areas. Although the FeHiPD district shall be developed in
a unified and coordinated fashion, each of the subdistricts has a tailored
purpose, use, bulk and site development standards reflective of its location,
function, and desired appearance within the Federal Hill area. It is the
intent of this district to augment other bulk requirements of the Unified
Development Ordinance. When not specifically addressed by this district, the
bulk standards of the Unified Development Ordinance shall apply.



         (a)   Review procedures. 



            1.   All development within the FeHiPD District
shall be subject to site plan review, Unified Development Ordinance
subdivision regulations, and site development standards, in addition to the
use, bulk, and site development standards of this part. All types of
development proposals shall be required to be reviewed as detailed
development plans in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Hill
Planned Development district and the Unified Development Ordinance.



               A.   All proposed subdivisions.



               B.   All development proposals in the Mixed
Residential Subdistrict (unless otherwise specified).



               C.   All development proposals that include
requests for any exceptions from the standards listed for this district
and/or subdistricts.



               D.   All development proposals in the FH
Flood Hazard Zoning District.



               E.   All proposed uses listed as Special
Considerations in Appendix C-1. These uses are not assumed permitted by-right
and thus, there shall be no presumption of their approval.



            2.   Process of the detailed development plan
shall always include the review and approval of the Technical Advisory
Committee. Should all the requirements of the Federal Hill Planned
Development district be met; only additional administrative review by the
Planning Department Staff is required; however, if the requirements of said
district cannot be met, then the process requires a public hearing before the
Plan Commission and Common Council seeking relief for any waivers from the
Federal Hill Planned Development district.



      (2)   Establishment of subdistricts.  The city hereby creates
a set of subdistricts that represent physical character areas within the
FeHiPD District. The subdistricts are as follows:



         (a)   Riverwalk Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and applicability.  The purpose of
the Riverwalk Subdistrict is to offer the community public gathering and
celebration space, to provide opportunities to view and interact with the
White River, to provide scenic pedestrian connections to other existing and
proposed paths, to offer recreation and sporting attractions, and to provide
a continuous natural green amenity that acts as a regional destination.



            2.   Use requirements. In recognition of the
environmental factors associated with the White River, uses in the Riverwalk
Subdistrict is limited to cultural and recreational. Permanent structures are
also limited. The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix C-1.



         (b)   West Logan Street Corridor Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and applicability.  The purpose of
the West Logan Street Corridor Subdistrict is to create a high-density
mixed-use activity center for the Federal Hill area, to provide outstanding,
comfortable pedestrian-friendly and visually attractive streets and
sidewalks, to create an energetic and vibrant gathering space for residents
and visitors, to link other Federal Hill districts, to create a hospitality
district for visitors to Noblesville, to provide space for continuing
education, workforce development and adult training, and to provide space for
conventions, gatherings and events.



            2.   Use requirements.  A mix of commercial,
office uses, and residential uses located on the second floor or above shall
be permitted in the West Logan Street Corridor Subdistrict, in accordance
with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. Where indicated on the map,
commercial uses shall be designed in a pedestrian-oriented manner. The
complete use matrix is contained in Appendix C-1.



         (c)   Professional Office Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the
Professional Office Subdistrict is to establish a planned and well-connected
location for new office and business development, to better integrate new
office and professional development within the Federal Hill area, to provide
a concentration of office and professional uses near the government center,
to provide space to grow and extend downtown’s office capacity and to
provide a daytime population that can patronize downtown businesses.



            2.   Use requirements. A mix of commercial and
office uses shall be permitted in the Professional Office Subdistrict, in
accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. Where indicated on
the map, commercial uses shall be designed in a pedestrian-oriented manner.
The complete use matrix is contained in Appendix C-1.



         (d)   Hospital Subdistrict.



            1.   Purpose and applicability.  The purpose of
the Hospital Subdistrict is to establish a formal and well-defined medical
services campus, to leverage the physical and economic potential of the
medical services market, to improve the local employment base, and to better
integrate Riverview Hospital and its future growth needs to the Federal Hill.



            2.   Use requirements. A mix of medical and
professional office uses shall be permitted in the Hospital Subdistrict, in
accordance with an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. The complete use
matrix is contained in Appendix C-1.



         (e)   Mixed Residential District.



            1.   Purpose and applicability.  The purpose of
the Mixed Residential Subdistrict is to address areas where a diversity of
residential uses is appropriate within the Federal Hill Planned Development
District. The range of residential uses that are permitted within this
Subdistrict include single family attached and multiple family residential,
provided it is designed in an integrated manner. The design standards
included within this section are intended to ensure that residential
development within the Federal Hill district is attractive, and yet remains
affordable.



            2.   Use requirements. A mix of residential uses
shall be permitted in the Mixed Residential subdistrict, in accordance with
an approved Land Use and Subdistricts map. The complete use matrix is
contained in Appendix C-1.



      (3)   Public right-of-way and infrastructure improvements.



         (a)   Improvements.  Unifying streetscape elements must
be provided at adjacent public rights-of-way, including streetlights, street
trees, sodded parkways, continuous sidewalks, and hike/bike trails where
appropriate.



            1.   Sidewalks.



               A.   Along properties fronting West Logan
Street, a continuous 15 foot public sidewalk shall be provided outside of the
public right-of-way, per city specifications, making connections to sidewalks
at adjacent properties. An access easement shall be recorded against the deed
of the appropriate property.



               B.   Along all other public road frontages,
a continuous five foot public sidewalk shall be provided within the public
right-of-way, per city specifications, making connections to sidewalks at
adjacent properties. Where space permits, sidewalks must be set no closer
than five feet to the curb line or as approved by the City Engineer.



               C.   Public sidewalk configuration must
provide direct access to curbside transit stops where appropriate. These
access points shall be compliant with the American with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and installed pursuant to city/federal regulations.



               D.   Hike/bike trails and trailheads shall
be provided where indicated on the Noblesville Alternative Transportation
Plan (NAT), per city specifications, making connections to trail segments at
adjacent properties.



            2.   Landscaping.



               A.   Deciduous street trees of 2.5 to 3-inch
caliper at the rate of one tree for every 40 linear feet of right-of-way are
required in an eight-foot wide grass strip. Street trees shall be planted in
the right-of-way unless circumstances do not allow and as approved in a
"streetscape" plan approved by the Director of Planning and Development.
Permitted tree species shall be those listed on the approved planting lists
of the City of Noblesville.



               B.   Unpaved portions of the right-of-way
shall be established in turf.



            3.   Detention.



               A.   Detention/retention ponds shall be
located and designed to be natural in appearance and enhance the entry
sequence and/or view of buildings.



               B.   Wet detention facilities and water
features, side slopes above the water line shall not exceed 4:1, and
wetland/aquatic vegetation shall be planted around at least 75% of the wet
area perimeter. The maximum "freeboard" of all detention areas shall not
exceed three feet. All detention facilities shall be required to install
safety ledges pursuant to the requirements of the Unified Development
Ordinance and as approved by the City Engineer.



               C.   Dry detention areas shall maintain a
maximum slope of 4:1, and shall be graded to harmonize with the overall open
space design of the site.



      (4)   General regulations.



         (a)   Non-residential site planning regulations.



            1.   Commercial uses shall be "master planned" in
conjunction with adjacent office uses to facilitate efficient circulation and
shared parking.



            2.   Where developments include several buildings,
they shall be grouped to create outdoor spaces/plazas.



            3.   No accessory structure shall be located
within any required setback.



            4.   Equipment.



               A.   No storage areas, trash receptacles/
enclosures, or mechanical equipment shall be located within any required yard
setback and shall not be located in the front yard and as per the
requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance.



               B.   Mechanical equipment, trash
receptacles, and satellite dishes shall be completely and permanently
screened from view of public rights-of-way and adjoining properties.
Mechanical equipment and satellite dishes attached to the ground shall
include a solid wall or fence enclosure and of materials that match the
principal building. When roof mounted, screening methods may include parapet
walls or other architectural treatments approved by the Planning Director.
All trash receptacle enclosures shall adhere to the requirements as per §§
159.180 et seq.



               C.   The colors and materials of all
screening methods shall match and be in coordination with the colors and
materials of the principal building.



            5.   Drive thru.



               A.    Vehicular drive thru uses are
prohibited in the Federal Hill Planned Development.



            6.   Lighting.



               A.   Light standards shall not exceed 25
feet in height (measured from the grade to the top of the light standard),
and shall be of a consistent type/style/finish throughout the site. If
adjacent to a residential district, light standards shall not exceed 15 feet
in height within 150 feet of the lot line. Light intensity on sites that are
adjacent to a residential district shall be no more than one half (.5)
foot-candle as measured along property lines that abut the residential
district.



               B.   Light standards that are used must be
approved by the city prior to their use, and the illumination of the
standards shall be subject to the standards of the Unified Development
Ordinance.



               C.   Lighting shall serve only to illuminate
signage, parking/loading areas, walkways and entrances, or to accent
landscaping and architectural details.



               D.   Colored, exposed neon, LED, tubing, and
flashing or moving lights, or similar types of lighting are prohibited.



               E.   All lights shall be installed in a
manner to best hide and shield point source lighting.



            7.   Circulation.



               A.   Off-street pedestrian and auto
connections shall be provided between sites where feasible, especially
between office and commercial uses.



               B.   Pedestrian and bicycle routes shall be
delineated within private developments, and connect to the public sidewalk
and the city's trail system.



               C.   Adequate on-site areas must be provided
for truck access, maneuvering, loading, and storage. These on-site areas
shall not be located fronting a street and as per the requirements as set
forth in §§ 159.140 et seq. If the parcel(s) to be developed have frontage
on more than one street, the location shall be approved by the Director of
Planning and Development.



            8.   Access regulations.



               A.   Roads and driveway cuts must be aligned
to create four-way intersections. Access points located on opposite sides of
the street should be designed to line up the respective left turn lanes,
where the road has no center median.



               B.   Curb cuts are not permitted within 350
feet of an intersection on any arterial street, or within 300 feet of an
intersection on any collector street.



               C.   Where permitted, outlots in commercial
and mixed developments shall only be accessed from internal roadways, and
shall share driveways and parking lots wherever feasible.



               D.   Direct access from State Road 32 to
development sites is prohibited. Direct access from secondary arterials may
not occur more frequently than once every 400 feet or as approved by the City
Engineer.



            9.   Bulk requirements. The following requirements
apply to all subdistricts:



   Table 8.H.4 Bulk Requirements for Federal Hill Subdistricts



 


Requirements

 
Riverwalk
 
West Logan Street Corridor
 
Professional Office
 
Hospital
 
Mixed Residential




Minimum Lot Area
 
None
 
3,000 SF
 
5,000 SF
 
5 acres
 
NA


Minimum Lot Width
 
None
 
20 feet
 
40 feet
 
100 feel
 
20 feel


Maximum Impervious Surface
 
80%
 
None
 
80%
 
80%
 
80%


Building Height
 
Maximum

Principal Buildings:
 
None
 
60 feet
 
60 feet
 
60 feet
 
60 feet


Accessory Structures:1
 
None
 
14 feet
 
14 feet
 
14 feet
 
14 feet


Minimum2

All Structures:
 
None
 
24 feet and two stories
 
12 feet and one story
 
24 feet and two stories
 
24 feet or two stories


Front Yard Setback
 
Minimum

State Roads 32 & 19
 
10 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
NA


Local
 
10 feet
 
None
 
None
 
20 feet
 
NA


Maximum

West Logan Street
 
None
 
5 feet
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
NA


Minimum Side and Rear Yard Setback (not abutting a public right-of-way)
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
15 feet
 
None


Minimum Building Size
 
None
 
5,000 SF
 
5,000 SF
 
40,000 SF
 
1,000 SF


Density

Single Family Attached Multi-Family
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
Maximum 14 dwelling units per acre


Minimum Floor Area Single Family Attached Multi-Family
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
NA
 
700 SF




 



NOTES:



1   Accessory buildings should not exceed principal building height or the
maximum height allowable, whichever is less.



2   Story height shall be determined by the number of stories from grade
as viewed from the street to which the front of the building is oriented.



         (b)   Residential general regulations.



            1.   Existing residential uses in non-residential
subdistricts.  The following site development standards shall apply to all
subdistricts within the FeHiPD District, with the exception of the Mixed
Residential Subdistrict.



            2.   Authority to continue residential uses. 
Where, at the time of adoption of an ordinance that assigns the FeHiPD
Federal Hill Planned Development District to a Noblesville Jurisdictional
zoning map, lawful residential uses of land which exist and would not be
permitted by the regulations imposed by the FeHiPD, may be continued so long
as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.



               A.   Enlargement/improvement of existing
residential structure.  Such nonconforming uses may be enlarged or increased
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
rezone so long as such improvements do not result in an increase of the value
of the structure by more than 50% of the pre-improvement value.



               B.   Moving a residential structure.  No
such nonconforming uses shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of
the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such uses at the effective date
of the rezone.



               C.   Termination by discontinuance or
abandonment of use.  If any such nonconforming uses of land are discontinued
or abandoned for more than one year (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is
located.



               D.   New construction of residential
buildings.  The only new structures that shall be permitted shall be clearly
accessory to the existing residential use of the property and shall adhere to
the standards for accessory structures as outlined in § 159.121. No
additional homes or separate living units shall be constructed in the FeHiPD
district unless such uses are permitted uses in the land use subdistrict area
and meets the requirements of the Federal Hill Planned Development district.



               E.   Damage or destruction.  Should such
nonconforming residential structures be destroyed or damaged by any means,
then the home may be reconstructed in a manner equal to the fair market value
of the building immediately prior to the damage.



            3.   Underlying standards. Any residential
improvements inside the FeHiPD district involving lawful non-conforming
residences excluding mobile home units located in an approved Mobile Home
Park, shall adhere to the underlying developmental standards of the R2 (Low
to Moderate Density Single-Family Residential) district.



            4.   All lawful nonconforming non-residential uses
and/or structures shall adhere to the requirements of §§ 159.220 et seq.
(Nonconforming Uses and Structures).



         (c)   Mixed Residential Subdistrict regulations.  In
the Mixed Residential Subdistrict, the following design guidelines shall be
utilized in evaluation of the proposed planned development proposal. Design
standards within this subdistrict are required.



            1.   Guidelines for single-family attached and
multiple-family buildings.



               A.   Each development should have standards
for uniform streetlights, mailboxes, fencing, sidewalks, and similar
structures.



               B.   A 30-foot buffer yard shall be
maintained along the railroad right-of-way. No structures, permanent or
temporary, shall be permitted within the 30-foot buffer yard with the
exception of fences. Inside the 30-foot landscape buffer, trees shall be
planted at a minimum rate of one tree per 40 linear feet and mounding shall
be required as approved during the Planned Development process.



               C.   Common open space and recreational
facilities shall consist of a minimum of 15% of the site. This open space
area must be active in nature, and shall not include public rights-of-way,
easements, floodplain areas, or landscape setback areas. Large open space and
retention areas (generally larger than 10,000 square feet) may only be
counted if they are improved to include active and passive amenities.
Generally, wet detention facilities or impervious surfaces shall not count
toward the 15% requirement.



               D.   Local streets should be extended to
provide access between adjoining neighborhoods at appropriate intervals.
Streets should generally be designed in a grid network and cul-de-sacs are
discouraged.



               E.   All buildings should be designed to be
oriented toward the street. Where larger developments are designed with
internal circulation systems, ai least some dwelling units should be oriented
to the exterior of the development to promote connection and integration of
the multiple family developments with adjacent uses. Townhouse or
multiple-family developments, which are oriented with the sidewalls facing
the street, are discouraged.



               F.   All buildings should have one main
entrance for each unit or one main entrance for the building that faces the
street at an angle of no more than 45 degrees from the street, and opens onto
a porch or a stoop. All buildings should be designed with building entrances,
rather than garage doors fronting on the street at the ground floor level.



               G.   Attached garages should be located at
the rear of the dwelling unit, and face the interior of the development,
rather than the street.



      (5)   Architectural standards.



         (a)   Architectural review procedure.



            1.   Architectural review shall be required for
all residential uses pursuant to the standards of §§ 159.105 et seq. and
§§ 159.025 et seq.



            2.   With regard to non-residential uses,
architectural plans for all primary and accessory buildings shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the
development, the design of the buildings, and the number, size, and type of
structures. A complete set of color 360-degree building/structure elevations
detailing the front, rear, and opposite side views of each proposed above
ground structure shall be provided. Key exterior elements such as materials,
windows, architectural breaks, and the like must be rendered in sufficient
detail and accompanied by clear descriptions of materials specifications,
colors, and textures.



               a.   If the architectural standards of the
FeHiPD district are met, the review of the architectural plans shall be
completed by Planning Staff. Appeals of Staff’s interpretations shall go to
the Architectural Review Board who shall render a decision pursuant to the
procedures established.



               b.   If the architectural standards for
residential or non-residential buildings/structures located within the FeHiPD
district cannot be met, then the Architectural Review Board shall render a
decision pursuant to the procedures established.



         (b)   Subdistrict specific architecture requirements.



            1.   Riverwalk Subdistrict.



               A.   New Structures are restricted in the
Riverwalk Subdistrict due to the Flood Hazard District regulations. Should
the Plan Commission and state or federal agencies allow a structure to be
permitted, the West Logan Street Corridor Subdistrict architecture
requirements shall be followed.



            2.   West Logan Street Corridor Subdistrict.



               A.   General requirements.



                  i.   All new construction shall
reflect the vertical design character of the existing downtown streetscape.
The emphasis on the vertical design character shall be carried through on the
storefront treatment and the proportions of upper windows for commercial
buildings.



                  ii.   All new buildings shall be a
minimum of two stories and a maximum of four stories.



                  iii.   High quality building design
and construction shall be provided on all elevations (360-degree
architectural treatment).



                  iv.   Multiple buildings in
developments (including accessory buildings) must incorporate coordinated
architectural styles, materials, forms, features, colors and applied elements
to visually tie the development together.



                  v.   Signage, fencing, walls, and
other amenities (benches, lights) must be integrated with building design and
landscaping.



               B.   Facades.



                  i.   Facade treatments shall be
designed to break large facade areas into smaller facades by utilizing
architectural variety in the form of offsets, lintels, expression lines or
cornices; changes in texture, color or masonry pattern; and/or pilasters,
piers or columns. Building facades that are blank or windowless shall be
prohibited.



                  ii.   Buildings shall be designed so
that there is distinct architectural differentiation between the ground floor
and the floors above, such as incorporating differences in floor-to-ceiling
heights, using building trim and accent elements, changing materials or
textures, or adding an awning or canopy between the first and upper stories.



                  iii.   Exterior materials must be
consistent on all facades, and material/finish changes shall relate to the
"structure" of the building.



                  iv.   Colors used on building facades
must be complementary. Natural, muted colors should serve as the primary
facade color, with brighter analogous color used only as limited accents.



                  v.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances and lighting.
Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               C.   Building materials.



                  i.   Primary building materials
(minimum 60% of the facade) must be brick, stone or glass.



                  ii.   Secondary building materials
(maximum 30% of the facade) may be decorative block or stucco.



                  iii.   Accent materials (maximum 10%
of the facade) may be wood or metal if integrated into the overall design.



                  iv.   No corrugated metal, sheet
metal, iron, plain concrete block, vinyl or similar materials allowed.



               D.   Building trim.



                  i.   The use of accent and trim
elements (accent panels, banding, cornices, canopies/awnings, etc.) is
recommended to add visual interest and break down the scale of facades.



               E.   Windows and doors.



                  i.   A minimum of 60% of the store-
front/ground floor facade shall be clear glass windows and doorways.



                  ii.   The window treatment for the
upper floors shall be different from the window treatment for the ground
floor facade. Upper floors shall have individual window openings rather than
a continuous band of windows.



                  iii.   Reflective or tinted glass,
opaque materials, shelving units, or similar materials that impede views into
storefront/ground floor of a building are prohibited.



                  iv.   Store entrances may be recessed
3-6 feet into the building face so a door may open outwards without
obstructing the sidewalk.



               F.   Roofs.



                  i.   Buildings shall have flat roofs,
as viewed from the street and must be enclosed by parapets.



                  ii.   All rooftop-mounted equipment
must be enclosed or screened from view on all sides of a building.



                  iii.   Parapets and other screen
treatments shall be composed of high quality building materials and shall
blend with the design of the building in terms of color, materials, scale and
height.



            3.   Professional Office Subdistrict.



               A.   Facades must incorporate three or more
vertical planes, and create both a "rhythm" of facade bays or structural
elements, and a horizontal division into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Main building entrances must be
prominently featured through porticos, recessed entrances, lighting and
landscaping. Weather protection should be provided at all entrances.



               C.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, (subject to approval by the Planning Director and may not be
appropriate when visible from an Arterial or Expressway), tile (ceramic or
porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs,
slate/imitation slate roof shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles, and
EIFS ("Dryvit") as a limited trim material only.



               D.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, EIFS ("Dryvit") wall systems, steel or
aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics, reflective glass.



            4.   Hospital subdistrict.



               A.   Facade treatments must create both a
"rhythm" of facade bays or structural elements, and a horizontal division
into a base, middle and top.



               B.   Appropriate building finish materials
include: brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, finished (textured
and painted) concrete, finished (textured and painted) pre-cast concrete
panels, (subject to approval by the Planning Director and may not be
appropriate when visible from an arterial or expressway), tile (ceramic or
porcelain), glass (clear or lightly tinted), standing seam metal roofs,
slate/imitation slate roof  shingles, architectural asphalt roof shingles,
and EIFS ("Dryvit") wall systems only if at least eight feet above grade or
as a trim material.



               C.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include wood, plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete
panels, concrete masonry units, steel or aluminum curtain wall systems,
plastics, reflective glass.



            5.   Mixed Residential Subdistrict.



               A.   Architectural style/design shall be
characterized by the use of traditional design elements (dormers, steep
pitched roofs, front porches, front doors, overhangs, shutters, bay/box/bow
windows, etc.)



               B.   Facade treatments shall be designed to
break large facade areas into smaller facades by utilizing architectural
variety in the form of offsets, lintels, expression lines or cornices and
changes in texture, color or masonry pattern; pilasters, piers or columns.
Building facades that are blank or windowless shall be prohibited.



               C.   Buildings shall be designed so that
there is distinct architectural differentiation between the ground floor and
the floors above. Such as incorporating differences in floor-to-ceiling
heights, using building trim and accent elements, changing materials or
textures, or adding an awning or canopy between the first and upper stories.



               D.   Colors used on building facades must be
complementary. Natural, muted colors should serve as the primary facade
color, with analogous brighter colors used only as limited accents.



               E.   All new buildings shall be a minimum of
two stories and a maximum of four stories.



               F.   All buildings shall front on to a
public sidewalk.



               G.   Single-family attached buildings shall
have a front porch or front stoop with steps.



               H.   High quality building design and
construction shall be provided on all elevations (360-degree architectural
treatment).



               I.   Appropriate building finish materials
include brick (clay), natural stone, simulated cut stone, wood, Hardi-plank
or similar cementuous materials, slate/imitation slate roof shingles,
architectural asphalt roof shingles.



               J.   Inappropriate, prohibited building
finish materials include plywood, unfinished concrete or concrete panels,
concrete masonry units, steel or aluminum curtain wall systems, plastics,
reflective glass, and vinyl.



               K.   Multiple buildings in proposed
developments (including accessory buildings) must incorporate coordinated
architectural styles, materials, forms, features, colors and applied elements
to visually tie the entire development together.



               L.   Signage, fencing, walls and other
amenities (benches, lights) must be integrated with building design and
landscaping.



               M.   The proposed dwelling should respect
the scale, height, and setbacks of those buildings on adjacent properties,
and where desirable, serve as an orderly transition to a different scale.



               N.   At least 15% of the area of each facade
that faces a street lot line must consist of windows or main entrance doors.



               O.   The rear facades of buildings shall not
be permitted to front thoroughfare streets. Access may be provided via
frontage roads and alleys.



               P.   The following design elements shall be
varied throughout multiple unit projects: exterior materials and finishes
including a color palette of at least three color combinations per overall
development or provide exterior accent materials such as brick, stone, or
other masonry materials; three distinct architectural building elevations for
each standard plan; floor plans including a minimum of four different floor
plans within each development; and front yard landscaping including three
different plant palettes consisting of trees, shrubs, and perennials.



      (6)   Parking/loading.  The following parking and loading
requirements shall apply within the FeHiPD district. All calculations shall
be made using gross floor area (GFA). For those uses not listed in the
Schedule of FeHiPD district, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements,
refer to §§ 159.140 et seq. for the specific standards.



 

SCHEDULE OF FeHiPD DISTRICT OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS


Use
 

Required Parking Spaces

 

Maximum Parking Spaces

 

Required Loading Spaces



Commercial Uses1
 

4 per 1,000 SF

 

5 per 1,000 SF

 

1 per USER



Office Uses1
 

3 per 1,000 SF

 

4 per 1,000 SF

 

1 per BUILDING



Hospital, Medical Office1
 

3 per 1,000 SF

 

4 per 1,000 SF

 

1 per BUILDING



Residential
 

See § 159.142, Table 9 Required Parking Spaces




 



1   In cases where buildings exceed 50,000 SF, the overall required
parking spaces and loading spaces may, on a case-by-case basis, and on the
merits of the circumstances be reduced with approval of the Director of
Planning.



         (a)   Parking/loading setback requirements.



            1.   Front setbacks. No parking, loading, or
vehicular use areas may be located between the building and front property
line. Loading facilities shall be screened from all public rights-of-way.



            2.   Side and rear setbacks. Parking, loading, and
vehicular use areas shall be setback a minimum of six feet from any rear or
side lot line.



            3.   Dedicated and conveniently located parking
spaces shall be provided for the physically disabled per established city and
other requirements in pedestrian-oriented commercial areas make off-street
parking access points visible.



            4.   Parking lots shall provide a pedestrian path
between the parking and the sidewalk, and parking and building.



            5.   Parking, driveways and curb cuts shall be
combined between developments where feasible to minimize pavement and reduce
interference with pedestrians.



            6.   Diagonal parking must be provided in
commercial parking lots where high turnover is expected.



            7.   Sufficient stacking spaces must be provided
at driveways.



            8.   Visual obstructions are prohibited within
parking lots and at driveways.



            9.   Snow plowing and storage must be accommodated
within parking lots and loading areas.



            10.   The use of parking lots as "short-cuts" to
circumvent the public roadway system must be discouraged.



         (b)   Parking structures.



            1.   Parking structures are encouraged.



            2.   Parking structures shall be at least
partially below grade to minimize their visual impact.



            3.   Where parking structures are visible from
public rights-of-way, they may not have sloping floor plates visible from
adjacent public rights-of-way.



            4.   Parking structures in commercial areas must
accommodate retail space on the ground floor level where permitted by the
subdistrict requirements.



            5.   The design of parking structures must
integrate the forms and materials used for principal building(s). Lighting
should also be integrated with the overall architectural character of the
site.



            6.   Landscaping must be used at the base of
parking structures, and the use of landscaping should be considered at upper
levels, to soften their appearance.



         (c)   Bicycle parking requirements.



            1.   All commercial and public/semi-public uses
shall provide parking facilities for bicycles based on the number of vehicle
parking spaces provided consistent with the Bicycle Parking Standard table
below.



 


Bicycle Parking Standards Table



Total Vehicle Parking Spaces Required
 
Bicycle Parking Spaces Required


1-25
 
0


26-200
 
4


201-500
 
8


Over 500
 
12



 



            2.   Bicycle racks shall support the bicycle
upright by its frame in two places above the bicycle's center of gravity,
shall enable the frame and one or both wheels to be secured with a lock, and
shall not require the lifting of the bicycle to use any of the racks’
parking positions.



               A.   Examples of appropriate racks include
an inverted "U" rack, the "A" rack, and the post and loop rack. The toast
rack is prohibited.



            3.   Bicycle parking facilities shall be located
in high visibility areas that provide convenient and safe pedestrian access
to main entrances or activity areas.



      (7)   Signage.



         (a)   General requirements.



            1.   A.   Riverwalk, West Logan Street Corridor.



                  i.   Permit Required: Yes.



                  ii.   Type of Sign Permitted: Wall,
Projecting, Awning, Canopy, Window, Blade, Ground, and Sandwich Board signs.



                  iii.   Number and Type:



                     (aa)   Single Tenant Building.



                        (1)   One wall,
projecting, awning, canopy, window, or ground sign per street frontage and/or
one blade sign per street frontage. Ground signs shall only be permitted on
lots with at least 75 feet of frontage and a minimum building setback of 20
feet from the adjacent street right-of-way. The owner may transfer a
permitted sign from one building elevation to another, however, no elevation
is permitted two or more of the same sign type on the same frontage.



                        (2)   One sandwich board
sign.



                     (bb)   Multi-Tenant, Multi-Level
Building.



                        (1)   Ground Floor Tenant.



                           a.   One wall,
projecting, awning, canopy, window, or sign per street frontage.



                           b.   One blade sign
per street frontage.



                           c.   One sandwich
board sign.



                        (2)   Tenant above the
ground floor.



                           a.   One blade sign
and/or one window sign on the door at street level used to access the tenant
space or on the floor where the use is located.



                           b.   One wall sign
above the windowsill of the second story.



                  iv.   Maximum Sign Area:



                     (aa)   Awning Sign - 20% of the
area of the angled face and 65% of the area of the vertical face.



                     (bb)   Canopy Sign - 20% of the
area of the angled face and 65% of the area of the vertical face.



                     (cc)   Blade Sign - four square
feet.



                     (dd)   Projecting Sign - 15
square feet.



                     (ee)   Sandwich Board - six
square feet - two feet in width and three feet in height.



                     (ff)   Wall Sign - Sign shall
not exceed 20% of the signable wall area, unless windows, doors, awning, and
other architectural details make up more than 50% of the building face in
which the sign size may increase to 40% of the signable wall area.



                     (gg)   Ground Sign - 12 square
feet.



                     (hh)   Window Sign - (i) Ground
Floor Tenant: 15% of the total window area; (ii) Second Floor and Above
Tenant: 20% of the total window area on which the sign is located.



                  v.   Maximum Sign Height:



                     (aa)   Ground Sign - four feet.



                     (bb)   Sandwich Board - three
feet.



                  vi.   Location: Sign shall not obscure
significant architectural features of the building.



                     (aa)   Awning Sign - May extend
to within one foot of the vertical plane of the curb and must maintain a
minimum clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk.



                     (bb)   Canopy Sign - May extend
to within one foot of the vertical plane of the curb and must maintain a
minimum clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk.



                     (cc)   Blade Sign - Permitted at
ground floor locations. May extend to within one foot of the vertical plane
of the curb and must maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above the
sidewalk.



                     (dd)   Projecting Sign - Must
maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk.



                     (ee)   Sandwich Board - May be
located on the exterior storefront or on the sidewalk at the front of the
establishment. It shall be located and oriented not to create a safety hazard
to pedestrians or conflict with pedestrian circulation patterns.



                     (ff)   Wall Sign - An activity
on the first floor shall not construct a wall sign above the windowsill of
the second story. An activity on the second floor or above shall construct a
wall sign between the windows on the highest floor and the roofline. A wall
sign may not exceed two-thirds of the distance between the top of the lower
window and the sill of the upper window or roofline.



                     (gg)   Ground Sign - Shall be
located a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way and a minimum of
five feet from the leading edge of the driveway. The sign shall be separated
from another ground sign located on the same side of the right-of-way a
minimum distance of 100 linear feet.



                     (hh)   Window Sign - On or
behind the window and viewable from public right-of-way.



               vii.   Permitted Materials:



                  (aa)   Awning Sign - Canvas or cloth,
no reflective or glossy materials or illuminated plastic.



                  (bb)   Canopy Sign - Canvas or cloth,
no reflective or glossy materials or illuminated plastic.



                  (cc)   Blade Sign - Wood or metal
(matching architectural features of building).



                  (dd)   Projecting Sign - Wood or metal
(matching architectural features of building).



                  (ee)   Sandwich Board - Wood,
chalkboard, or finished metal A-frame.



                  (ff)   Wall Sign - Wood, metal,
plastic, or similar material (matching architectural feature of building).
Individually mounted channel letters are preferred.



                  (gg)   Ground Sign - Wood, metal, or
masonry (matching architectural features of building).



                  (hh)   Window Sign - Vinyl, gold leaf,
or substantially similar materials.



               viii.   Illumination: Halo-lit or externally
lit.



               ix.   Landscaping:  A minimum of five foot
landscaped areas radiating around the base of the sign shall be provided and
shall be planted in such a way to substantially cover the area with landscape
materials such as, but not limited to, annuals, ground covers, perennials,
shrubs, and ornamental trees. A mixture of plant types is required.



               x.   Alternate Signage:



                  (aa)   Cafe umbrella graphics for
outdoor seating areas may be used in addition to all other permitted signs.
The total signage on an umbrella shall not exceed 15% of the area of the
umbrella.



                  (bb)   Painted wall signs may be used
as a primary sign on a secondary elevation if permitted. Such painted signs
shall constitute no more than 20% of the signable area.



                  (cc)   Users with secondary public
entrances are permitted to have a window sign that equals 15% of the glass
area or a one square foot placard mounted next to the door.



               B.   Professional Office Subdistrict.



                  i.   Permit Required: Yes.



                  ii.   Type of Sign Permitted: Ground
Sign, Wall Sign.



                  iii.   Number and Type:



                     (aa)   Single Tenant Building.



                        (1)   One sign per street
frontage. Ground signs shall only be permitted on lots having a minimum lot
width of 75 feet and a minimum building setback of at least 20 feet from the
adjacent street right-of-way. The owner may transfer a permitted sign from
one building elevation to another, however, no elevation is permitted two or
more of the same sign types on the same frontage.



                     (bb)   Externally Accessed
Multi-Tenant Building.



                        (1)   One wall sign per
tenant per street frontage and/or one ground sign per street frontage with
signage space for each tenant provided equally. Ground signs shall only be
permitted on lots having a minimum lot width of 75 feet and a minimum
building setback of at least 20 feet from the adjacent street right-of-way.



                     (cc)   Internally Accessed
Multi-Tenant Building.



                        (1)   One wall sign per
street frontage identifying the building and one ground sign per street
frontage. Ground signs shall only be permitted on lots having a minimum lot
width of 75 feet and a minimum building setback of at least 20 feet from the
adjacent street right-of-way.



                  iv.   Maximum Sign Area:



                     (aa)   Ground Sign: 32 square
feet.



                     (bb)   Wall Sign: Shall not
exceed 20% of the signable wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings, and
other architectural details make up more than 50% of the building face in
which the sign size may increase to 40% of the signable area.



                  v.   Maximum Ground Sign Height: five
feet.



                  vi.   Location: Shall be located a
minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way and a minimum of five feet
from the leading edge of the driveway. The sign shall be separated from
another ground sign located on the same side of the right-of-way a minimum
distance of 100 linear feet.



                  vii.   Permitted Materials:



                     (aa)   Wall Sign - Wood, metal,
plastic, or similar material (matching architectural feature of building),
individually mounted channel letters.



                     (bb)   Ground Sign - Wood,
metal, or masonry (matching architectural features of building).



                  viii.   Illumination: Halo-lit,
internally or externally lit



                  ix.   Landscaping: A minimum of five
foot landscaped area radiating around the base of the sign shall be provided
and shall be planted in such a way to substantially cover the area with
landscape materials such as, but not limited to, annuals, ground covers,
perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees. A mixture of plant types is
required.



                  x.   Alternate Signage:  Awning or
canopy signage may be used in lieu of wall signage. Signage shall be a
maximum of 20% of the awning/canopy area.



               C.   Hospital Subdistrict.



                  i.   Permit required: Yes.



                  ii.   Type of Sign Permitted:
Designation Sign, Ground Sign, Illuminated Vehicular Directional Sign,
Non-Illuminated Vehicular Directional Sign, Entrance Identification Sign,
Directory Sign, Wall Sign.



                  iii.   Number and Type:



                     (aa)   Designation Sign: One at
each main entrance to the property. Signs must be separated by at least 1,000
feet.



                     (bb)   Ground Sign: One per
adjacent internal drive or road.



                     (cc)   Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: Not Applicable.



                     (dd)   Non-Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign:  Not Applicable.



                     (ee)   Entrance Identification
Sign: One at each entrance to the property.



                     (ff)   Directory Sign: One at
each public entrance to the building.



                     (gg)   Wall Sign: One per
building elevation.



                  iv.   Maximum Sign Area:



                     (aa)   Designation Sign: 220
square feet.



                     (bb)   Ground Sign: 45 square
feet.



                     (cc)   Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: 30 square feet.



                     (dd)   Non-Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: 20 square feet.



                     (ee)   Entrance Identification
Sign: 110 square feet.



                     (ff)   Directory Sign: 85 square
feet.



                     (gg)   Wall Sign: Not Applicable.



                  v.   Maximum Sign Height:



                     (aa)   Designation Sign: 14.5
feet.



                     (bb)   Ground Sign: six feet.



                     (cc)   Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: seven feet.



                     (dd)   Non-Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: six feet.



                     (ee)   Entrance Identification
Sign: eight feet.



                     (ff)   Directory Sign: six feet.



                     (gg)   Wall Sign:



                        (1)   Hospital Name - five
foot tall letters.



                        (2)   Secondary
Identifiers - four foot tall letters.



                  vi.   Location:



                     (aa)   Designation Sign: Shall
be a minimum of ten feet from the street right-of-way and a minimum of ten
feet from the leading edge of the driveway. The sign shall be separated from
another ground sign located on the same side of the right-of-way, a minimum
distance of 100 linear feet.



                     (bb)   Ground Sign: Shall be
located far enough from the curb and driveway to not obstruct views of
oncoming traffic.



                     (cc)   Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: shall be located far enough from the curb and driveway to
not obstruct views of oncoming traffic.



                     (dd)   Non-Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign: Shall be located far enough from the curb and driveway to
not obstruct views of oncoming traffic.



                     (ee)   Entrance Identification
Sign: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street right-of-way and a
minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway. The sign shall be
separated from another ground sign located on the same side of the
right-of-way, a minimum distance of 100 linear feet.



                     (ff)   Directory Sign: Shall be
located at the public entrances to the building.



                  vii.   Permitted Materials:



                     (aa)   Designation Sign, Ground
Sign, Illuminated Vehicular Directional Sign, Non-Illuminated Vehicular
Directional Sign, Entrance Identification Sign, or Directory Sign:  The sign
shall be constructed of materials that blend with the character of the
building such as, but not limited to, wood, metal, EIFS, or masonry.



                     (bb)   Wall Sign: Individually
mounted channel letters.



                  viii.   Illumination: Halo-lit,
internally or externally lit.



                  ix.   Landscaping: A minimum of five
foot landscaped area radiating around the base of the sign shall be provided
and shall be planted in such a way to substantially cover the area with
landscape materials such as, but not limited to, annuals, ground covers,
perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees. A mixture of plant types is
required.



                  x.   Alternate Signage: The
designation sign may include an electronic sign component that does not
exceed 40 square feet in size.



               D.   Mixed Residential Subdistrict.



                  i.   Permit Required: Yes.



                  ii.   Type of Sign Permitted: Ground
sign.



                  iii.   Number and Type: One ground
sign shall be permitted at each entrance to a recorded, platted residential
subdivision.



                  iv.   Maximum Sign Area: 24 square
feet.



                  v.   Maximum Ground Sign Height: Six
feet.



                  vi.   Location: Shall be a minimum of
ten feet from the street right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the
leading edge of driveway.



                  vii.   Permitted Materials: The sign
material shall be constructed of materials which blend with the residential
character of the neighborhood including but not limited to wood, metal, or
masonry.



                  viii.   Illumination: Halo-lit or
externally-lit.



                  ix.   Landscaping: A minimum of five
foot landscape area radiating around the base of the sign shall be provided
and shall be planted in such a way to substantially cover the area with
landscape materials such as, but not limited to, annuals, ground covers,
perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees. A mixture of plant types is
required.



                  x.   Alternate Signage: Not Applicable.



      (8)   Landscaping/screening.



         (a)   General requirements.



            1.   A.   Riverwalk, West Logan Street,
Professional Office Subdistricts.



                  i.   Landscaping should enhance but
not obscure buildings and vistas while walkways should take advantage of, and
derive access to views, open space, and environmental features that are
important to the Federal Hill Planned Development District. It is encouraged
that the landscape design enhance the pedestrian environment and complement
the building and site design.



                  ii.   (aa)   Building base
landscaping shall be provided at the base of all buildings elevations that do
not directly abut hardscapes such as sidewalks or plazas/public greenspace.
Building base landscaping shall contain a minimum of one small shade tree,
one ornamental tree, and six shrubs per 100 linear feet of stand-alone
building perimeter. If building base landscaping requirements cannot be
installed due to its proximity to a hardscape, then landscaping may be
installed elsewhere to fulfill the building base landscaping requirements as
approved by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee.



                     (bb)   Alternate locations
(adjacent to site) include interior courtyards, public parks, plazas, parking
lots, alleys, and/or roof gardens/green roofs. Other suitable alternatives
include window boxes, planters, trellises, climbing vines, espaliered trees
and shrubs, and roof gardens. Sculpture groupings may also be used as a part
of the landscaping. A range of landscaping materials, trees, deciduous and
evergreen shrubs, ornamental grasses, groundcovers, and/or seasonal flowers
shall be provided for color and visual interest.



                  iii.   Planters shall be constructed
of masonry or stone and have a minimum height of 30 inches and the minimum
height of shrubs and/or ornamental grasses shall be 12 inches at the time of
planting.



                  iv.   Window boxes with flowers and
freestanding planters of a scale and character appropriate to the street and
main structure are encouraged.



                  v.   (aa)   Perimeter parking lot
landscaping is one tree for every 50 linear feet of adjacent right-of-way. A
landscaping strip sufficient to maintain the landscaping shall be provided
and covered with groundcover or mulch. A parking lot abutting an arterial
road shall also provide shrubs three-feet on center, staggered, at a minimum
height of 30 inches at the time of planting. A decorative fence may be
substituted for the shrubs required in the perimeter parking lot landscaping
and shall enclosure the perimeter of the parking area.



                     (bb)   Internal parking lot
landscaping shall include one parking island (minimum size 180-SF) for every
20 parking spaces to include one small shade tree and vegetative ground cover.



                  vi.   A minimum of 20% of the lot area
must be in landscaping including a combination of building base landscaping,
perimeter parking lot landscaping, interior parking lot landscaping,
hardscape, planter boxes, planter containers, and the like.



               B.   Hospital - As per adopted Planned
Development Ordinance No. 14-03-08 or as it may be amended.



               C.   Mixed Residential - As per adopted
landscaping standards of the Unified Development Ordinance per the Perimeter
Parking Lot Table and Building Base Landscaping Table.



The maintenance and care of all landscape elements are the responsibility of
the owner of the property. All landscaping is to be approved by the city
prior to installation.



Street trees are required to be installed as per the Noblesville Standards
and Unified Development Ordinance, as amended.



   (I)   Downtown Mixed Use Overlay District (DMU).



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   The purpose of the Downtown Mixed Use Overlay
District (DMU) is to accommodate a unique form of development defined as
Downtown Mixed Use Residential. The area boundaries are per Appendix G,
Central Core Map, the geographical area and specific to the underlying zoning
district of DT Downtown.



         (b)   There is no guarantee that approval of a Mixed Use
Residential Development will be granted as a Downtown Mixed Use Overlay
District (DMU). The Plan Commission and/or Council may deny a Mixed Use
Residential Development request that is not consistent or compatible with the
surrounding uses; may be harmful to the public health, safety or general
welfare of the immediate neighborhood or community as a whole; and/or is not
harmonious with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Master Plan,
the requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance, and other related
special studies adopted by the city.



         (c)   The principal purposes of the Downtown Mixed Use
Overlay District (DMU) are:



            1.   To support a more efficient use of land, as
compared with the typical residential/commercial development.



            2.   To encourage the design of dwelling units and
commercial uses that integrate and relate to living facilities above
non-residential uses all within walking distance of the hub of downtown
Noblesville.



            3.   To utilize the Mixed Use Residential
Development to infill existing vacant areas.



      (2)   Location; District in Which Permitted.  Mixed Use
Residential Development shall only be permitted in the DT Downtown Zoning
District as it relates to the geographical area depicted within  the Central
Core Map, as per Appendix G.



      (3)   Uses.  Single-family, two-family or multi-family units
located above a first floor (ground level) of a non-residential use. For
non-residential uses, refer to the Official Schedule of Uses, Appendix C,
Commercial Districts, specifically DT (Downtown Zoning District). Only
permitted uses shall be developed as a part of the Mixed Use Residential
Development, removing the following permitted uses: club or lodge (private),
indoor cinema, theater, hotel, motel, meeting or party hall, cemetery, sex
shop, adult media store, public parks and playgrounds, health fitness, ATMs
(standalone structures), laundry and dry cleaners without an on-site plant,
restaurant with drive-thru, and restaurant drive-in or drive-thru as a
primary use.



      (4)   Bulk Requirements.



         (a)   Minimum lot area, density, lot coverage, lot width
are not applicable.



         (b)   Dwelling Unit Size.  Minimum residential dwelling
unit size: 600 square feet.



         (c)   Setbacks.



            1.   Front Yard and Side Yards.  The average
setback of the adjacent principal structures on either side of the proposed
structure.



            2.   Rear Yard.  There shall be a minimum rear
setback of ten feet.



         (d)   Building Height.  The maximum building height is
50 feet.



      (5)   Procedure for a Downtown Mixed Use Overlay as per the
Central Core Map relating to Mixed Use Residential Development.



         (a)   Application.  Applications for a Mixed Use
Residential Development (Downtown Mixed Use Overlay District) shall be filed
in accordance with the requirements of § 159.040, Applications and Hearings.
A detailed development plan, architectural plans, civil drawings, photometric
plans, landscaping plans, signage, and other information that may be required
by Planning and/or Engineering Departments shall be required to be submitted
for review, subject to approval by the Plan Commission and Common Council as
per § 159.040, Applications and Hearings, and § 159.044, Amendments.



         (b)   Site Plan Review.  Applications for a Mixed Use
Residential Development shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to §
159.041, Site Plan Review. The purpose of the site plan review is to
encourage logical, imaginative, innovative design and variety in the
development of the district to insure the continuity of the proposed
development and its compatibility with the surrounding area.



         (c)   Site Plan Review Criteria.  The following
criteria shall be considered for the site plan review of Mixed Use
Residential Development:



            1.   Planning Studies.  Planning studies approved
by the Plan Commission/Common Council that include development patterns or
environmental and other design criteria shall be utilized in the plan review
process.



            2.   Architecture.  As per § 159.041(F),
Additional Standards for Non-Residential Uses, Except in I2 and I3 Zoning
Districts, including purpose, design principals, relationships (architectural
and site), materials and colors, exterior walls, roofs, windows, doors,
lighting and fencing.



            3.   Landscape.  Landscape shall be preserved in
its natural state insofar as is practical by minimizing removal of existing
vegetation. Landscaping shall be used to shade and cool, direct wind
movements, enhance architectural features relating the structure design to
the site, visually screen non-compatible uses, and ameliorate the impact of
noise. Base landscaping standards shall be applied as per Central Core Map;
however, lesser standards may be approved by the Plan Commission and the
Common Council.



            4.   Buffers.  Architectural and/or landscape
elements that provide a logical transition to adjoining, existing or
permitted uses may be required as per the Plan Commission and/or Common
Council.



            5.   Energy Conservation.  Design methods to
reduce energy consumption are encouraged. Energy conservation methods may
include, but not be limited to: natural ventilation of structures, siting of
structures in relation to prevailing breezes and sun angles, insulation of
structures, use of landscape materials for shade and transpiration, and
orientation of breezes.



            6.   Signs for Non-Residential Tenants (Ground
Floor).



               a.   Projecting.  Fifteen square feet,
internally illuminated or halo-lit, may be a push-through letters on an
opaque background, clears the grade by a minimum of eight feet in height,
shall not extend vertically above a second-story window, and may require the
approval of an encroachment permit if it extends over the right-of-way and/or
sidewalk; or



               b.   Wall.  Twenty per cent of the signable
wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
make-up more than 50% of the building face, in which case the sign face may
increase to 40% of the signable area or as determined by the Plan Commission
and Common Council.



            7.   Trash Containers.  Trash containers shall be
screened as per the requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance, unless
modified by the Plan Commission and Common Council, and so designed as to be
conveniently accessible to their users and collectors at the rear of the
property within the ten-foot setback.



      (4)   Commencement of Development.  Development may not
commence until after adoption by the Common Council of the overlay district
and final approval by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) is received
regarding the site development plan. If development is not commenced within
six months from the date of approval by the Technical Advisory Committee of a
site development plan, the approval thereof shall become null and void, and
the same may not be developed in accordance with the site development plan
unless reviewed by the Technical Advisory Committee and approved. Subsequent
stages of the site development plan shall commence within the following 18
months after completion of the previous stage. Commencement of construction
shall include, but not be limited to: active and continuous road improvement,
excavation, grading and leveling, installation of utilities and the like.



      (5)   Additional Requirements.



         (a)   Platting Requirements.  Area may require a replat
of the lots involved as per Subdivision Requirements, §§ 159.060 et seq.



      (6)   Exceptions from the General Requirements. 



         (a)   In the interest of preserving the downtown area
and pursuant to Ordinance 45-11-92, the DT Downtown Zoning District shall be
exempt from the requirements of § 159.142, Required Off-street Parking
Standards, and from the payment of certain sewer availability fees as set
forth below.



         (b)   In consideration for a waiver of sewer
availability charges, connection fees, and parking lot requirements, the
applicant for an improvement location permit and/or a building permit within
the Core Central Business District, as described in Ordinance No. 45-11-92,
shall pay 15% of the savings from the sewer availability charges and
connection fee(s), which would have been due under ordinary circumstances, to
a maintenance fund for the continued improvement and maintenance of the
downtown area. Under no circumstances shall more than ten  EDUs of sewage
capacity per day be entitled to the exemption established herein for any
proposed use that would otherwise qualify for an exemption.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord.
64-11-98, passed 12-14-98; Am. Ord. 68-11-00, passed 12-12-00; Am. Ord.
21-4-00, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 55-11-01, passed 12-11-01; Am. Ord.
26-06-02, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 36-08-02, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord.
04-01-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. 26-4-03, passed 5-13-03; Am. Ord.
86-11-03, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 53-9-04,
passed 10-12-04; Am. Ord. 6-1-05, passed 2-14- 05; Am. Ord. 28-4-05, passed
5-10-05; Am. Ord. 42-5-05, passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord. 54-7-05, passed 8-9-05;
Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am.
Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
20-7-11, passed 8-9-11; Am. Ord. 29-08-13, passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 17-04-14,
passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 48-10-14, passed
11-10-14; Am. Ord. 49-10-14, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord. 20-03-15, passed
4-14-15; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed
11-10-15; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17 ; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed
7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 159.120  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   The regulations within each district shall be minimum regulations and
shall apply uniformly, except as hereinafter provided.



   (A)   Allowable Use of Land and Building.



      (1)   No building, structure, or land shall be used or
occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.



      (2)   No structure shall be erected or altered to provide for
greater height or bulk; to accommodate or house a greater number of families;
to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear
yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required, or
in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this
chapter shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements set forth herein.  No
part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space
required in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with
this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street
parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.



      (4)   Encourage these home occupations to be primarily service
oriented by limiting the intensity and retail design of these uses.



   (B)   Property Access.  Every building hereafter erected or moved
shall be located on a lot with frontage and access on a street, and provide
for safe and convenient access, fire protection, and required off-street
parking, except as otherwise provided in § 159.107(C).



   (C)   Number of Buildings Per Lot.  Every building hereafter
erected shall be located on a lot unless otherwise specified for planned
developments.  In no case shall there be more than one principal building
used for residential purposes, and its accessory buildings, located on one
lot, except as otherwise provided in this chapter for a mobile home park or
planned development.  If two or more principal non-residential buildings are
located on a lot, the space between such buildings shall be as established by
the yard setback requirements of the district in which the use is located.



   (D)   Minimum Yard Setback.  No structure shall be erected, placed,
or moved to within any setback area except certain accessory structures as
provided in § 159.121(B)(1).



   (E)   Topsoil Removal.  No person, firm, or corporation, without an
improvement location permit, shall strip, excavate, or otherwise remove
topsoil for sale, other than on the premises from which the same shall be
taken except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building
on such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto.  (Exception,
1-3 District.)



   (F)   Agriculture.



      (1)   Agriculture shall be a permitted use in all districts
provided that:



         (a)   The agricultural use does not include the
operation or maintenance of a commercial stockyard or confined feeding
operation (feedlot).



         (b)   The use shall not include the feeding, keeping, or
sheltering of animals or poultry in penned enclosures within 75 feet of any
residential district, except where animals are kept in soundproof, air
conditioned buildings, in which case the required setback shall be 25 feet.



         (c)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the ability
to grant a restricted commercial or retail operation as a component of the
overall agricultural operation in any district as a conditional use. These
operations shall not be construed to be permitted as an accessory use in any
residential district.



      (2)   Barns, outbuildings, or other buildings, or structures
which are adapted for agricultural purposes shall not be affected by the
setback and size regulations of this chapter provided they are located beyond
the corporate limits of the city except in those situations stated in this
division (F).  These structures shall also be exempt from the building
permit requirements with the completion of an application for agricultural
exemption so long as they are designed to house farm machinery, animals,
supplies, or products that are harvested from or utilized on a parcel of land.



   (G)   Mineral Extraction, Exempt by State Law.  Nothing herein
shall prevent, outside of urban areas, the complete use and alienation of any
mineral resources or forests by the owner or a lienee thereof, pursuant to IC
36-7-4-1103.  For the purpose of this paragraph, urban area shall include
any land or lots used for residential purposes where there are eight or more
residences within a one-quarter mile square area, such other land or lots as
have been or are planned for residential areas contiguous to incorporated
cities or towns, or other land already incorporated into cities and towns;
provided, however, that within these areas, mineral extraction may be
permitted in an appropriate location.



   (H)   Vision Corner Clearance.  “VISION CORNER CLEARANCE” is a
triangular space at the street corner of a corner lot, free from any kind of
obstruction to vision, including buildings, structures, fences, signs, trees
and shrubs between the heights of two and one-half feet and ten feet above
the established street grade. Street grade is measured at the intersection of
the centerlines of the intersecting street pavements. The triangular space is
determined by a diagonal line connecting two points measured 15 feet
equidistant from the lot corner along each property line at the intersections
of two local streets or one local street and one alley; or 25 feet along each
property line at the intersection of a local street and a collector, arterial
expressway, or any combinations thereof. For measuring purposes only, an
alley shall be determined as per the local street distances. For areas
located within the Central  Core Map, Appendix G, this particular
requirement may be modified and shall be approved by the City Engineer on a
case-by-case basis.



   (I)   Height Pre-emptions.  Height requirements may be preempted by
restrictions imposed by the Tall Structures Act or other airport height
control restrictions, as applicable.  Mobile equipment may be any height.



   (J)   Allowable Encroachments.



      (1)   SR District.  No structure or part thereof shall
project into a required rear or side yard except:



         (a)   Un-enclosed, uncovered steps, entrance platforms,
terraces, or landings not over 18 inches above grade level;



         (b)   The ordinary projection of belt courses, sills,
lintels, chimneys, and other similar ornamental and architectural features
not exceeding 18 inches, or 20% of the required setback; whichever is less;



         (c)   An eave, cornice overhang, awning, balcony, or bay
window not exceeding 20% of the required setback.



      (2)   All Other Districts.  No structure or part thereof
shall project into a required rear or side yard except:



         (a)   Un-enclosed, uncovered steps, entrance platforms,
terraces, or landings not over 18 inches above grade level;



         (b)   The ordinary projection of belt courses, sills,
lintels, chimneys, and other similar ornamental and architectural features
not exceeding 18 inches or 80% of the required setback, whichever is less.



         (c)   An eave, cornice overhang, awning, balcony, or bay
window not exceeding four feet or 80% of the required setback, whichever is
less.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 26-7-97, passed 9-29-97 Am. Ord.
48-6-05, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)   Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.121  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Intent.  The regulations of this section apply to accessory
uses and structures such as garages, carports, canopies, porte-cocheres,
patios, outdoor fireplaces, bath houses, cabanas, doghouses, children's play
equipment, greenhouses, television satellite dishes, solar panels, and
similar accessory buildings or structures.  Accessory Uses and Structures
shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts except as otherwise
restricted in this chapter.



   (B)   General Requirements.  Accessory uses and structure may be
permitted in all zone districts in accordance with the provisions of this
section.  Accessory uses and structures:



      (1)   Shall be incidental and subordinate to, and commonly
associated with the operation of, the principal use of the lot;



      (2)   Shall be operated and maintained under the same
ownership and on the same lot as the principal use;



      (3)   Where permitted detached accessory structure’s size,
height, and setback are based on the following standards:



         (a)   In the case where the property is one acre or less
in size:  The combined square footage of all accessory structures shall be
limited to 50% of the square footage of the principal building or 1,000
square feet, whichever is less.



         (b)   In the case where the property is larger than one
acre but less than five acres in size, and where an individual seeks to
exceed the bulk requirements of subsection (a) above, a structure may be
permitted subject to the following requirements:



            1.   The combined square footage of all accessory
structures shall be limited to the square footage of the principal building
or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less.



            2.   The height of the structure shall be limited
to 17 feet.



            3.   The minimum setbacks required shall be those
of the underlying zoning classification except for the side yards and rear
yards, which shall be required to maintain a 20 foot minimum setback.



         (c)   In the case where a property is equal to or larger
than five acres, and where an individual seeks to exceed the bulk
requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above, a structure may be permitted
subject to the following requirements:



            1.   The combined square footage of all accessory
structures shall not exceed the square footage of the principal building or
4,000 square feet, whichever is less.



            2.   The height of the structure shall be limited
to 20 feet.



            3.   The minimum setbacks required shall be those
of the underlying zoning classification except for the side yards and rear
yards, which shall be required to maintain a 40 foot minimum setback.



      (4)   Shall not be located closer to any lot line than the
minimum setback line required, unless specified otherwise in this chapter;



      (5)   Detached garages shall not be located closer to the
front lot line than the front line of the principal structure.



      (6)   Shall not be permitted prior to the erection and
operation of the principal use, unless a Temporary Improvement Location
Permit is obtained subject to § 159.042(B).



      (7)   Shall require a building permit, except as otherwise
provided in division (C) of this section.



      (8)   Shall have on all sides the same architectural features
as, or shall be architecturally compatible with, the principal building(s)
with which it is associated.



      (9)   Shall be used for the storage of personal materials only
and shall not be used for any commercial or separate residential purpose.



   (C)   Accessory Structures Exempt from Building Permit and Setback
Requirements.



      (1)   Accessory structures such as essential services,
sidewalks, driveways, curbs, drainage installations, boathouses, sea walls,
retaining walls, mail boxes, nameplates, lamp posts, bird baths, {decks less
than 18 inches from grade} Ord. No. 12-4-97, and structures of a like nature
are permitted in any required front, side, or rear yard and without the
issuance of any permit.  However, such uses shall be subject to all other
regulations for accessory structures found in division (B) of this section.



      (2)   Fences and unenclosed handicapped ramps attached to a
structure require a building permit but are exempt from front, side, and rear
yard setback requirements.



   (D)   Accessory Uses Permitted; Regulations Specific to Particular
Uses.  The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted
subject to the regulations of divisions (B) and (C) of this section and to
any additional regulations herein:



      (1)   Antennae, amateur radio sending and receiving, provided
the height thereof including masts shall not exceed 75 feet measured from
finished lot grade.



      (2)   Boathouses, subject to the following: Boathouses are
exempt from the setback requirement for accessory structures due to their
need to be located on the water's edge.  However, to mitigate the visual
impact of boathouses on neighboring properties, site plan approval shall be
required for the location of new boathouses, and landscaped screening as well
as the size of the boathouse shall be regulated subject to the site plan
review procedure.



      (3)   Garages and carports, private residential for the
storage of motor vehicles, which are clearly accessory and not for commercial
purposes.



      (4)   Fall-out shelters.



      (5)   Fences, walls, and hedges for residential and
non-residential uses, subject to the following and as per specific
regulations of that particular zoning district:



         (a)   They shall not obstruct visibility pursuant to §
159.120(H), Vision Corner Clearance.



         (b)   They may be permitted in any required yard or
along the edge of any yard, providing that driveway entrances are not
shielded by a fence, wall, or hedges in such a way as to obstruct the view of
a driver entering a road from the driveway.



         (c)   Residential open or solid fences, latticework,
screens, or walls not more than seven feet in height may be located in the
required side or rear yard, and a fence maintained not to exceed four feet in
height may be located in any front yard as defined in § 159.016.



         (d)   Non-residential fences shall be restricted by the
requirements of the zoning district or a maximum of eight feet.



         (e)   A site plan, including the location of the fence
and the setbacks from the property lines, shall be submitted with the fence
application. The site plan shall include all easements and infrastructure
locations, wetlands, floodplains, and the like. No fences shall be installed
until a permit is obtained.



         (f)   For the purposes of any fence, wall, and hedge
regulations, any common property held by the homeowners’ association or
non-residential business associations for landscaping or other purposes, that
abuts a street and is adjacent to and separate from the lot, extending 15
feet or less, shall be considered a front yard, thereby permitting a fence at
a maximum height of four feet. This only applies to corner lots and through
lots as defined in § 159.016.



         (g)   For the purposes of a residential fence, wall, and
hedge regulations, any yard that abuts a street to which access is prohibited
shall be treated as either a side or rear yard, thereby permitting a fence at
a maximum height of seven feet, except as otherwise noted above.



      (6)   Foster family care, where not more than six children
unrelated to the residents are cared for, provided that no sign shall be
displayed.



      (7)   Landscaping materials, as set forth in §§ 159.180
through 159.188.



      (8)   Management offices, in multi-family uses, and other
facilities normally associated with tenants' convenience, such as vending
machines and washing machines, provided there is no exterior display.



      (9)   Parking and loading areas, off-street, as set forth in
§§ 159.140 through 159.148.



      (10)   Pets, domestic, provided that the keeping of such pets
is not for profit and not construed as a kennel.



      (11)   Recreational Vehicles and Equipment, Storage or Parking
of, subject to the following:



         (a)   SR District.  Recreational vehicles and equipment
may be parked or stored anywhere on a lot in this district provided that they
do not violate any other section of this chapter and that no storage occurs
within the required front yard setback.



         (b)   All Other Districts.  No recreational vehicle or
equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district,
except for in the SR District as provided above, except in a carport or
enclosed building or behind the front facade of the building.







         (c)   Parking and Storage of Unregistered Vehicles. 
Recreational vehicles, of any kind or type without current license plates
shall not be parked or stored for more than seven days on any residentially
zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings.



         (d)   Mobility Shall Be Maintained.  The wheels or any
similar transporting devices of any recreational vehicle shall not be removed
except for repairs, nor shall such vehicle be otherwise permanently fixed to
the ground in a manner that would prevent ready removal of said types of
mobile structures.



         (e)   Number of Vehicles Limited.  No more than two
recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored in the open on residential
property at any one time, provided, however, that one additional recreational
vehicle may be permitted for visitation for a maximum of ten consecutive days
and not to exceed 14 days in any one year.



         (f)   Prohibition of Use of Stored Vehicles.  At no
time shall any parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used for
living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes, except as provided for
visitations in division (11)(e) above.



         (g)   Exception.  Notwithstanding the provisions above,
recreational vehicles may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or
unloading purposes, for not longer than a 48-hour period.



      (12)   Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).



         (a)   May be accessed either through a secondary
entrance on the property or the main living quarters.



         (b)   ADU must be connected to the utilities of the
primary dwelling unit (principal building). Separate metering is prohibited.



         (c)   The ADU shall be designed to blend with the
architectural and exterior appearance of the principal building. To the
degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the principal building shall
remain that of a single-family residence.



         (d)   No entrance to the ADU shall be permitted on the
front façade of the building.



         (e)   Exterior stairways or similar structures shall not
be constructed on the front façade of the building.



         (f)   The accessory dwelling unit is initially intended
for relatives or resident domestic employees.



         (g)   One accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot
or parcel.



      (13)   Satellite Dishes (Parabolic Receivers and
Transmitters), subject to the following:



         (a)   Parabolic reflectors used to receive from or
transmit to satellites (hereinafter referred to as parabolic reflectors)
exceeding 36 inches in overall height shall require improvement location
permits and payment of fees applicable to accessory uses.



         (b)   Parabolic reflectors shall be subject to all zone
district setbacks, which shall be measured from that part of the parabolic
reflector that extends closest to the adjoining property.



         (c)   In no case shall parabolic reflectors be allowed
within 15 feet of any public right-of-way line.



         (d)   All cables and connections from a parabolic
reflector to other equipment on the premises shall be buried underground when
a parabolic reflector is located on the ground, or appropriately concealed
when a parabolic reflector is located on a building.



         (e)   Maximum heights for any portion of the parabolic
reflectors shall be determined by the zone district and land use of the
property:



            1.   In residential districts and areas of or
abutting residential land uses or districts, maximum height is ten feet above
ground.



            2.   In the "LB," "GB," "DT," "PB," "MO," and "VC"
districts, the maximum height is 12 feet above ground.



            3.   In the "I-1," "1-2," and "1-3" districts the
maximum height is 15 feet above ground.



            4.   Parabolic reflectors larger than 24 inches in
diameter shall be prohibited from being mounted on any portion of the
building except as allowed by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



         (f)   Ground mounted parabolic reflectors shall be
screened by a tight evergreen vegetative screen no less than seven feet high,
at maturity; provided, however, that in no circumstance shall screening be
required that would interfere with the reflector's line of sight to the
satellite.



         (g)   When the setback to the parabolic reflector
exceeds 30 times the height of the parabolic reflector, no screening is
required.



      (14)   Signs, as set forth in §§ 159.160 through 159.166.



      (15)   Stables and Animal Pens.



         (a)   Within the Corporate Limits of the City:



            1.   No more than one horse or pony of at least
six-months of age shall be stabled, maintained, pastured, grazed, or kept in
any manner, except upon property at least one acre, and no more than one
horse or pony shall be kept on each additional acre thereafter.



               a.   Stables shall be located at least 150
feet from existing residence on adjacent lots.



               b.   Minimum yard setbacks.



                  (i)   Front - Stables are not
permitted within any front yard.



                  (ii)   Side - 25 feet.



                  (iii)   Rear - 25 feet.



               c.   Maximum stable building height - 18
feet.



               d.   Maximum stable structure size - 50% of
the square footage of the principal building or 1,000 square feet, whichever
is less.



            2.   No person shall keep, raise, confine, or feed
hogs, chickens, ducks, goats, sheep, cows, or other similar animals within
the corporate limits of the city.



         (b)   Outside the corporate limits of the city.



            1.   No more than one horse or two ponies shall be
stabled, maintained, pastured, grazed or kept in any manner, except upon
property at least one acre and nor more than one horse or two ponies shall be
kept on each acre thereafter.



            2.   Hogs, chickens, ducks, goats, sheep or cows
may be permitted on residentially platted lots of at least five acres,
located outside the city limits, provided that structures, pens or corals
housing animals shall be a minimum of 75 feet from an adjoining property
line, except where animals are kept in soundproofed air-conditioned buildings
in which case the required setback shall be a minimum of 25 feet.



         (c)   No keeping of animals permitted under these
regulations shall be conducted for profit, nor shall any kennel be permitted
pursuant to these regulations.



      (16)   Storage Buildings and Equipment Sheds.



      (17)   Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs at least 42 inches
deep and 12 feet in diameter, subject to the following:



         (a)   Permanent swimming pools shall be protected by a
surrounding fence at least four feet in height, which is maintained to
prevent access by small children or animals, and/or by a safety pool cover,
which meets all specifications set forth in the adopted Indiana Swimming Pool
Code, as amended.  If a surrounding fence is used, said fence may be located
around either the pool itself or the property on which the pool is located.



         (b)   Non-permanent pools shall meet all accessory
building structure regulations but are not subject to the safety and
screening regulations of permanent pools.



      (18)   Cluster box units (CBUs) and neighborhood unit centers
(NUCs)/postal kiosks.



         (a)   Required for all new residential subdivisions
after January 2016 and amended for apartments after July 1, 2016.



         (b)   CBUs and NUCs shall be approved by the United
States Postal Service (USPS) local manager, including cluster box locations
and type of equipment, prior to receiving approval by the Technical Advisory
Committee (TAC). The approved plan by the local manager shall be included
with the TAC submittal.



         (c)   The submitted plan shall include all easements,
location of infrastructure, such as sewer lines, manholes, and the like, and
the location and setbacks of the CBUs or NUCs. Materials, colors, and color
elevations are required as a part of the TAC submittal and for approval.



         (d)   The CBUs and NUCs shall be “decorative” in
nature, to include decorative top and enhanced pedestal cover. The
non-decorative cluster box units shall be unacceptable such as the
base/standard units that are non-descriptive.



         (e)   Acceptable colors include black, brown and bronze.
White, grey, green and/or tan (sandstone) or other similar colors are
prohibited.



         (f)   An encroachment permit shall not be required prior
to the installation of CBUs approved by TAC.



         (g)   A building permit shall be required prior to
installation neighborhood unit centers and postal kiosks.



         (h)   The city shall not be responsible for the
installation, repair or replacement of damaged CBUs and/or NUCs.



         (i)   Refer to the USPS Postal Operations Manual (POM),
Section 631, Modes of Delivery, and Section 632, Mail Receptacles, for
additional standards, as those documents may be amended.



         (j)   For new or remodeled apartment complexes, refer to
the USPS Postal Operations Manual (POM), Section 632, Mail Receptacles, for
location and arrangement of CBUs.



   (E)   Special Regulations in ZLL Districts.  In the ZLL overlay
district, all uses are required to have an attached one car garage.  No
detached accessory structures are permitted in the ZLL District.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord.
44-8-98, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord. 04-01-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord.
86-11-03, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 95-11-06, passed 12-12-06; Am. Ord.
56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord.
29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 21-06-12, passed 7-10-12; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 13-02-14, passed 3-11-14; Am. Ord.
25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16)   Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.122  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Intent.  Home occupations shall be a permitted use in all
residential zoning districts except as otherwise restricted in this
chapter.  The intent of these home occupation regulations is to:



      (1)   Protect residential areas from adverse impacts of
activities associated with home occupations.



      (2)   Permit residents of the community a broad choice in the
use of their homes as a place of livelihood and the production or
supplementing of personal and family income.



      (3)   Establish criteria and development standards for home
occupations conducted in dwelling units and accessory structures in
residential zones.



   (B)   General Requirements.  Home occupations require a permit from
the Director of Planning and Development which is subject to the following
restrictions.



      (1)   The primary use of the structure or dwelling unit shall
remain residential, and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a
resident in the dwelling unit.



      (2)   If the operator is a tenant, he or she shall provide a
written letter from the property owner giving permission for the home
occupation to be conducted on the property.



      (3)   No person may participate in, or assist with, the
conduct or operation of the home occupation except:



         (a)   Individuals who are residents of the dwelling unit
as mentioned above;



         (b)   Individuals whose sole participation in the use
and operation of the home occupation is financial in nature;



         (c)   A nonresident assistant, subject to the following
requirements and limitations:



            1.   Participation by the nonresident assistant
shall be in a subordinate capacity only, incidental to the conduct of the
home occupation;



            2.   The nonresident assistant shall not
participate, totally or partially, in the capacity of an additional operator
of the home occupation, as an additional practitioner of the professional,
craft, or occupational service of the operator, or as a partner or
professional associate thereof;



            3.   Participation by the nonresident shall be
limited to 40 hours per week;



            4.   No more than one resident assistant shall be
permitted.  If more than one home occupation is conducted in the same
dwelling unit, a nonresident assistant shall be permitted for only one of the
home occupations.



            5.   No nonresident assistant shall be permitted
at beauty shops, barber shops, or other similar businesses with a regular
flow of customers.



      (4)   No structural additions, enlargements or exterior
alterations changing the residential appearance to a business appearance
shall be permitted.



      (5)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the primary residential use of the dwelling.  No more than
600 square feet or 25% of the total square footage of the dwelling unit,
whichever is lesser, shall be used in conduct of all home occupations
operated from a property.



      (6)   Such home occupations shall be conducted entirely within
the principal building.  An accessory structure may be utilized on a
property of five acres or more in area.  In cases where accessory structures
are permitted to be used, no more than 600 square feet or 25% of the total
square footage of all structures on the property, whichever is less, shall be
used to conduct the home occupation.



      (7)   No additional and separate entrance incongruent with the
residential structural design shall be constructed for the purpose of
conducting the home occupation.



      (8)   No more traffic shall be generated by a home occupation
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.



      (9)   No provision for more than one extra off-street parking
space, other than the requirements and the permitted facilities of the zone
district, shall be permitted.  No part of a minimum required setback
distance shall be used for off-street parking or loading facilities, and no
additional driveway to serve such home occupations shall be permitted.



      (10)   No display of goods or external evidence of the home
occupation shall be permitted, except for one non-animated, non-illuminated,
non-flashing announcement plate, indicating not more than the name of the
occupation and name and address of resident.  Said plate shall be attached
flat against the wall of the residence and shall not exceed one square foot
in total surface area.



      (11)   No stock in trade or commodities, other than those
prepared, produced, or created on the premises by the operator of the home
occupation, shall be kept or sold on the premises.



      (12)   No electrical or mechanical equipment shall interfere
with local radio communications and television reception, or cause
fluctuation in line voltage off the premises.



      (13)   Hours of operation of the home occupation shall not
interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent residential properties.



   (C)   Exempted Enterprises.  Uses where the occupant utilizes a
telephone or computer for "business" activity but does not receive customers
or products shall be exempt from this classification as a business or home
occupation, provided all of the other conditions of the one occupation are
met.



   (D)   Procedure.



      (1)   Application.  Application for a Home Occupation shall
be filed with the Director of Planning and Development on a form provided by
the Director.  An applicant for a Home Occupation permit shall pay fees in
connection with the submittal of the application in accordance with fee
schedules adopted, from time to time, by the Common Council.  The current
fee schedule is found in Appendix A, "Fee Schedule."  The Director of
Planning and Development will make a decision and notify the applicant in
writing 15 calendar days of the date the application is received.



      (2)   Scope.  In cases where the Department of Planning and
Development considers the application not within the scope of the home
occupation criteria, the application shall be denied.



      (3)   Time Limit.  All home occupation permits shall be valid
for a period of one year from initial date of approval.



      (4)   Voiding of Permit.  The Department of Planning and
Development may void any home occupation permit for non-compliance with the
criteria set forth in this section.  Revocation may take place at any time
prior to the expiration date of the permit. If the permit is revoked, or is
not renewed, it becomes null and void and said use shall be terminated.



      (5)   Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.  The decision of
the Department of Planning and Development concerning approval or revocation
shall be final unless a written appeal is filed with the Board of Zoning
Appeals within ten calendar days of the decision.  An appeal may only be
filed by the applicant or persons residing within 300 feet of the subject
property.



      (6)   Notice to Parties.  Applicants for a new home
occupation permit shall be required to send a notice by certified mail
records of this county.  Such notice shall be prepared by the Department of
Planning and Development to all property owners of property within 660 feet
or two adjacent properties whichever is less of the subject tract.  The
owners shall be identified as recorded in the office of the Hamilton County
Recorder, or as it appears in the Department of Planning and Development and
shall include the following:



         (a)   Statement that a home occupation permit
application has been filed at a given location;



         (b)   A brief description of the particular home
occupation applied for;



         (c)   Address and phone number of the Department of
Planning and Development determines that the application complies with all
legal standards set forth in this chapter.



      (7)   Upon completion of the required certified mail notices,
and a determination that the application is in compliance with this chapter,
the Director of Planning and Development shall issue the permit no sooner
than ten days after and no later than 15 days after the certified mail notice
date.



      (8)   Inspection.  Home occupation applicants shall permit a
reasonable inspection of the premises by the Department of Planning and
Development to determine compliance with these provisions.  Home occupations
shall be field checked annually by the Department of Planning and Development
staff to determine compliance.



      (9)   Renewal.  Home occupation permits may be renewed
annually provided there has not been any violation of the provisions of these
provisions.  Requests for renewals shall be submitted to the Department of
Planning and Development in writing, accompanied by the prevailing renewal
fee, one month prior to expiration of the permit.  Renewals shall not be
subject to the notice requirement under division (D)(5) of this section. 
Renewals shall not be subject to the notice requirement under division (D)(5)
of this section.



   (E)   Prohibited Uses.  The following uses, by the nature of the
investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency once started to rapidly
increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations and thereby impair
the use and value of a residentially zoned area for residential purposes. 
Therefore, the uses specified below shall not be permitted as home
occupations:



      (1)   Medical Offices;



      (2)   Dental Offices, Law Offices and Real Estate Offices;



      (3)   Houses of Worship;



      (4)   Boarding Houses, Time Share Condominiums;



      (5)   Dance Studios;



      (6)   Automobile Repair (Major or Minor);



      (7)   Restaurants, Taverns;



      (8)   Private Clubs;



      (9)   Painting of Vehicles, Trailers, or Boats;



      (10)   Welding Shops;



      (11)   Hair Styling Salons with two or more customer chairs;



      (12)   Massage Parlors or Massage Studios.



   (F)   Child Care Homes. Child Care Homes are home occupations which
are subject to the following additional requirements:



      (1)   Maximum Number of Children Permitted.  The maximum
number of children permitted shall be as described in the definition of Child
Care Home Class I and Class II in § 159.016.



      (2)   Compliance.  Division (F)(1) notwithstanding, a Child
Care Home must comply with all applicable city ordinances and state and
federal statutes and regulations, including licensing.



         A copy of the issued state license as to operate a Child
Care Home shall be provided to the Planning and Development Department prior
to the issuance of a home occupation permit and a certificate of occupancy as
per §§ 159.040 through 159.045 and §§ 159.120 through 159.131.



      (3)   Resident Operator.  A Child Day Care Home shall be
operated by a resident of the dwelling in which it is located.



      (4)   Activity Area.  Any Child Day Care Home shall include
an outdoor play area which shall be enclosed on all sides by a barrier in the
form of a fence, building wall, or other structure or landscaping so as to
provide for safe outdoor play.



      (5)   Parking and Sign Regulations.



         (a)   One additional off-street parking space shall be
provided for a Child Day Care Home use.



         (b)   No signs shall be displayed.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 26-7-97, passed 9-29-97; Am. Ord.
33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
53-10-15, passed 11-10-15)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.123  RESIDENTIAL CARE HOMES.



   Residential care homes shall be a permitted use in all residential
districts, as permitted by Indiana law, and provided that such uses shall be
registered with the Department of Planning and Development.  Such
registration shall include the following:



   (A)   Name, address, and phone number of owner.



   (B)   Name, address, and phone number of operator.



   (C)   Names, addresses, and phone numbers of individuals who may be
contacted in an emergency (24 hours).



   (D)   Address and phone number of the home itself.



   (E)   Number of residents.



   (F)   Disability of the residents.



   (G)   Any special information concerning special needs or
limitations in case of an emergency (e.g. impaired mobility, impaired hearing
or vision).



   (H)   Evidence that all required licenses, certifications, permits,
and approvals are up to date and maintained.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.124  MANUFACTURED HOMES, INDIVIDUAL.



   Manufactured homes as scattered-site residences shall be a permitted
use in all residential districts, subject to the requirements for all
residential uses in the districts and provided manufactured homes shall meet
the following requirements and limitations:



   (A)   The home shall meet all requirements applicable to single
family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location, building and
occupancy permits and other certification required by this chapter.



   (B)   The home shall be of double section construction and meet the
minimum square footage requirements for the appropriate zone.



   (C)   The home shall be oriented such that its longest side is the
side which faces the street frontage.



   (D)   The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
foundation in conformance with the regulations in the Indiana One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Ordinance and with the manufacturer's installation
specifications.



   (E)   The home shall be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on site-built residential dwellings, and such material shall
extend over the top of the foundation or meet the community's site-built
residential dwelling home standards.



   (F)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material customarily
used on site-built residential dwellings, such as asbestos, fiberglass,
shake, asphalt, or tile, which shall be installed onto a surface
appropriately pitched for the materials used.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.125  BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS.



   Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall be a conditional accessory use
in all residential districts, the Downtown (DT) District and the General
Business (GB) District.  Bed and Breakfast Establishments, where permitted,
shall only be located within and accessory to an owner-occupied single-family
home.  Bed and Breakfast Establishments shall be bound by the standards
below as well as the applicable requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located.



   (A)   Procedural Standards.



      (1)   Operation of a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall not
commence until approval has been granted by the Noblesville Board of Zoning
Appeals.



      (2)   No party shall operate a Bed and Breakfast Establishment
unless the establishment complies with all fire safety standards as
established by the Indiana Department of Fire and Building Services, and
unless a health inspection report from the Indiana State Board of Health
and/or Hamilton County Health Department has been filed with the Department
of Planning and Development stating that the establishment complies with
state  and county  public health regulations applicable to Bed and
Breakfast Establishments.



      (3)   Proof of registration with the Indiana Department of
Revenue and Hamilton County for hote1/motel taxes shall be provided to the
Department of Planning and Development within 90 days after Board of Zoning
Appeals approval. Records of payments made to the Indiana Department of
Revenue and Hamilton County for hote1/motel taxes shall be submitted upon
reasonable request, at any time, by a representative of the Department of
Planning and Development.



      (4)   No ancillary use inconsistent with the description of a
Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall be operated in connection with an
approved Bed and Breakfast Establishment.  Examples of such ancillary uses
include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Operation of a commercial restaurant;



         (b)   Sales of items to the general public;



         (c)   Procurement of an alcoholic beverage sales permit;



         (d)   Provision of recreation or conference facilities
to other than guests;



         (e)   Operation of services such as beauty and barber
shops, on site dry cleaning or laundry services and gift shops.



      (5)   The location of a Bed and Breakfast Establishment in a
residential district shall not be considered a precedent for the granting of
any Conditional Use, Land Use Variance, or Variance which would allow other
commercial and industrial development in the same district.  Operation of a
Bed and Breakfast Establishment is not to be considered, classified, or
permitted as a Home Occupation.



   (B)   Development Standards.



      (1)   A Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall include no more
than eight guest rooms for rent.



      (2)   Accommodations shall not be provided to a particular
guest for more than 30 consecutive days.



      (3)   Parking areas in residential districts must be so
designated and maintained so as not to alter the existing character of the
district.  All parking shall be screened from view from adjacent residential
uses according to a landscape plan approved by the Department of Planning and
Development and required by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a condition of
approval.



      (4)   Parking lot illumination, if proposed, must not result
in an illumination intensity of more than 0.1 foot-candles at any adjacent
residential property boundary.  A parking lot lighting plan indicating
illumination at the property lines must be submitted as part of the
application to be heard by the Board of Zoning Appeals.  Parking lot
lighting must be of a down-directed variety, the standards for which may not
exceed a height of 18 feet and must be of an architectural style specifically
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (5)   Signage displayed for Bed and Breakfast Establishments
located in business districts shall be as provided in §§ 159.160 through 
159.166.  In residential  districts,  each Bed  and  Breakfast
Establishment shall be limited to the display of one non-illuminated sign per
street frontage, said sign to be attached flat against the wall of the Bed
and Breakfast Establishment and limited to a size of no more than four square
feet.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



§ 159.126  (RESERVED)



§ 159.127  TEMPORARY USES.




   (A)   Intent.  Temporary Uses shall be a permitted use in all
zoning districts except as otherwise restricted in this chapter and subject
to the granting of a Temporary Improvement Location Permit by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, or by the Director of Planning and Development as noted.





   (B)   General Requirements.





      (1)   The duration of the temporary period is stated
hereinafter, provided, however, renewal of such permit may be requested. 
Temporary uses are limited to the maximum number of days listed in division
(C) of this section per location and/or user.





      (2)   Temporary Uses shall be subject to all the regulations
of the applicable zoning district.





      (3)   The following factors should be considered by the Board
or Director as they review Temporary Use applications:





         (a)   Adequate access and off-street parking facilities
shall be provided which shall not interfere with traffic movement on adjacent
streets.





         (b)   No public address systems or other noise-producing
devices of a disruptive nature shall be permitted in a residential district.





         (c)   Any flood lights or other lighting shall be
directed upon the premises and shall not be detrimental to adjacent
properties.





         (d)   No banners, pennants, or unnecessary signs shall
be permitted in a residential district.





         (e)   The lot shall be put in clean condition devoid of
temporary use remnants upon termination of the temporary period.





   (C)   Temporary Uses Permitted; Regulations Specific to Particular
Temporary Uses.




      (1)   Sales uses operated from permanent structures such as a
model home, and the accessory model homes or model apartments normally
associated with these uses, shall be considered permitted temporary uses in
residential subdivisions. Three model homes per housing type with a maximum
number of ten model homes are permitted for the entire planned
development/subdivision. Each builder shall be limited to one sales use, and
at no time shall any subdivision be permitted more than three total sales
uses. Each such use shall require a permit by the Director and such permit
shall be valid for one year from the date the permit is issued. Such uses
shall also be subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   Sales uses and model homes shall be clustered
together near the entrance of the development so as to avoid undue traffic
through the developing site.



         (b)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
and maintained for each structure proposed for a sales use and/or model home.



         (c)   No signs, flags, banners, etc. shall be permitted
unless otherwise specifically allowed by this subsection or §§ 159.160 et
seq., Signs.



         (d)   Adherence to the requirements of subsection (B)(3)
'General Requirements' shall be maintained in any case where that section is
more restrictive than the requirements of this subsection.




   Each subdivision shall be permitted, beyond that already allowed by
this chapter, a sign indicating the location of the models under
construction. The sign shall indicate model homes and/or sales office with an
arrow.  The sign shall be both incidental and necessary for the sale,
rental, or lease of real property in the zone district. This sign shall be a
maximum of four square feet in size and shall be required to be located
inside the subdivision under construction.





      (2)   Sales offices operated from temporary structures shall
be required to meet all standards included in subsection (C)(1) above, as
well as following standards:





         (a)   Meet all building setback requirements of the
respective district.





         (b)   Landscaping at a minimum rate of 12 shrubs and two
trees per temporary structure. All landscaping shall be installed in
compliance with the type standards required by §§ 159.180 through 159.188
of the Unified Development Ordinance.





         (c)   Skirting shall be installed around 360 degrees of
the structure.





         (d)   Must have indoor plumbing.





         (e)   All temporary sales trailers shall be removed upon
20% build out of the subdivision.





      (3)   Non-commercial concrete batching plant, both incidental
and necessary to construction in the zone district. A Temporary Use permit
may be issued by the Director.  Maximum 18 months.





      (4)   Temporary building or yard for construction materials
and equipment, both incidental and necessary to construction in the zone
district.  A Temporary Use permit may be issued by the Director for a period
of time coinciding with the building permit, but for a maximum 18 months. 
This use is limited to construction-related activity only and is not to be
mixed with a sales use. (Maximum 18 months).





      (5)   Parking lot (designated for a special event in a zone
district).  A Temporary Use permit may be issued by the Director.  Maximum
30 days.





      (6)   Bazaars, carnivals, and similar temporary uses. A
Temporary Use permit may be issued by the Director.  Maximum ten days.





      (7)   Sale of Christmas trees, outdoor tent theater, sale of
seasonal fruits and vegetables from roadside stands, tent sales.  A
Temporary Use permit may be issued by the Director.  Maximum 60 days.




      (8)   Parking of recreational vehicles for visitation that
exceeds 14 days.  A Temporary Use permit may be issued by the Director. 
Maximum 30 days in any given year.



      (9)   Garage sales shall not be operated from any property
more than six days during the calendar year. A permit shall be required for
such events. A sticker will be issued for the event to be placed on the
temporary sign not exceeding four square feet.



      (10)   Any temporary use deemed appropriate by the Director of
Planning and Development and located in the appropriate zone district, which
does not exceed three days in duration.



      (11)   Other similar uses deemed temporary by the Board of
Zoning Appeals and attached with such time period, conditions, and safeguards
as the Board may deem necessary.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 45-8-98, passed 9-14-98; Am. Ord.
55-11-01, passed 12-11-01; Am. Ord. 42-5-05, passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord.
95-11-06, passed 12-12-06; Am. Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 12-2-11,
passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed
5-12-15)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.128  MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES.



   (A)   Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to mobile
food vehicles engaged in the business of cooking, preparing, and distributing
food or beverage with or without charge upon or in public and private
property. This section does not apply to vehicles which dispense food and
that move from place to place and are stationary in the same location for no
more than 15 minutes at a time, such as ice cream trucks or food vending
pushcarts and stands located on sidewalks. Mobile food vehicles shall comply
with the following standards relating to their operation. Any vendor wishing
to operate a mobile food vehicle must first receive a mobile food vehicle
permit. Any failure to comply with these regulations may result in the
revocation, suspension, or the city not renewing the mobile food vehicle
permit.



   (B)   General regulations. 



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any
religious, charitable or nonprofit organization to operate a mobile food
vehicle within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the City of
Noblesville without a permit unless otherwise exempted by these regulations.



      (2)   A mobile food vehicle must hold all requisite health
department, business, and resale licensures to sell food and beverages.



      (3)   A separate permit is required for each mobile food
vehicle.



      (4)   A permit issued under this section shall expire after
one year.



      (5)   Mobile food vehicles shall not be required to obtain a
temporary use permit.



      (6)   A vendor shall not operate on private property without
first obtaining written consent to operate from the affected private property
owner. A private property owner shall not permit parking by a mobile food
vehicle until a mobile food vehicle permit has been obtained to allow for
such use.



      (7)   In addition to complying with the city's ordinances
related to mobile food vehicles, the owner and operator of a mobile food
vehicle is responsible for applying for and obtaining all other necessary
licenses required for the service of food and beverages, and the food truck
itself must be in compliance with the motor vehicle laws of the State of
Indiana.



      (8)   In locations where mobile food vehicles are permitted to
operate, mobile food vehicles shall comply with all parking rules.



      (9)   Mobile food vehicles shall not interfere with or
obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles along any street,
sidewalk, road, or parking lot drive aisle or park within 20 feet of any
intersection.



      (10)   Excluded event or location. Mobile food vehicles must
operate at least 1,000 feet from permitted special event locations and the
Farmer's Market location. A valid mobile food vehicle permit does not allow
operation at these excluded events or locations. To operate at these excluded
events or locations mobile food vehicles are not required to have a valid
mobile food permit, but are subject to the following:



         (a)   Mobile food trucks may operate at events on public
property if they have a vendor agreement with the event coordinator.



         (b)   Mobile food trucks may operate at events on
Noblesville Parks' property if they have a signed agreement with the
Noblesville Parks Board.



         (c)   The space available to mobile food trucks at some
excluded events may be limited. It shall be up to the individual groups to
make those determinations and set their own selection criteria.



      (11)   No mobile food vehicle shall be equipped with any
external electronic sound amplifying device.



      (12)   Signage is only allowed when placed on mobile food
vehicles. No separate freestanding signs are permitted.



      (13)   All exterior lights with over 60 watts shall contain
opaque, hood shields to direct the illumination downward.



      (14)   All mobile food vehicle vendors shall offer a waste
container for public use which the vendor shall empty at its own expense. All
trash and garbage originating from the operation of mobile food vehicles
shall be collected and disposed of off-site by the operators each day. Spills
of food or food by-products shall be cleaned up, and no dumping of gray water
on the street is allowed.



      (15)   Any power required for the mobile food vehicle located
on a public way shall be self-contained and a mobile food vehicle shall not
use utilities drawn from the public right-of-way. Mobile food vehicles on
private property may use electrical power from the property being occupied or
an adjacent property, but only when the property owner provides written
consent to do so. All power sources must be self-contained. No power cable or
equipment shall be extended at or across any city street, alley, or sidewalk.



      (16)   Mobile food vehicles shall provide proof of General
Liability Insurance in the amount of not less than $l,000,000 per occurrence
and $2,000,000 aggregate prior to obtaining a permit or entering into an
agreement with the Noblesville Parks Board.



      (17)   No mobile food truck shall be parked on the street
overnight, or left unattended and unsecured at any time food is kept in the
mobile food truck. Any mobile food truck which is found to be unattended
shall be considered a public safety hazard and may be ticketed and impounded.



      (18)   All signs must be permanently affixed to or painted on
the mobile food vehicle and shall not extend more than six inches from the
vehicle.



      (19)   No sign shall flash, cause interference with radio,
telephone, television or other communication transmissions; produce or
reflect motion pictures; emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor; be
animated or produce any rotation, motion, or movement.



      (20)   A sign on which the message is changed electronically
not more than one time per ten seconds shall not be considered to be an
animated sign or a sign with movement, but is classified as a changeable copy
sign.



      (21)   Changeable copy signs shall be permitted, but the total
area of such signs on the vehicle, when parked and the vehicle is set up to
operate, must not exceed 30 square feet. Any message on a changeable copy
sign shall have an instantaneous change of message with no fading, fly-in,
dissolve, or other feature used. The change of message rate on digital sign
shall be limited to no more than once every ten seconds.



      (22)   No sign shall utilize any exposed incandescent lamp
with wattage of more than 40 watts, any revolving beacon light, or a
luminance in excess of 350 foot lamberts measured at sign face.



      (23)   No mobile food vehicle shall make or cause to be made
any unreasonable or excessive noise. The operation of all mobile food
vehicles shall meet the city noise ordinance, including generators. No loud
music, other high decibel sounds, horns, or amplified announcements are
allowed.



      (24)   No mobile food vehicle shall provide or allow any
dining area, including but not limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools,
benches, and stand up counters, unless a proposal for such seating
arrangements is submitted with the permit application and the use is located
on private property.



      (25)   Any mobile food truck being operated without a valid
mobile food truck permit shall be deemed a public safety hazard and may be
ticketed and impounded.



      (26)   No flashing or blinking lights or strobe lights are
allowed on mobile food vehicles or related signage.



(Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13)



§ 159.129  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   Applicability.  Wireless Telecommunications Service
Facilities including Cellular on Wheels (COW) shall comply with the following
standards as well as the applicable requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located except where otherwise noted in this part.



      (2)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for
sensible and reasonable land use standards to allow for the provision of
adequate, reliable public and private telecommunication service. There is a
need to maximize the use of service facilities in order to reduce the total
number of towers needed to service the needs of the areas, as well as a need
to minimize the adverse, undesirable visual effects of service facilities
while still providing for reasonable location of such towers within the
city’s zoning jurisdiction.



      (3)   Location of Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.



         (a)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall be a
permitted use in the following zoning districts:



            1.   I-1 (Light Industrial) Zoning District;



            2.   I-2 (Heavy Industrial) Zoning District;



            3.   I-3 (Extractive Industrial) Zoning District;
and



            4.   The following subdistricts of the CCPD
(Corporate Campus) Zoning District:



               a.   Industrial/Office;



               b.   Regional Recreation and Entertainment;
and



               c.   Agricultural/I-O.



         (b)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall be a
conditional use in the following zoning districts:



            1.   PB (Planned Business) Zoning District.



            2.   In any residential zoning district in which
the structures may be setback at least 500 feet from an adjoining residential
development or property.



            3.   In any district where the antennas are to be
located upon pre-existing structures or buildings so long as the petitioner
proposes to sufficiently screen or camouflage antennas and antenna support
structures.



            4.   In any district upon property owned or
operated by units of government or public utilities.



            5.   In any district, in a non-urban area, a term
associated with I.C. 36-7-4-1103. “Urban area” is defined in the Code as
follows: all lands and lots within the corporate boundaries of a
municipality, any other lands or lots used for residential purposes where
there are at least eight residences within any quarter mile square area, and
other lands or lots that have been or are planned for residential areas
contiguous to the municipality.



         (c)   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities shall be a
special consideration in the following subdistricts of the CCPD (Corporate
Campus) zoning district:



            1.   Office;



            2.   Office/Flex Uses;



            3.   Commercial;



            4.   Commercial/Office; and



            5.   Community.



   (B)   Procedural Standards.  All Wireless Telecommunication Service
Facilities shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The placement of antennas upon existing antenna support
structures or any electrical work at existing support structures may be
administratively approved by the Planning Director. The applicant shall
submit all appropriate permits and drawings deemed necessary by the Director
of Planning.



      (2)   In the event an antenna support structure ceases to be
used, the antenna support structure shall be removed within 180 days of
termination of use. Cellular on Wheels (COW) must be removed from the parcel
within three days after the event to which it is servicing.



      (3)   In the zoning districts in which a Wireless
Telecommunication Facility is listed as either a permitted or conditional
use, a Wireless Telecommunications Facility may be deemed an accessory use.



      (4)   The following documentation shall be submitted for all
applications for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility. This information
shall be submitted in addition to the standard application requirements for
the type of application being filed. The Planning Director may waive any of
the submission requirements based upon a written request of the applicant
that must be submitted at the time of application. The waiver of any
submission requirement may only be granted if the Planning Director finds in
writing that, due to special circumstances of the application, the
information is not required to determine compliance with the standards of
this chapter.



         (a)   A location map showing all Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities within a two mile radius of the proposed
facility. The applicant shall indicate which existing facilities in the area
they already have existing antenna arrays located on. Applicant shall also
indicate on this map the size and location of the search ring identified by
their engineering studies to find a site to fill the network coverage gap.



         (b)   Evidence demonstrating that no existing building,
site, or structure can accommodate the applicant’s proposed facility, the
evidence for which may consist of any one or more of the following:



            1.   Evidence that no existing facilities are
located within the targeted market coverage area identified by the
applicant’s engineering requirements.



            2.   Evidence that existing facilities do not have
sufficient height or cannot be increased in height at a reasonable cost or
within the limitations of this chapter at a reasonable cost to meet the
applicant’s engineering requirements.



            3.   Evidence that existing facilities do not have
sufficient structural strength to support the applicant’s proposed antenna
array and related equipment. Specifically:



               a.   Planned, necessary equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing facility, considering the
existing and planned use of those facilities, and these existing facilities
cannot be reinforced to accommodate the new equipment at a reasonable expense.



               b.   The applicant’s proposed antenna or
equipment would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers, or the antenna or equipment with the existing facility would
cause interference with the applicant’s proposed antenna.



               c.   Existing or approved facilities do not
have space on which planned equipment can be placed so it can function
effectively.



            4.   The fee, costs, or contractual provisions
required by the owner in order to share or adapt an existing facility are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding the pro rata share of new facility development
are presumed to be unreasonable.



            5.   Evidence that the applicant has made diligent
good faith efforts to negotiate co-location on an existing facility,
building, or structure and has been denied access.



         (c)   A propagation map, before and after, of how the
proposed facility fits in the applicant’s telecommunications network. The
after propagation map shall demonstrate that the proposed facility will fill
a significant coverage gap.



         (d)   A scenic assessment for the project area
consisting of the following:



            1.   Elevation drawings of the proposed facility,
showing height above ground level and details on the antenna array attachment
or arrangement.



            2.   A site plan indicating the proposed placement
of the facility on the site, including the delineation of the proposed lease
area; location of existing structures, trees, means of access to the lease
area, and the type of material being used, and other significant site
features.



            3.   Photo simulations of the proposed facility
taken from at least two different perspectives. Each photo must be labeled
with where it was taken from, elevation, and date taken.



            4.   A landscape plan indicating the landscaping
and screening at the base of the facility or around the perimeter of the
lease area, whichever is most appropriate.



         (e)   Drawings prepared and certified by a professional
engineer of the proposed structure indicating the location, type, and height
of the proposed facility, antenna capacity, and compliance with all
applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI) technical and
structural codes.



         (f)   Certification by the applicant that the proposed
facility complies with all FCC standards for radio emissions.



   (C)   Development Standards.



      (1)   All Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities shall
meet the following requirements:



         (a)   The height of the antenna support structure shall
not exceed 200 feet.



         (b)   The antenna support structures in non-residential
zoning districts shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from the property
line, unless the adjoining property is zoned or used for a residential use.
If the adjoining property is zoned or used for residential use or the tower
is located within a residential zoning district, the setback shall not be
less than the height of the support structure.



         (c)   The antenna support structure shall not be
illuminated or display strobe lights unless specifically required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), or other governmental agency.



         (d)   No signs or advertising shall be placed upon an
antenna support structure or associated equipment buildings or cabinets.



         (e)   All new or replacement towers shall be a monopole
design.



            1.   Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities
located within the I-1, I-2, and I-3 zoning districts may have external,
hugging or slick-mounted antenna arrays.



            2.   Wireless Telecommunications Service
Facilities located in all other zoning districts must at a minimum have
internal antenna arrays. In addition, facilities shall be designed to blend
into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging
architectural treatments.



            3.   Where feasible, the applicant shall utilize
existing structures to house antenna arrays. Such arrays shall be designed to
be camouflaged by architectural treatments in keeping with the existing
structure.



            4.   For building mounted facilities that do not
utilize camouflaging, the antenna arrays may not extend above the roof line
or parapet of an existing structure, and may not be installed unless the roof
design allows them to be shielded from public view. Whip antennas and
omni-directional antennas may extend up to 15 feet above the roof line or
parapet of an existing structure.



         (f)   All utility or equipment buildings and cabinets
accessory to the antenna support structure shall be architecturally designed
to blend into the surrounding area. This shall be accomplished through the
use of the same exterior materials as the surrounding structures for the
equipment building. These requirements shall apply unless the building or
cabinet is completely screened by a wall or fence.



         (g)   Wireless Telecommunications Service Facilities
shall provide vehicular access to the tower and antennas along any existing
driveways whenever feasible.



         (h)   A landscaping and screening plan for the Wireless
Telecommunication Service Facility shall be submitted with the application.



            1.   An opaque fence or masonry wall shall
completely screen and enclose the facility.



            2.   A landscaping screen, consisting of more than
75% evergreen material, shall be planted outside the fence or wall. For
hedges, the plants shall be a maximum of five feet on center. For evergreen
trees, plants shall be a maximum of ten feet on center. All plants needed to
provide a solid screen shall be a minimum of five feet in height at the time
of planting.



            3.   Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible on the entire site. Credit will
be given for any existing trees saved as stated in §§ 159.180 through
159.191.



         (i)   All Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities
that utilize a freestanding tower shall be designed structurally, 
electrically, and in all other respects to accommodate the user’s equipment
and the equipment of at least two additional service providers.



         (j)   A qualified and licensed engineer must approve the
design of the antenna support structure and certify that it is constructed to
comply with the co-location requirements set out above.



         (k)   A notarized letter of intent shall be included
with the application committing the antenna support structure-owner or lessee
on behalf of themselves and their successors in interest that the antenna
support structure shall be shared with additional users if the additional
user(s) agrees to meet reasonable terms and conditions of shared use.



         (l)   No transmissions from a Wireless Telecommunication
Service Facility shall interfere with any existing public safety
communications.



         (m)   The site of the facilities shall be maintained in
a condition free of debris, refuse, and trash.



   (D)   Limitations on Zoning Authority.



      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals or any other reviewing body
shall not consider any evidence or base a denial of the location of a
Wireless Telecommunication Service Facility on any evidence concerning
adverse environmental or health effects of radio frequency emissions so long
as those emissions meet the standards of the Federal Telecommunication
Commission.



      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed as a prohibition of
the location of Wireless Telecommunication Service Facilities within the
planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed or applied to
unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent
service, or services that compete one against the other for various Wireless
Telecommunication Services.



(Ord. 5-2-97, passed 3-10-97; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.130  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS USES.



   (A)   Classifications.  Sexually oriented business uses are
permitted in the General Business and Planned Business zoning classifications
as per the Official Schedule of Uses, Appendix C and all other adopted
regulations.



   (B)   Location restrictions.  For purposes of this section,
separation distances are measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the protected use’s property line to the
building of the sexually oriented establishment.  If the business is located
in a multi-tenant building, the straight line shall extend to the walls of
the sexually oriented business’s premises.  All sexually oriented
businesses are subject to the following location restrictions:



      (1)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted in a
residential zoning district or within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning
district.



      (2)   No more than one sexually oriented business shall be
located within a single building and no sexually oriented business shall be
located within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.



      (3)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to be
located within 1,000 feet from any of these pre-existing protected uses:
religious institutions, schools (K-12), parks and playgrounds, libraries,
museums, childcare centers, and community gateways as measured from the
right-of-way line.



      (4)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to be
located within 1,000 feet from any property owned by these protected uses at
the adoption of this subchapter: religious institutions, schools (K- 12),
parks and playgrounds, libraries, museums, childcare centers, and community
gateways (State Road 32/State Road 37; Interstate 69/Campus Parkway; Hazel
Dell Road/146th Street; Allisonville Road/146th Street; Gray Road/146th
Street; Gray Road and Moontown Road/State Road 32; State Road 37/186th
Street, State Road 19/206th and Hague Road/Carrigan Road) measured from the
existing right-of-way line.



      (5)   No sexually oriented business shall be located in the
village center or downtown zoning districts.



      (6)   Refer to Appendix L - Map of Potential Sites for
Sexually Oriented Businesses, attached to Ordinance No. 13-3-08, passed April
15, 2008, and adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.



   (C)   Exterior portions of the sexually oriented business.  The
purpose of this section is to carry out the public policy of banning the
public display of sexually explicit images and messages and establishing that
the business be aesthetically consistent with its adjacent properties to
minimize the impact on surrounding property values.



      (1)   Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations in any manner.  All sexually-oriented
businesses are also subject to sign regulations as per §§ 159.160 through
159.166 in addition to the following conditions: each letter forming a word
on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be the
same print-type, size, and color.  The background behind such lettering on a
display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.



      (2)   Signage maybe illuminated, provided, however, such
illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon, exterior lighting (i.e.
spot or floodlights), or any flashing or animated lights (either interior to
the sign, exterior of the sign, or as a border to the sign).



      (3)   Painting of the exterior with any design that would
simulate a sign or advertising message is prohibited.



      (4)   (a)   The exterior appearance of the establishment
shall be consistent with the structures from the abutting properties to
conform to the character of the area, which shall include but is not limited
to materials and architectural style.



         (b)   The exterior portions of the establishment shall
not be painted any color other than a single achromatic color unless the
following conditions are met:



            1.   The establishment is part of a commercial
multi-tenant center; and



            2.   The exterior portions of each individual unit
in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the
business, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a
way to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit center.



      (5)   The merchandise or activities of the establishment are
prohibited from being displayed publicly.



      (6)   All off-street parking areas and structure entryways of
the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing
hours of operation with a lighting system, which provides an average
maintained horizontal illumination of one-foot candle of light on the parking
surface and/or walkways.  This required lighting level is established in
order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways
serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and
employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. 
The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premise.



   (D)   Bulk requirements.  All sexually oriented businesses shall
comply with the bulk requirements of the appropriate zone classification as
per the established districts set forth in §§ 159.105 - 159.109.



   (E)   Classification specific regulations.



      (1)   Main stream media outlets.  These are mainstream media
shops, video stores, bookstores, and newsstands in which adult media
constitutes between 10% and 40% of the stock in trade or occupies between 10%
and 40% of the gross public floor area and are subject to the following
conditions:



         (a)   Location restrictions.  Mainstream media outlets
shall be permitted in all zones as per Appendix C, Official Schedule of Uses
and shall be subject to the separation conditions of division (B) of this
section.



         (b)   Design requirements.  Adult media in a shop to
which this section is applicable shall be kept in a separate room or section
of the shop, which room or section shall:



            1.   Not be open to any person under the age of 18;



            2.   Be physically and visually separated from the
rest of the store by an opaque wall of durable material, reaching at least
eight feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less;



            3.   Be located so that the entrance to it is as
far as reasonably practicable from media or other inventory in the store
likely to be of particular interest to children;



            4.   Have access controlled by electronic or other
means to provide assurance that persons under the age of 18 will easily not
gain admission and that the general public will not accidentally enter such
room or section and provide continuous video or window surveillance of the
room by store personnel; and



            5.   Provide signage at the entrance stipulating
that persons under 18 are not permitted inside.



      (2)   Sexually oriented retail establishments.  These
establishments include adult media stores and sex shops and are subject to
the following conditions: location restrictions; sexually oriented retail
establishments shall be limited to intensive commercial zones and shall be
subject to the separation requirements of division (B). A complete listing of
permitted districts is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.



      (3)   Sexually oriented on-premise entertainment.  These
establishments include adult motion picture theaters and adult cabarets. 
The purpose of this section is to prohibit specified sexual activities and
other public sexual conduct and enforce I.C. 35-45-4 while leaving open
alternative channels for protected speech.



         (a)   Location restrictions.



            1.   Sexually oriented on-premise entertainment
establishments shall be limited to zones that allow for adult motion picture
theaters and adult cabarets and shall be subject to the separation
requirements of division (E)(1).  A complete listing of permitted districts
is provided in Appendix C, Use Matrix.



            2.   No sexually oriented on-premise entertainment
business shall be permitted to be located within 1,000 feet from any of these
pre-existing protected uses: religious institutions, schools (K-12), parks
and playgrounds, libraries, museums, childcare centers, and community
gateways as measured from the right-of-way line.



         (b)   Design requirements.



            1.   Adult cabarets.  All entertainers are
required to perform in an area that meets the following requirements:



               a.   The performance area shall only occur
in a room of at least 1,000 square feet.



               b.   The performance area shall be separated
from areas where patrons are permitted by a minimum of six feet which shall
be separated by a solid barrier or railing of which shall be a minimum of at
least three feet from the floor;



               c.   The performance area shall be on a
stage or platform, which is at least 18 inches above the immediate floor
level.



               d.   The sexually oriented business
establishment shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and
male performers that shall not be occupied or used in any way by any one
other than performers.



               e.   The sexually oriented business
establishment shall provide access for performers between the stage and the
dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons.  If such
separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a
minimum four foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room
area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the
patrons and the performers which prevents any physical contact between
patrons and performers.



            2.   Adult motion picture theaters.



               a.   The showing of films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions may only occur
in rooms greater than 600 square feet in size.



               b.   The premises shall be equipped with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place
to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than
two-foot candle as measured at the floor level.  The lighting shall be shown
on the required sketch or diagram of the premise.



   (F)   Prohibited uses.  The purpose for restricting the following
uses from the Noblesville community is to eliminate the actual or potential
direct one-on-one contact between an entertainer (and/or another employee)
and a customer where the purpose of the employee is to display their body in
order to excite the customer sexually.  The prohibition of these uses is
intended to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of Noblesville by preventing the potentially adverse secondary
effects of these businesses that includes, but is not limited to reducing the
possibility of prostitution and drug dealing.



      (1)   Lingerie modeling studio.



      (2)   Massage studios that do not comply with Chapter 113 of
the Noblesville City Code of Ordinances;



      (3)   Video-viewing booths or arcades; and



      (4)   Nude model studios.



(Ord. 57-9-04, passed 9-28-04; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord.
13-3-08, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13)



§ 159.131  PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Purpose. Public service facilities shall be a permitted use in
all zoning districts. These regulations are intended to provide for sensible
and reasonable land use standards to allow for the provision of reliable
public utility service to all structures in the City of Noblesville. At the
same time, there is a need to minimize the adverse, undesirable effects of
the facilities while still allowing them in locations that do not drive up
the cost of the improvements.



   (B)   Development Standards.



      (1)   No structure shall be located within 150 feet of any
structure on another lot.



      (2)   Every structure must meet the minimum setback and/or
buffer yard requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.



      (3)   All outdoor above ground facilities excluding a building
shall be completely surrounded by a masonry wall or fence. Fences may be
constructed of wrought iron, vinyl, vinyl coated chain link, or wood.
Uncoated chain link is prohibited.



      (4)   Landscaping shall be provided on all sites.



         (a)   Those facilities that are surrounded by a fence or
wall shall provide evergreen canopy trees at a rate of ten feet on center and
a minimum height of six feet at the time of planting around the entire
perimeter of the fence.



         (b)   If the facility is surrounded by a masonry wall,
the spacing of the evergreen canopy trees may be increased to a rate of 20
feet on center.



         (c)   Those facilities that include a building not
surrounded by a fence or wall shall comply with the building base landscape
requirements set out in § 159.185.



      (5)   Buildings 200 square feet in size or less shall be
finished in brick, masonry, native stone, integral color CMU, horizontal wood
lap siding, stucco, EIFS, or split faced block. No metal, unfinished
concrete, or vinyl or aluminum siding shall be permitted.



      (6)   Buildings more than 200 square feet in size shall be
required to meet the architectural requirements for non-residential uses
contained in § 159.041(F).



      (7)   Any facilities that require a parking area of more than
two spaces shall be required to meet the parking lot landscape requirements
set out in § 159.184.



      (8)   No outdoor storage shall be permitted unless on a lot
zoned I-1 or I-2 and the outdoor storage area must comply with the
requirements for those zoning districts.



      (9)   All lighting shall comply with the standards of §
159.201. In those instances where stronger lights are needed for emergency
work, lights shall be on a switch, and lights shall be directed downward, and
away from adjoining property and roadways.



   (C)   Procedure. All public service facilities shall meet the
requirements contained in this section. If all regulations are met, such
permits shall be administratively approved. If any regulation will not be
met, the applicant shall submit a request for variance.



(Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13)



§ 159.132  SMALL CELL NETWORKS AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Applicability.  The regulations in this section shall apply
to small cell networks and facilities located within the public right-of-way
within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city. Those facilities not
located in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the regulations of §
159.129, Wireless Telecommunications Service Facilities.



   (B)   Application Requirements.



      (1)   Contents of Application.  An application for a wireless
support structure and wireless facility shall include the following:



         (a)   The name, business address, and point of contact
for the applicant;



         (b)   The location of the proposed or affected wireless
support structure or wireless facility, including location map, address, and
latitude and longitude;



         (c)   A construction plan that describes the proposed
wireless support structure and all equipment and network components,
including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies,
cabling, and related equipment;



         (d)   The location of all existing wireless support
structures within 1,500 feet of the proposed wireless support structure; and



         (e)   If applicable, evidence supporting the choice of
location for the proposed wireless support structure, including a sworn
statement from the individual responsible for the choice of location
demonstrating that co-location of wireless facilities on an existing wireless
support structure was not a viable option because co-location:



            1.   Would not result in the same wireless service
functionality, coverage, and capacity;



            2.   Is technically infeasible; or



            3.   Is an economic burden to the applicant.



         (f)   A copy of any applicable encroachment or location
permits from entities other than the city. In the event that an application
is submitted for a facility that is in the planning and zoning jurisdiction
of the city, but requires an encroachment or location permit from an entity
other than the city, the applicant shall first obtain all other required
permits. A copy of those permits shall be submitted to the city with the
permit application.



         (g)   Construction plans for the proposed facility shall
include the following elements:



            1.   A written plan for construction of a new
wireless support structure which demonstrates that the aesthetics of the
wireless support structure is substantially similar to the street lights
located nearest the proposed location;



            2.   Includes the total height and width of the
wireless facility and wireless support structure, including cross section and
elevation, footing, foundation and wind speed details;



            3.   A structural analysis indicating the capacity
for future and existing antennas, including a geotechnical report and
calculations for the foundation’s capacity;



            4.   The identity and qualifications of each
person directly responsible for the design and construction; and



            5.   Signed and sealed documentation from a
professional engineer that shows the proposed location of the wireless
facility and wireless support structure and all easement and existing
structures within 200 feet of the wireless facility or wireless support
structure, including the distances from roadways, sidewalks, trails,
driveways, and entrances.



            6.   For a substantial modification of an existing
wireless facility or wireless support structure, a plan that describes the
proposed modifications to the wireless support structure and all equipment
and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, power supplies, cabling, and related equipment, along with any
relevant engineering information relating to the support structure.



      (2)   An applicant may submit one application for multiple
wireless support structures and wireless service facilities that are located
within the city. A single permit shall be issued for those multiple
locations, but a fee shall be assessed for each location.



      (3)   Procedure.



         (a)   Determination of a complete application.  Within
ten business days of receipt of an application, the department shall
determine if the application is complete. If the application is not complete,
the applicant shall be notified in writing of all defects in the application.
If the applicant is not notified an in writing of all defects in the
application, the application is considered complete.



         (b)   An applicant that receives written notice of an
incomplete application or an application with deficiencies may cure the
defects and resubmit the corrected application within 30 days of receiving
the notice. If an applicant is unable to cure the defects within the 30-day
period, the applicant shall notify the department of the additional time the
applicant requires to cure the defects.



         (c)   Not more than 90 days after making an initial
determination of completeness, the department shall review the application to
determine if it complies with applicable laws and ordinances governing land
use and zoning, and notify the applicant in writing whether the application
is approved or denied. If the applicant has requested additional time to cure
the defects, the 90-day period is extended for a corresponding amount of time.



         (d)   A written determination shall state clearly the
basis for the decision to approve or deny an application. If the department
denies the application, the written notice must include substantial evidence
in support of the denial. A notice is considered written if it is included in
the minutes of a public meeting of the permit authority.



         (e)   In all instances, the Department of Planning shall
transmit to the Street Department a copy of the permit application as notice
of encroachment locations.



   (C)   Location Limitations.



      (1)   There must be a minimum of 1,320 feet between any
support structures used for telecommunications, measured in any direction
between support structures. This measurement is not necessarily a dimension
measured parallel to a road right-of-way.



      (2)   The wireless support structure shall be placed so as to
not interfere with the construction, maintenance, or safe operation of
vehicular and pedestrian transportation infrastructure. The support
structures shall be at least two feet from the edge of pavement for
pedestrian transportation infrastructure. The support structures shall be
outside the clear zone per the Indiana Design Manual for vehicular
transportation infrastructure.



      (3)   The wireless support structure must be located on a
roadway with a classification on the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan of
expressway, primary arterial, secondary arterial, or collector streets.



      (4)   Wireless support structures are prohibited on local
streets, as defined in § 159.016.



      (5)   The applicant must make reasonable efforts to avoid
obstruction or location in front of existing ground signage and entry
features. Whenever feasible, the facilities shall be placed so as to not be
located within ten feet of edge of the ground signage or entry feature.



   (D)   Specifications.  New wireless facilities and wireless support
structures shall meet the following specifications.



      (1)   Maximum Height.  The wireless support structure shall
not be taller than adjacent existing utility poles within 1,320 feet. If
there are no existing utility poles, the wireless support structures may be
no more than 40 feet in height in residential areas, and 50 feet in height in
non-residential areas.



      (2)   Support structures must be metal or fiberglass poles
matching the city’s street light poles, per the city standards contained in
Appendix F of the Unified Development Ordinance, which may be amended from
time to time. The support structures, cabinets, and any antenna mounted to
the support structures shall be painted Deep Hemlock (Porter Paints, Color
No. 6348-5).



      (3)   At a minimum, new wireless support structures shall be a
monopole constructed to support the initial user plus the anticipated loading
of one additional user.



      (4)   Any proposed wireless support structure shall be
designed and engineered structurally, electrically, and in all other
respects, to accommodate both the initial wireless facility and one
additional wireless facility.



      (5)   All facility equipment at a single facility, with the
exception of the antenna itself, shall be ground-mounted in a cabinet having
an area not to exceed 40 cubic feet, and no greater than 48 inches overall
height. Under special circumstances based on a mutual agreement, the permit
authority may allow a pole-mounted cabinet, with dimensions not exceeding 20
inches by 20 inches by six inches, and a ground-mounted cabinet not exceeding
two feet by two feet by one foot. If a pole-mounted cabinet is permitted, the
facility will need to include additional shrouding and landscaping to
mitigate the visual impact of the equipment. If a mutual agreement cannot be
reached, then the Board of Public Works shall intervene and make a
determination.



      (6)   All support structures shall have a plaque identifying
the structure, the owner, and the owner’s contact information. This plaque
shall not exceed 0.25 square feet.



      (7)   All wiring and fiber for the facility shall be concealed
within the support structure. All conduit, wiring, and fiber shall be buried
between structures and/or structures and ground-mounted cabinets. All service
lines, including fiber optic and electric lines, to the support structure
must also be buried, unless service lines in the area of the support
structure are aerial. If the aerial service lines are located on the opposite
side of the street or roadway, the service drop crossing would need to be
bored and placed under the street or roadway. No aerial crossings or pavement
cuts are permitted.



      (8)   If relocation of wireless support structures is
necessary to accommodate vehicular and/or pedestrian transportation
improvements, the wireless support structure is to be moved at the utility
company’s expense.



      (9)   Wireless support structures must be separated from
existing underground utility facilities per industry standards. For larger
diameter pipes (water, gas, sewer, and the like) the support structure must
be offset the depth of the pipe, with a minimum of three feet separation.



      (10)   The wireless support structure and wireless facilities
shall comply with the requirements of the Building Code of the State of
Indiana, as amended, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), when applicable.



      (11)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
certified by a qualified and licensed professional engineer to conform to the
latest structural standards and wind-loading requirements of the Building
Code of the State of Indiana, as amended, and the Electronics Industry
Association.



      (12)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
designed to conform to accepted electrical engineering methods and practices,
and to comply with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended.



      (13)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
constructed to conform to the requirements of the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA).



      (14)   All wireless facilities and support structures shall be
designed and constructed to all applicable standards of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) manual, as amended.



   (E)   Continued Operation.  A person receiving a permit for the
construction of a new wireless support structure, substantial modification of
a wireless support structure, or co-location of wireless facilities on an
existing structure inherently agrees that, if the wireless support structure
or wireless facilities are not used for a period of six consecutive months,
they will be removed by the facility owner at their expense. Should the owner
fail to remove the wireless support structure or wireless facilities after 30
business days from the date a notice of violation is issued by the city, the
city may remove the structure or facilities and bill the owner for the costs
of its removal and cleanup of the site.



(Ord. 01-01-17, passed 1-24-17)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 159.140  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The regulations of this section are designed to alleviate or
prevent congestion of streets by establishing minimum requirements for
on-site storage, loading, and/or unloading of motor vehicles in accordance
with the use by which a property is occupied.  Accessory off-street parking
and loading facilities shall be provided and maintained for all buildings,
structures, or premises used for purposes permitted by this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, except for uses in the
Core Central Business District (CCBD) which shall be exempt from the
applicable parking ratio requirements as outlined in Ordinance 45-11-92 and
any amendments thereto.



   (B)   These regulations also recognize that stormwater runoff from
impervious areas, including off-street parking and loading areas, can result
in increased flooding and property damage, degradation of streams, less
groundwater recharge, impaired water quality, increased water temperatures in
streams, loss of habitat, and decreased recreational opportunities. The
impact of stormwater runoff from off-street parking and loading areas shall
be addressed as part of this subchapter.



   (C)   It is a further purpose of this subchapter to ensure that
parking is not excessive for the associated use, and that the design and
construction of parking areas minimizes their impact on the city's water
resources by utilizing "Low Impact Development (LID)" to manage stormwater
and reduce the urban heat island effect.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 41-9-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord.
22-06-13, passed 7-9-13)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.141  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   Nonconforming Parking.



      (1)   No use previously lawfully established shall be required
to provide and maintain the parking and loading requirements herein,
provided, however, that off-street parking and loading spaces required by any
previous ordinances adopted pursuant to the Indiana Planning Statutes shall
be deemed conforming. (See §§ 159.220 et seq., Nonconforming Uses and
Structures.)



      (2)   For any nonconforming use which is hereafter damaged or
partially destroyed, and which is lawfully reconstructed, re-established, or
repaired, off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to those
maintained at the time of such damage or partial destruction shall be
restored and continued in operation, provided, however, in no case shall it
be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess
of those required by this ordinance for equivalent new uses.



   (B)   Additional Parking Required.



      (1)   For Additions.  When the intensity of use of any
building, structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of
dwelling units, floor area, beds, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement, parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be
provided for such increase in intensity of use.



      (2)   For Change in Use.  Whenever the existing use of a
building, structure, or premises shall hereafter be changed or converted to a
new use permitted by this chapter, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use.



      (3)   Accessory Parking Permitted.  Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of accessory
off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or
buildings, provided that all regulations herein governing the location,
design, and operation of such facilities are adhered to.



      (4)   On-Street Parking.  On-street parking shall be
permitted, but the Indiana Department of Transportation (INDOT) or the City
of Noblesville may place restrictions on this use.



      (5)   Use of Accessory Parking by Other Uses is Limited. 
Accessory off-street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided
collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the
sum of the separate requirements for each such use, and no parking space or
portion thereof shall serve as a required space for more than one use, unless
otherwise authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals as Shared or Mixed-Use
Parking, pursuant to § 159.146.



      (6)   Distinction Between Parking and Loading Areas. 
Required off-street loading and unloading spaces shall not be construed as
being part of the required off-street parking spaces.



      (7)   Limitations on Parking Areas.



         (a)   Use of Parking Areas Limited.  Accessory
off-street parking facilities shall be utilized solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles or light trucks of less than one ton capacity, of
patrons, occupants, or employees of specified uses.  Said parking facilities
shall not be used for the storage, display, sale, repair, dismantling, or
wrecking of any vehicle, equipment, or material.



   Further, no repair work, sales, or service of any kind shall be
permitted in association with accessory off-street parking facilities, unless
such facilities are enclosed in a building and such work or service is
otherwise permitted in the district. No inoperable vehicles shall be stored
in an off-street parking area for more than 24 hours.



         (b)   Drive-Through Stacking.  A property owner
proposing a drive-through facility shall provide a minimum of four stacking
spaces for each drive-through station in addition to the parking required by
this section. Each lane of stacking space must be at least nine feet wide and
must be delineated with pavement markings. Each stacking space shall be
25-feet long; however, individual spaces within the lane shall not be
delineated with pavement markings. Stacking lanes may not be located within
required driveway, internal circulation, or parking aisle widths.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-3-98, passed 3-9-98; Am. Ord.
89-10-06, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)  Penalty, see
§ 159.999



§ 159.142  REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Computing Number of Required Spaces.  In determining the
minimum required number of off-street parking or loading spaces, the
following instructions shall be applicable in such computations:



      (1)   Determining Floor Area.  Off-street parking
requirements shall be calculated based on gross square footage of the use to
which the parking is accessory, or as otherwise provided in Table 8.



      (2)   Fractions.  If the calculation of required parking
spaces results in a fraction, said fraction shall be considered as being the
next unit and shall be counted as requiring one space.



      (3)   Public Assembly Seating.  In sports arenas, churches,
and other places of assembly in which patrons occupy benches, pews, or other
similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such seating shall be counted
as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements thereunder.



      (4)   Calculating Required Parking For Bar and Restaurant
Combinations.  For bars and nightclubs which serve food and for restaurants
which include a bar, required parking shall be calculated according to Table
8.  Since bars and restaurants require different parking, this table allows
parking to be calculated accurately based on how much of the use is a bar and
how much is a restaurant.  This table is based on the premise that a
restaurant requires greater kitchen space than a bar.



 


Table 8
Calculating Parking for Bars and Restaurant Combinations




% of Gross Floor Area Devoted to Kitchen

 

% of Public Floor Area Calculated as "Restaurant"

 

% of Public Floor Area Calculated as "Bar"



40% or more
 
100%
 
0%


30 - 39%
 
75%
 
25%


20 - 29%
 
50%
 
50%


5 - 19%
 
25%
 
75%


less than 5%
 
0%
 
100%



 



To use the table determine the gross square footage of the kitchen area and
divide that number by the gross square footage of the building in which it is
located.  The resulting number may be converted to a percentage.  Reference
that percentage in the first column of the table, and follow the row
across.  If, for example, the percentage of the kitchen area is 25%, then
50% of the public floor area in the building is calculated as a bar and 50%
as a restaurant.  Reference Table 9 to determine the required parking ratio
for each use.



      (5)   Determining Parking Requirements for Unlisted Uses. 
For uses not specified in Table 9, the number of parking spaces shall be
determined by the Director of Planning and Development, on the basis of
requirements for similar uses, the gross square footage of the use, and the
relationship between the size of the use and the number of persons served or
employed.



      (6)   Additional Parking Spaces above the Required Number as
per the following Tables. Additional parking above the required number shall
be increased by a maximum of 10% and be constructed using pervious concrete,
permeable pavers, or other similar materials. Plans shall also incorporate an
additional 2% of interior parking lot landscaping above the required
percentage per Table 12.0.5.C.1. entitled 'Interior Parking Lot Landscape
Requirement'. Low Impact Development (LID) landscaping standards and
techniques shall be implemented.



 


Table 9: Required Parking Spaces




Uses

 

Required Parking Spaces






Residential Uses




Bed and breakfast

 

2, plus 1 additional space per guest room.




Dwelling unit, multi-family

 

Spaces per unit



• Studio units, 1.25



• 1 bedroom, 1.3



• 2 bedroom, 1.7



• 3 bedroom or more, 1.9




Dwelling unit, single- or two- family

 

2 per dwelling unit




Dwelling units, zero lot line

 

2 per unit, at least 1 of which shall be located in a required private garage.




Home occupation

 

1 (minimum and maximum) in addition to residence requirement.




Housing for elderly

 

• Specialized care: .5 space per bed



• Minimal care: .7 space per bed



• Multi-family: .5 space per unit




Mobile home park

 

2 per mobile home site, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of any office areas.




Institutional Uses




Cemetery, crematory, or mausoleum

 

2 spaces and 1 per 4 seats provided for any place of assembly.




College or university

 

1 per 4 students, based on projected maximum enrollment; plus 1 per 4 seats
in auditorium and/or gymnasium areas; plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. of office areas.




Fire Station

 

1 per bed in the living quarters.




Police Station

 

1 per 250 sq. ft., plus 1 per vehicle, or as determined by the Chief.




Hospital

 

1 per 3 beds plus 1 per each member of the medical staff plus 1 per each
outpatient treatment room and .40 space per employee.




House of worship

 

1 per 4 seats in main auditorium.




Kindergarten, preschool or day nursery

 

1 space per 200 sq. ft.




Nursing home

 

1 per 2 beds




Penal or correctional institutions

 

1 per 10 inmates capacity




Post offices

 

1 space per 200 sq. ft.




Private club or lodge

 

1 per 250 sq. ft.




Library or museum

 

1 per 300 sq. ft.




Community or recreation buildings

 

1 per 200 sq. ft.




Civic offices

 

1 per 250 sq. ft.




School, Jr. High & High

 

1 per 6 students, based on projected maximum enrollment; plus 1 per 4 seats
and/or gymnasium areas; plus 1 per 200 sq. ft. in office areas.




Trade or business school

 

1 per 200 sq. ft.



Commercial, Retail and Service Uses



Automobile or trailer sales area

 
2.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area of interior sales space plus 1.5
per 1,000 sq. ft. of external display (does not include stock areas closed to
public) plus 3 per service bay.


Site plans submitted for automobile or trailer sales area shall illustrate
the parking spaces allocated as per the above.




Automobile repair and fuel sales

 

3 spaces per service bay and 1 space per 250 sq. ft. of accessory retail
sales area




Banks/Financial offices

 

1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area




Office/Business/



Professional services

 

1 space per 300 sq. ft. gross floor area




Clinic, medical or dental, for humans

 

1 space per 250 sq. ft. gross floor area




Clinic, veterinary

 

2 spaces and 1 per 3 animal spaces (cages or kennels or pens)




Shopping centers

 
• 4 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area for centers up to 400,000 sq. ft.

• 4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable area for centers between 400,000
to 600,000 sq. ft.


• 5.25 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable area for centers over 600,000
sq. ft.




Free-standing stores

 

One per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area




Grocery or supermarket

 

1 per 300 sq. ft.




Plant nurseries, building material sales, equipment rental or sales yards and
similar uses

 

1 per 300 sq. ft. of sales and display areas




Furniture and appliance stores

 

• Up to 15,000 sq. ft.: 1 space for each 500 sq. ft.



• 15,000 sq. ft. or more: 1 space for each 500 sq. ft. for the first 15,000
sq. ft.; 1 space for each 800 sq. ft. thereafter




Bar, Lounge, Tavern or Nightclub

 

1 for each 35 sq. ft. of indoor public floor area, plus 1 for each 200 sq.
ft. of outdoor public seating area, excluding the first 200 sq. ft. of
outdoor public seating area




Restaurants

 

1 for each 50 sq. ft. of indoor floor area, plus 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of
outdoor public seating area, excluding the first 200 sq. ft. of outdoor
public seating area.  See also "Drive Through Facilities."




Drive-through Facilities

 

• As Accessory Use: As required for the principal use, plus 5 stacking
spaces for the first window and 2 stacking spaces for each additional window



• As Principal Use: 5 stacking spaces for the first window and 2 stacking
spaces for each additional window




Greenhouse (commercial), facilities for raising or breeding non-farm fowl or
animals (commercial)

 

3 spaces plus 1 for each 125 sq. ft. of sales area




Mortuary

 

1 per 2 seats (capacity) plus 1 per 30 sq. ft. of public assembly area.




Parking as a primary use

 

Subject to a conditional use permit and the requirements of §159.143.




Health or fitness studio

 

• Less than 10,000 sq. ft.: 1 per 150 sq. ft.



• 10,000 - 19,999 sq. ft.: 1 per 200 sq. ft.



• 20,000 - 29,999 sq. ft.: 1 per 250 sq. ft.



• 30,000 sq. ft. and over: 1 per 300 sq. ft.




Hotel/motel

 

2 plus one per guest room.




Marina

 

1 space per slip or berth.




Riding stable

 

1 per 2 horse stalls.




Stadium or coliseum

 

1 per 4 seats.




Swimming pools, skating rinks, tennis clubs, and similar facilities

 

1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of gross area or 5 per 100 sq. ft. of water or court
area, whichever is greater.




Theater/cinema (indoor)

 

1 per 4 seats.




Dancing academy

 

1 per 200 sq. ft.




Billiard hall

 

2 per billiard table.




Bowling alley

 

3 per lane plus 1 per 6 spectator seats.




Campground

 

1 per campsite plus 1 per cabin.




Country club or golf course

 

1 parking space for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area in any main building plus
1 space for every 2 practice tees in the driving range, plus 4 parking spaces
for each green in the playing area.




Game centers

 

1 per 100 sq. ft.



Industrial Uses



Manufacturing and industrial establishments

 

1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area.




Warehousing or wholesaling establishments

 

1 per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area.




Junk yard

 

2 per acre




Self-service storage facility

 

1 per 50 storage spaces, plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of any office spaces.




Energy, Communication, and Transportation Uses




Radio or TV tower/studios

 

1 per 500 sq. ft.




Railway station or motor bus station

 

1 per 10 seats in waiting room, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. retail area.




Sewage disposal plant

 

1 per 400 sq. ft. devoted to office use, plus 1 per 800 sq. ft. devoted to
other uses.




Telephone exchange or public utility substation

 

1 space.





 



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord.
96-11-05, passed 12-13-05; Am. Ord. 13-3-08, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord.
12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 30-08-13,
passed 9-10-13)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.143  DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS FOR PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Applicability.  All off-street parking areas shall be
developed in accordance with the standards of this section, except in the
case of one-family, two-family, and agricultural uses, and storage of
vehicular merchandise not counting toward the minimum requirements as set
forth in this chapter.  However, driveways for one-family, two-family and
agricultural uses shall be limited to a width of 20 feet or 30 feet as
provided in this section and one per street frontage.



   (B)   Dimensions and Layout.  Each off-street parking space shall
open directly upon an aisle or driveway at least 12 feet wide or such
additional width and design in accordance with Table 10, below, so as to
provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. 
Such aisle or driveway shall be unobstructed and allow for the passage of
emergency vehicles at all time.







   Table 10: Off-Street Dimensions (In Feet)




(dimensions are listed in Table on following page)




 

Table 10
Off-Street Parking Dimensions (In Feet)



Angle

 

Stall Width (A)

 

Vehicle Projection (B)

 

Aisle (C)

 

Typical Module (D)

 

Interlock Reduction (E)

 

Overhang (F)

 

Curb Length (G)






0°

 

9.0

 

9.0

 

12.0

 

30.0

 

0.0

 

0.0

 

20.0




45°

 

9.0

 

14.1

 

13.0

 

41.3

 

3.2

 

1.8

 

12.7




50°

 

9.0

 

15.3

 

13.7

 

44.3

 

2.8

 

1.9

 

11.7




55°

 

9.0

 

16.4

 

14.7

 

47.5

 

2.5

 

2.0

 

11.0




60°

 

9.0

 

17.3

 

16.0

 

50.6

 

2.2

 

2.2

 

10.4




65°

 

9.0

 

18.1

 

17.0

 

53.3

 

1.8

 

2.3

 

9.9




70°

 

9.0

 

18.8

 

18.3

 

55.9

 

1.5

 

2.3

 

9.6




75°

 

9.0

 

19.3

 

20.0

 

58.6

 

1.2

 

2.4

 

9.3




90°

 

9.0

 

19.3

 

20.0

 

58.6

 

1.2

 

2.4

 

9.3





 



      NOTES:   No two-way aisle shall be less than 24' in width.



            All measurements are in feet.



   (C)   Location and Access of Off-street Parking and Loading Areas.



      (1)   Right-of-Way Access.



         (a)   All off-street parking or loading facilities shall
be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley
in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement.



         (b)   Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be
provided along arterials and major collectors where necessary, as determined
through site plan review.  Such accel/decel lanes shall parallel and adjoin
the improved part of the right-of-way and shall measure at least 11 feet in
width.  Accel/decel lanes shall be at least 100 feet in length, exclusive of
the entrance way and taper area.  However, if the lot frontage is too small
to meet such requirement, the acce1/decel lane shall extend the entire width
of the lot.



         (c)   Each use that fronts upon an arterial shall
provide an easement for the purpose of a frontage lane to reduce the number
of curbs cuts and traffic conflicts along said arterial.  The applicant
shall bear the cost of constructing the frontage road across his or her own
property and such frontage road shall be constructed prior to the granting of
a certificate of occupancy for the use, except as otherwise provided in §
159.045(C).



      (2)   Driveways.



         (a)   Non-residential driveway entrances or exits shall
be at least 25 feet from an adjoining residential property line; ten feet
from an adjoining non-residential property line; or 45 feet from an
intersection.



         (b)   Owners of adjoining properties shall provide
combined driveways wherever practical.  In conjunction with approval of a
development, the City may require a property owner to provide an access and
circulation easement to an abutting owner where joint access is reasonable to
serve future development.  Such entrances or exits shall be designed in such
a manner as to interfere least with traffic movement.



         (c)   No single non-residential or multi-family driveway
shall exceed a width of 30 feet at the right-of-way line.  However, a
driveway 36 feet in width at the right-of-way line shall be permitted
provided pavement markings indicate three separate lanes, one for ingress and
two for egress. An entrance/exit divider not to exceed ten feet in width
shall not be counted towards the width limit. Non- residential driveways are
limited to one per street frontage and shall be approved by the Engineer
having jurisdiction thereof.




         (d)   Driveways for single-family or two-family
residential uses shall be limited to a width of 20 feet and to one per street
frontage.  However, a driveway 30 feet in width at the right-of-way line
shall be permitted provided that the lot width is a minimum of 80 feet and it
serves a garage with at least three bays.  In addition, residential
driveways located on property fronting more than one public street shall be
located ten  feet from the property line farthest from the intersection, or
in a location approved by the Engineer of Jurisdiction.




      (3)   Location of Accessory Parking and Loading on Same Lot. 
Accessory off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided on the same
lot as the use served, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and may
be situated as one or more individual areas.



      (4)   Location of Parking and Loading Behind Required
Setback.  Accessory off-street parking and loading areas shall not be
located in any required yard, except as specified otherwise by this
chapter.  When permitted within required yards, a landscape buffer shall be
provided along the property-line of the yard in which it is located, pursuant
to § 159.185.



      (5)   Design Requires Interior Circulation.  Required
off-street parking spaces shall be so designed, arranged, and regulated as to
have individual spaces marked, be unobstructed and have access to an aisle or
driveway so that any automobile may be moved without moving another, and so
that no maneuvering directly incidental to entering or leaving a parking
space shall be on any public right-of-way or walkway.



   (D)   Improvement Standards for Parking Lots.



      (1)   Paving Required.  Parking and driveway areas shall be
paved with asphalt or constructed of concrete or permeable pavement and be
curbed with rigid or roll-type curb as per the Noblesville Standards. As an
alternative to continuous curb, wheel stops or strategic breaks in the
barrier curb shall be provided in order to allow for drainage into LID
Stormwater BMP's.



      (2)   Drainage of Runoff.  Such parking areas shall be graded
and properly drained in such a manner that there will be no free flow of
water onto either adjacent property or public sidewalks.  Any runoff
generated by such improved areas shall be disposed of in appropriate drainage
facilities as per the Noblesville Standards and the Stormwater Technical
Standards.



      (3)   Marking of Parking.  Such parking areas shall be so
lined or designated as to ensure the most efficient use of the parking spaces
and provided with bumper guards or wheel guards so located that no part of
the parked vehicle will extend beyond the boundary of the established parking
area into any minimum required yard on onto adjoining property.



      (4)   Parking Lot Lighting.  A minimum of one foot-candle of
illumination shall be provided throughout the parking lot.  Illumination of
off-street parking areas shall utilize fully-shielded lighting fixtures so as
not to reflect direct rays of light onto adjacent properties or streets, and
prevent excessive uplighting, pursuant to §§ 159.200 through 159.208.



   (E)   Landscaping.  All off-street parking areas shall be
landscaped pursuant to § 159.184.



   (F)   Special Regulations for Parking Garages and Attendant
Buildings.



      (1)   Buildings Used for Parking Garages.  Parking Garages,
whether Principal or Accessory uses, shall be treated as any structure and
shall be subject to all requirements thereof.



      (2)   Attendant Buildings.  Parking areas may be provided
with one one-story shelter or guard building which shall not exceed 100
square feet of gross floor area and which shall conform to all the standards
of the district in which it is located.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 7-1-98, passed 2-9-98; Am. Ord.
12-3-98, passed 3-9-98; Am. Ord. 86-11-03, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 33-6-04,
passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed
4-9-13; Am. Ord. 22-06-13, passed 7-9-13 ; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed
11-10-15; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-16)   Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.144  PARKING SPACES ACCESSIBLE TO THE DISABLED.



   The City of Noblesville encourages all development which serves the
public to provide facilities which are accessible to people with disabilities
as defined by this chapter and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of
1990.  In accordance with this goal and pursuant to the ADA, accessible
parking shall be provided by any building or use initiated after the
effective date of this chapter according to the following minimum
requirements and any further requirements hereafter adopted by federal,
state, or local law.



   (A)   Required Accessible Spaces.  Accessible parking spaces shall
be provided according to Table 11.  In addition, accessible patient parking
at outpatient facilities must equal no less than 10% of the total required
parking spaces, and facilities which specialize in treatment or services for
persons with mobility impairments must provide for patient use accessible
parking equaling no less than 20% of the total required parking spaces.



 

Table 10.0.5
Accessible Parking Spaces Required by the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA)


Total Spaces in Off-street Parking Area
 
COLUMN A
Total Minimum Accessible Spaces (Van Accessible + Accessible)
 
Minimum Van Accessible Spaces (96" wide access aisle)
 
Minimum Accessible Spaces




1-25
 
1
 
1
 
0


26-50
 
2
 
1
 
1


51-75
 
3
 
1
 
2


76-100
 
4
 
1
 
3


101-150
 
5
 
1
 
4


151-200
 
6
 
1
 
5


201-300
 
7
 
1
 
6


301-400
 
8
 
1
 
7


401-500
 
9
 
2
 
7


501-1000
 
Two percent (2%) of total
 
1/8 of COLUMN A
 
7/8 of COLUMN A


1001 +
 
20, plus 1 for each 100 spaces over 1000
 
1/8 of COLUMN A
 
7/8 of COLUMN A




 



   (B)   Calculating Required Accessible Spaces.  The required number
of mobility impaired accessible parking spaces shall be calculated prior to
any applied reduction in parking requirements otherwise approved by the
Director of Planning and Development or provided pursuant to Table 9.



   (C)   Design and Layout of Accessible Parking Lots.



      (1)   Access Aisles.  Access aisles shall be provided next to
each accessible parking space and shall measure at least five feet in width
when adjacent to an automobile accessible space and at least eight feet in
width when adjacent to a van accessible space.  For each access aisle which
is eight feet or wider, bollards shall be placed at the driveway end of the
aisle so as to prevent vehicles from parking in the aisle illegally.



      (2)   Accessible Routes.  Each access aisle shall abut an
accessible route to the building entrance. The minimum width of said
accessible route shall be three feet.



      (3)   Maximum Slope.  Accessible parking spaces, access
aisles, and accessible routes shall not exceed a slope of 1:50, and the ramp
from the access aisle to the sidewalk or other transition to the principal
use shall not exceed a slope of 1:12.



   (D)   Signage And Marking.  All accessible spaces shall be
designated by the international access symbol.  Van accessible spaces will
be labeled by both the international access symbol and an additional sign
indicating that the space is accessible for vans.  Signs shall be placed a
minimum of 5.5 feet above ground level so as not to be obscured by parked
vehicles.  The mobility impaired symbol shall also be painted on the ground
to the rear of the parking space.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



§ 159.145  PEDESTRIAN ACCESS.



   Promoting an interconnected network of pedestrian routes is a priority
for the city. Providing connections for pedestrians between buildings,
walkways, adjacent properties, rights-of-way, and other uses help meet the
objectives of the Noblesville Alternative Transportation Plan. The
installation of pedestrian facilities increases the walkability of the city,
thus reducing vehicle trips traveled and traffic congestion.



   (A)   Location.  All new development containing 25 parking stalls
or more, except detached single-family and duplex uses, shall comply with the
following pedestrian access requirements pursuant to the standards in
division (B)(1).



      (1)   Between Buildings on Subject Property. Provide
pedestrian walkways between the primary entrances to all businesses, uses,
and/or buildings on the subject property pursuant to the applicable standard
in division (B)(1).



      (2)   Between Properties. Provide pedestrian walkways
connecting to existing or future walkways on adjacent properties pursuant to
the applicable standards in division (B)(1). Exceptions: Pedestrian
connections to industrial uses are not required. The location for the access
points at property edges and to adjacent lots shall be coordinated with
existing and planned development to provide convenient pedestrian links
between developments. Where there are topographic changes in elevation,
stairs or ramps may be provided to make a pedestrian connection.



      (3)   Along Building Facades Not Adjacent to a Public Sidewalk.



For buildings that do not front on a public sidewalk, a pedestrian walkway
shall be provided along the entire facade of all building facades containing
a primary entrance. The walkways should meet the pedestrian walkway standards
in division (B)(2). Exceptions may be approved as part of Site Plan Review in
the following circumstances: where new development is less than 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area, features a landscaped front yard area and parking
is located to the side or rear, only direct pedestrian access shall be
provided from the abutting sidewalk to the primary entrance to all buildings.



      (4)   Through Parking Areas.  All parking lots must include
pedestrian walkways through the parking lot to the main building entrance or
a central location. The pedestrian walkway must connect the building entrance
to the public sidewalk. The pedestrian walkway must meet the development
standards pursuant to division (B)(3).



   (B)   Pedestrian Access- Required Improvements.



      (1)   Pedestrian Walkway Standards - Between Buildings on
Subject Property and Between Properties.  The applicant shall install
pedestrian walkways between buildings and properties pursuant to the
following standards:



         (a)   Must be at least five feet wide;



         (b)   Must be distinguishable from traffic lanes by
painted markings, pavement material, texture, or raised in elevation;



         (c)   Must have adequate lighting for security and
safety. Lights must be non-glare and mounted no more than 20 feet above the
ground;



         (d)   Must be centrally located on the subject property;



         (e)   Must be accessible;



         (f)   Barriers which limit future pedestrian access
between the subject property and adjacent properties are not permitted;



         (g)   Easements to provide rights of access between
adjacent properties shall be recorded prior to occupancy.



      (2)   Pedestrian Walkway Standards - Along Facades Not
Adjacent to Sidewalks.  The applicant shall install pedestrian walkways
along facades not adjacent to public sidewalks pursuant to the following
standards:



         (a)   Must be provided along the entire facade of all
building facades containing a primary entrance;



         (b)   Must have a minimum unobstructed width of eight
feet, paved with decorative concrete. A minimum of five feet may be approved
for residential uses;



         (c)   Trees placed at an average of 30 feet on-center
between the pathway and any parking or vehicular access area. The required
trees must be placed in planning strips at least 4.5 feet in width or within
planting grates. Exceptions:



            1.   To increase business visibility and
accessibility, the city may allow modifications in the required tree coverage
adjacent to the primary building entries; however, no less than one tree per
60 lineal feet of required pathway shall be provided.



         (d)   Must be distinguishable from traffic lanes by
painted markings, pavement material, texture, or raised in elevation;



         (e)   Must have adequate lighting for security and
safety. Lights must be non-glare and mounted no more than 20 feet above the
ground;



         (f)   Must be accessible.



      (3)   Pedestrian Walkway Standards - Through Parking Areas. 
The applicant shall install pedestrian walkways through parking areas,
connecting the main building entrance to parking areas and public sidewalks
pursuant to the following standards:



         (a)   All parking lots that contain more than 25,000
square feet of paved area, including access lanes and driveways, must include
clearly identified pedestrian routes from the parking stalls to the main
building entrance or central location. At a minimum, walkways must be
provided for every three driving aisles or at a distance of not more than 150
foot intervals, whichever is less, and meet the standards of division (B)(1).



         (b)   Must have a minimum unobstructed pavement width of
eight feet, paved with decorative concrete. A minimum of five feet may be
approved for residential uses;



         (c)   Trees placed at an average of 30 feet on-center
between the pathway and any parking or vehicular access area. The required
trees must be placed in planting strips at least 4.5 feet in width or within
planting grates. Exception:



            1.   To increase business visibility and
accessibility, the city may allow modifications in the required treed
coverage adjacent to the primary building entries; however, no less than one
tree per 60 lineal feet of required pathway shall be provided.



      (4)   Walkway shall not use vehicle entrance or exit driveways
from the public right-of-way;



      (5)   Must connect from the parking spaces and public
sidewalks to the pedestrian entrance of the building served by the parking;



      (6)   Must be distinguishable from traffic lanes by painted
markings, pavement material, texture, or raised elevation;



      (7)   Must have adequate lighting for security and safety.
Lights must be non-glare and mounted no more than 20 feet above the ground;



      (8)   Must be accessible.



(Ord. 30-08-13, passed 9-10-13)



§ 159.146  PARKING AS A PRINCIPAL USE.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby authorized to grant conditional
use permits for Parking as a Principal Use in accordance with the following
conditions:



   (A)   Development Plan Required.  A development plan for Parking as
a Principal Use shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals as a required
exhibit accompanying the Conditional Use application and shall be made part
of the conditions of any approval therefor.  The development plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable standards of this chapter and
shall indicate:



      (1)   Adjacent streets, alleys, and lots;



      (2)   All individual primary uses to be served, including the
location, use, and number of parking spaces required for each such use;



      (3)   A layout drawn to scale of aisles and driveways,
entrances, exits and turn-off lanes, parking spaces, setbacks, drainage
facilities, and landscaping and buffer screening;



      (4)   Type of lighting, pavement, and signs proposed including
location, size, and design thereof.



   (B)   Setbacks and Access.  Parking as a Principal Use shall be
provided with the setback requirements of the zoning district in which they
are located, and ingress and egress points shall be limited to protect the
function of adjoining streets.



   (C)   Parking as a Principal Use Requires Legal Encumbrance. 
Parking as a Principal Use shall be encumbered by any instrument duly
executed and acknowledged, which links such parking facilities to the use(s)
served.  Said instrument shall specify and bind the time period to the
anticipated life of the building or use which the parking facilities serve. 
Said instrument shall be filed in the applicable Improvement Location Permit
files of the Department of Planning and Development, and placed on public
record in the office of the Hamilton County Recorder.



   (D)   Design of Principal Use Parking Areas.  Principal Use parking
facilities shall be developed in accordance with all of the provisions of
this subchapter.  Further, said facilities shall be developed under such
conditions imposed by the Board of Zoning Appeals as to protect residential
districts and maintain at a minimum the disturbance to nearby residential
uses.



   (E)   Changes to Development Plans for Parking as a Principal Use. 
Development Plans for Parking as a Primary Use shall be amended by the
applicant to indicate any change or other modification of uses served, or
number of parking spaces provided therefor.  Such amended plans shall
require re-approval by the Board.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 21-6-97, passed 7-28-97; Am. Ord.
30-08-13, passed 9-10-13)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.147  PROGRAMS AND INCENTIVES TO REDUCE PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following programs and incentives are provided to permit reduced
parking requirements in the locations and situations outlined herein where
the basic parking requirements of this chapter would be excessive or
detrimental to goals and policies of the city relating to traffic congestion
and environmental protection.



   (A)   Credit For On-Street Parking.  Wherever on-street parallel
parking is provided in the improvement of a street, credit toward off- street
parking requirements shall be granted at the rate of one off-street space per
every 25 feet of frontage.  However, parallel parking shall not be permitted
in the following areas:



      (1)   Frontage on an expressway or arterial street.



      (2)   Frontage on a street that is less than 32 feet wide
curb-to-curb or closest edge of the traveled lane.



      (3)   Frontage within 20 feet of a corner.



      (4)   Frontage within ten feet of each side of a driveway or
alley.



      (5)   Frontage within a fire hydrant zone or other emergency
access zone.




   (B)   Shared Parking.





      (1)   Purpose and Applicability.  Generally, a group of
non-residential uses may provide a joint parking area if the number of spaces
in the area at least equals the aggregate of the spaces required for the
several uses subject to the requirements for location of parking and off-site
parking in this subject. However, uses that require parking areas at times
when nearby uses do not need their parking facilities may, by agreement
approved by the Director, use those facilities instead of providing their own.




      (2)   Requirements.  The Director may approve shared parking
facilities located on adjoining separate properties or on a single site
according to the following requirements:



         (a)   Facilities located on adjoining separate
properties must be within 600 feet of each other.



         (b)   A convenient pedestrian connection shall be
provided between the properties.



         (c)   The availability of parking for all affected
properties or uses is indicated by directional signs.



         (d)   The number of spaces proposed meets the following
restriction:



            1.   Where the uses to be served by shared parking
have overlapping hours of operation, the property owner or owners shall
provide spaces equal to the total of the individual parking requirements for
the uses served, reduced by 10% of that total number.  The director may
approve a further reduction of that number if the property owner(s)
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the resulting provision
of parking will be adequate for the proposed uses.



            2.   Where the uses to be served by shared parking
do not overlap their hours of operation, the property owner or owners may
provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the applicable individual
parking requirements.



      (3)   Written Agreement Required.  Prior to establishing
shared use of parking, the property owner or owners shall file with the
Department of Planning and Development a written agreement approved by the
Director of Planning and Development providing for the shared parking use. 
The agreement shall also be recorded on the title records of each affected
property.



   (C)   Mixed-Use Parking.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a)   Mixed-use Parking Program is presented as an
option to reduce the total required parking in large mixed-use facilities in
which the uses operate at different times from one another throughout the
day.  The city recognizes that strict application of the required parking
ratios may result in the provision of excessive numbers of parking spaces
and, therefore, excessive pavement and impermeable surfaces.  A Mixed-use
Parking Program allows the property developer to use parking spaces more
efficiently by allowing the same spaces to be "shared" by various land uses.



      (2)   Applicability.  The Mixed-use Shared Parking Program
may be applied for wherever mixed uses are proposed.



      (3)   Procedure.



         (a)   The Director of Planning and Development may
authorize a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces for two
or more uses jointly providing on-site parking if the respective hours of
operation of the uses do not overlap, as demonstrated by the application of
Table 12.



         (b)   If one or more of the land uses proposing to use
joint parking facilities do not conform to one of the general land use
classifications in Table 12, the applicant shall submit sufficient data to
indicate that there is not substantial conflict in the principal operating
hours of the uses.  Such data may include information from a professional
publication such as those published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) or the Urban Land Institute (ULI), or by a professionally
prepared parking study.



         (c)   For changes of use in mixed-use projects the
applicant must demonstrate that parking necessary for the new mix of uses
does not exceed the amount which was required by the previous mix of uses.



         (d)   The total number of parking spaces required per
Table 9 shall not be reduced by more than 20%.



 




Table 12
Schedule of Mixed Use Parking Calculations




General Land Use Classification

 

Mid - 7 am (%)

 

Weekdays
7 pm - 6pm (%)

 

6 pm - Mid (%)

 

Mid -7 am (%)

 

Weekends
7 am - 6pm (%)

 

6 pm - Mid
(%)




Office/
Industrial

 

5

 

100

 

5

 

0

 

60

 

10




Retail   

 

0

 

100

 

80

 

0

 

100

 

60




Residential

 

100

 

55

 

85

 

100

 

65

 

75




Restaurant

 

50

 

70

 

100

 

45

 

70

 

100




Hotel

 

100

 

65

 

90

 

100

 

65

 

80




Cinema/
Theater

 

0

 

70

 

100

 

5

 

70

 

100





 



How to Use the Schedule of Mixed Use Parking:



Calculate the number of spaces required for each use if it were free-standing
(refer to the Schedule of Minimum On-site Parking Requirements).  Applying
the applicable general land use category to each proposed use, use the
percentages to calculate the number of spaces required for each time period
(six time periods per use).  Add the number of spaces required for all
applicable land uses to obtain a total parking requirement for each time
period.  Select the time period with the highest total parking requirement
and use that total as your mixed use parking requirement.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 12-3-98, passed 3-9-98; Am. Ord.
22-06-13, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 30-08-13, passed 9-10-13)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.148  REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING.



   (A)   Purpose.  On the same premises with every use involving the
receipt or distribution by vehicle of material or merchandise, there shall be
provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading, and
unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the street
or alley.



   (B)   Number of Loading Berths Required.  The number of loading
berths required shall conform to the requirements set forth in Table 13.



   (C)   Berth Size.  Loading berths shall have a minimum width of ten
feet, a minimum length of 50 feet, and a minimum height clearance of 14 feet.



   (D)   Access and Maneuverability.  Each required off-street loading
berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movement,  and which  will not restrict the access of surrounding uses, and
shall be subject to approval by the Director of Planning and Development. 
At a minimum, the following areas for access and maneuvering shall be
provided:



      (1)   Maneuvering Apron.  A maneuvering apron of 55 feet
shall be provided.



      (2)   Access Aisles.  A width of at least 18 feet shall be
provided for one way aisles and 24 feet for two way aisles.



   (E)   Design and Improvement Standards.  Off-street loading areas
shall be developed in accordance with the standards in § 159.144(C), except
that paving of loading areas shall be capable of bearing a live load of 200
pounds per square foot.



   (F)   Central Loading.  Central loading facilities may be
substituted for loading berths on individual zoning lots provided the
following conditions are fulfilled:



      (1)   Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the
central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at-grade.



      (2)   No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet removed
from the central loading area.



      (3)   Total area of off-street loading berths provided shall
meet the minimum requirements herein specified, based on the sum requirements
of the several types of uses served.



 




Table 13
Schedule of Off-Street Loading Requirements



Use
 
Gross Floor Area (square feet)
 
Number of Berths


Residential Uses


Hotel, Motel, Assisted Living or Nursing Home
 
12,000 - 120,000
 
1


Multi-Family
 
40,000 - 120,000
each additional 120,000
 
1
1 additional


Office and Institutional Uses


Banks, Government Buildings, Offices, Business Services, Hospitals
 
12,000 - 120,000
each additional 120,000
 
1
1 additional


Commercial Uses


Personal Services
 
Under 12,000
12,000 - 25,000
 
1
2


Restaurants
 
Under 25,000
25,000 - 40,000
40,000 - 120,000
each additional 200,000
 
1
2
3
1 additional


Retail sales
 
5,000 - 15,000
15,000 - 40,000
40,000 - 100,000
each additional 50,000
 
1
2
3
1 additional


Educational/Cultural/Entertainment Uses


Primary or Secondary School, College or University, Theater or Assembly Hall,
Amusement Establishment
 
12,000 - 120,000
each additional 120,000
 
1
1 additional


Industrial Uses


Assembly/Manufacturing/Packaging, Warehousing and Distribution Plants
 
5,000 - 12,000   
12,000 - 30,000
30,000 - 120,000
each additional 120,000
 
1
2
3
1 additional


Research and Development
 
30,000 - 120,000
each additional 120,000
 
2
1 additional










NOTE: Gross Floor Area refer to all buildings and structures on premises. 



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 30-08-13, passed 9-10-13)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



SIGNS



§ 159.160  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to create the legal framework for a
comprehensive and balanced system of signs, to promote and facilitate a
simple and pleasant communication between people and their environment;
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; minimize hazards to
pedestrians and motorists along thoroughfares, intersections: and public
rights-of-way; enhance the aesthetic environment of the City of
Noblesville’s jurisdictional limits; and avoid visual clutter that may be
harmful to property values, business opportunities and community appearance.
It is a further goal to protect the residential character of neighborhoods by
limiting the intrusion of non-residential signage into residential
neighborhoods, and setting out strict standards to allow for limited
intrusion of signs where appropriate. It is the intent of this subchapter to
authorize the use of identification signs that are:



   (A)   Compatible with their surroundings;



   (B)   Appropriate to the activity that displays them;



   (C)   Expressive of the identity of individual and the community as
a whole;



   (D)   Legible in the circumstances in which they are seen;



   (E)   Simple and concise;



   (F)   Cognizant of the need for adequate business identification
while promoting an attractive appearance throughout the community through the
use of sensible quality control, adequate maintenance and inspection, and by
reasonable guidelines formulated to minimize clutter;



   (G)   Allow residents to conduct activities like garage sales that
are considered customary and incidental to normal use of a residential home
but temporary and limited in duration and scope of event;



   (H)   Allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive, and
incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are
located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but without
a requirement for permits;



   (I)   Provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances without
regard to the communicative content of the sign;



   (J)   Establish comprehensive sign regulations which effectively
balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and
aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to
the city;



   (K)   Establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in
zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent, and aesthetic
characteristics of those districts;



   (L)   Regulate signage based on property use, location, and
activities, in a content neutral manner;



   (M)   Promote public safety.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord.
17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.161  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “BALLAST.” A heavy substance placed in such a way as to improve the
stability and control of an object.



   “BUILDING, SINGLE-TENANT.”  A building in which all space is
occupied by one tenant and is not a part of a larger unified development.



   “CANOPY.” A roof-like structure extending from a building in order
to provide protection from the elements, which is carried by a frame that is
supported by the ground.



   “CHANGEABLE COPY.” Letters, numerals, or other copy that may be
manually or mechanically affixed to and/or removed from a sign. “CHANGEABLE
COPY” is only permitted when incorporated into a permanent sign structure
as permitted by this subchapter.



   “CHANNEL LETTERS.” Three-dimensional individually cut letters or
figures, illuminated or not illuminated, affixed to a structure. Open- face
“CHANNEL LETTERS” are prohibited.



   “CHANNEL LETTERS, OPEN-FACE.” Three dimensional, individually cut
letters or figures, illuminated having a clear plastic face allowing for raw
neon or like materials to be seen and affixed to a structure. This type of
channel letter is prohibited.



   “COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.” Any image, logo, or words that advertise a
business conducted, service rendered, activity conducted, or goods produced
and/or sold.



   “COMMUNITY EVENT.” An activity that is open to the general public
and sponsored by a public, private not-for-profit, or religious organization
that is educational, cultural, or recreational in function. Charitable events
sponsored by for-profit organizations are also considered “COMMUNITY
ACTIVITIES.”



   “COPY.” The wording, logo, shapes, and object content of a sign in
either permanent or removable letter media.



   “CORE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.” The area beginning at the
intersection of Clinton Street and 10th Street, running thence south along
10th Street to the intersection with Maple Avenue, running thence west along
Maple Avenue to a point where Maple Avenue would intersect with White River,
if Maple Avenue were continued upon its western course; running thence north
along the meandering thread of White River to the intersection of a line
which would represent the extension of Clinton Street to the west to its
intersection with White River; thence east to Clinton Street and along
Clinton Street to the point of beginning.



   “DRIVEWAY, LEADING EDGE.” The edge of the driveway located behind
the street right-of-way.



   “FACADE.” The main exterior of a building usually characterized by
elaboration of stylistic details and containing an entrance.



   “FLAG.” A rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is
or represents an official symbol of a nation, state, municipality, or the
legal entity that occupies the property.



   “FRONTAGE.” Property connected directly with a street or highway.
For the purpose of determining frontage, an alley is not considered to be a
street or highway.



   “GARAGE SALE (RUMMAGE, NEIGHBORHOOD, ESTATE AND OTHER SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES).” The sale or offering for sale to the general public of
personal property on any portion of a lot in any zoning district, either
within or outside of a structure on a temporary basis. It includes a
single-individual, a group of individuals, and/or a sale conducted by a
religious, school, or not-for-profit organization.



   “HEIGHT, SIGN.” The vertical distance measured from the highest
point of the sign to the finished grade of the ground immediately beneath the
sign. For those instances when the sign is constructed on an artificially
constructed earthen berm, the “SIGN HEIGHT” shall be measured from the
highest point of the sign to the base of the earthen berm.



   “ILLUMINATION.” An artificial light source incorporated internally
or externally for the purposes of illuminating the sign.



   “ILLUMINATION, BARE-BULB.” A light source which consists of light
bulbs with a 20 watt maximum wattage for each bulb.



   “ILLUMINATION, FLOOD.” A light source which shines directly upon
the object which it is intended to illuminate.



   “ILLUMINATION, HALO-LIT.” Individually mounted opaque, internally
backlit letters that illuminate the wall or surface to which they are
attached.



   “ILLUMINATION, INDIRECT.” A light source which does not directly
shine upon the object which it is illuminating.



   “ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL.” A light source that is concealed or
contained within the object which it is intended to illuminate and becomes
visible in darkness through a translucent surface.



   “INDIVIDUAL LETTERS.” May include channel letters/figures,
sandblasted letters/figures, wood-carved letters/figures or other types as
determined by the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee.



   “INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT.” A development containing three or more
stores, service establishments, offices or other permitted uses planned,
organized, and managed to function as a unified whole and featuring all or
some of the following features in common: (1) driveways, (2) parking, (3)
signage plan, (4) landscaping plan, and /or platted as a subdivision that may
include outlots for lease or for sale.



   “ITEM OF INFORMATION.” A word, an initial, a logo, an abbreviation,
a number, a symbol, or a geometric shape.



   “MULTI-TENANT BUILDING, EXTERNALLY ACCESSED.” A single building
occupied by two or more tenants in which individual business entrances are
accessed externally on the ground floor.



   “MULTI-TENANT BUILDING, INTERNALLY ACCESSED.” A single building
occupied by two or more tenants in which individual business entrances are
accessed internally through a single exterior access point or  limited
exterior access points.



   “MURAL, ART.” Original works (i) created by an individual or team
that are designed with the intent of producing a creative or aesthetic
outcome, (ii) are not used for advertising a business, product, service, or
commercial activity, and (iii) is painted, drawn, or similarly applied on the
exterior of a structure for artistic expression. The only lettered or numeric
messaging includes the artist's name and date of installation.



   “RACEWAY.” A long rectangular metal enclosure used to mount
individual channel lettering and to conceal related electrical components
onto a wall face. “RACEWAYS” may be internal or external to a building.



   “RESIDENTIAL AREA.” Any portion of the city in which residential
uses are permitted or a legal non-conforming residential use is established.



   “REVERSE CHANNEL LETTERS.” See “ILLUMINATION, HALO-LIT.”



   “SIGN.” Any name, identification, description, display, or
illustration which is affixed to, painted, or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building or other outdoor structure or parcel of land, and
which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, business,
person, service, or interest. The following definitions shall be subsets of
the definition of “SIGN:”



      (1)   “AWNING.” A roof-like covering of cloth, plastic or
other non-structural material that either is permanently extending from a
building or can be raised or retracted to a position against a building when
not in use.



      (2)   “BANNER.” A sign with a message comprised of a logo,
text, coloring, and/or design applied to a lightweight material such as
cloth, paper, fabric, or plastics and secured or mounted to allow movement
caused by the atmosphere or by artificial means of producing the movement of
air. These do not include wing banners, feather banners, flying banners,
towers, cylindrical banners, wind-up banners, and tear-drop banners.



      (3)   “BANNER, FEATHER.” A sign with a rigid rib that
forms a straight line, curve, or angle at the top on a single or two side and
loose fabric on the other edges. Also known as wing banners, feather flags,
flying banners, towers, cylindrical banners, wind-up banners, and tear-drop
banners.



      (4)   “BLADE.” A smaller version of a projecting sign
oriented to be read from the sidewalk by a pedestrian. These signs shall be
located on the ground floor of the buildings and shall be suspended from or
supported by the building, an awning, canopy, or marquee.



      (5)   “CABINET/BOX.” A sign with text and symbols printed
on a single-piece of plastic, acrylic, wood, or metal made up of a
single-face and back or two faces that are mounted in a cabinet or box that
houses the lighting sources and equipment.



      (6)   “CONSTRUCTION.”  A sign located on a property or
within a development or subdivision that is actively under construction. That
includes property with active building permits or improvement location
permits.



      (7)   “DESIGNATION.” A type of ground sign that identifies
an integrated development and may identify one or more establishments within
the development.







      (8)   “DIRECTIONAL.” A sign intending to direct the safe
flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic that includes “enter,”
“exit,” “arrow signs” and other similar information.



      (9)   “DIRECTORY.” A sign that provides a listing of uses
or tenants within a particular building or complex of buildings, intended to
facilitate circulation within the development and provide information to
patrons by providing either directions to or locations of tenants.



      (10)   “ELECTRONIC.” A sign capable of displaying words,
symbols, figures, or images in a format such as LED (Light Emitting Diode)
that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic
means.



      (11)   “GATEWAY.”  A permanent sign indicating entry into
a neighborhood or special district located either on private property or
within the right-of-way.



      (12)   “GROUND.” A freestanding sign supported primarily
by an internal structural framework or integrated into landscaping or other
solid structure features. If supported by poles, posts, or braces, the
maximum clearance between the bottom of the sign and the grade is one foot.
The external support structures shall be covered by natural flagstone, brick,
rock, stone, and/or river rock with said sign design being of the same
architectural style and materials as the main building on the site. Each
support covering must be a minimum of 25% of the width of the sign face.







      (13)   “INCIDENTAL.” A permanent sign which has a purpose
that is secondary and incidental to the use of the lot on which it is
located, such as “hours of operation,” “loading zone only,”
“air,” and “visitor parking” and other similar messages which carries
no commercial message that is legible beyond the lot on which the sign is
located.



      (14)   “LIGHTER-THAN-AIR.” A nonporous bag of light
material that can be inflated with heated air or gas so as to make it float
in the atmosphere and give it shape and is properly anchored to the ground.



      (15)   “LOT IDENTIFICATION.” A sign that includes the lot
number, structure address number, and building permit all laminated and
established on a two-foot by four-foot post(s), a minimum of five feet to a
maximum of six and one-half feet in height above the ground level.



      (16)   “MARQUEE.”  A permanent structure other than a
roof, attached to, supported by, and projecting from a building providing
protection from the environment.



      (17)   “MENU BOARD.” A cabinet sign listing the assortment
of food items available and the price of such items offered.



      (18)   “MODEL HOME/SHOW HOME.” A sign indicating that it
is a “MODEL HOME” or “SHOW HOME” and may include the name of the
builder/developer, telephone number of the builder/developer, hours open,
cost, model/style, and other information relating to that particular home and
located on the lot of the “model” or “show” home.



      (19)   “MURAL.” A sign painted onto the side of a
building, wall, ground, or structure. Murals without a commercial message are
not regulated by this subchapter. (See also Mural, Art definition.)



      (20)   “NEIGHBORHOOD.” A sign identifying a subsection of
the overall subdivision or development.



      (21)   “NON-CONFORMING.” A sign legally existing as of the
effective date of this subchapter that is not in compliance with this
subchapter or any subsequent amendments.



      (22)   “OFF-PREMISE” or “OFF-SITE.” A sign directing
attention to a business, product, service, entertainment and/or any other
activity offered, sold or conducted elsewhere than upon the lot where the
sign is displayed.



      (23)   “PARKING LOT IDENTIFICATION.” A sign providing
information for the convenience of the public to identify the location of a
parking space or lot that only contains the venue name or symbol and the
necessary information to identify the parking lot and row.



      (24)   “PLACARD.”  A sign that is attached directly to
the face of a residential structure that has been converted into a business
in the area shown in Appendix G of the Unified Development Ordinance also
known as the Central Core Map.



      (25)   “POLE.” A freestanding street graphic that is
permanently supported in a fixed location by a structure of poles, posts,
uprights, or braces from the ground and not supported by a building or base
structure.







      (26)   “PORTABLE.” Any sign that is not permanently
attached to the ground or other permanent structure or a sign designed to be
transported including but not limited to signs designed to be transported by
wheels; balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising and signs
attached to or painted on vehicles which are parked or positioned for the
primary purpose of displaying the sign.



      (27)   “PORTABLE, HUMAN.”  Any sign or banner, made of
any material which is carried, held, or displayed by any person or persons.



      (28)   “PROJECTING.” Any double-sided sign suspended from
or supported by a building, and extending outward perpendicular to the
building face upon which it is attached.



      (29)   “REAL ESTATE AVAILABILITY.”  A sign displayed on
property that is listed for sale, lease, or rent on a centralized listing
service, website, newspaper advertisement, or other similar media.



      (30)   “ROOF.” Any sign erected on or above the roof-line
of a building.



      (31)   “SANDBLASTED.” A sign created by placing a rubber
stencil over letters and images and etching the background with a
high-pressure mixture of sand and air on wood or glass materials.



      (32)   “SANDWICH BOARD.” A sign constructed in such a
manner as to form an “A” or a tent-like shape not permanently attached or
secured to the ground or surface upon which it is located specifically for
advertising that business.



      (33)   “SUSPENDED PORCH.”  A sign that is suspended from
a porch or overhang. This type of sign shall be permitted on residential
structures that have been converted to a business in the area shown in
Appendix G of the Unified Development Ordinance also known as the Central
Core Map.



      (34)   “TEMPORARY.” A sign or advertising display that is
to be displayed for a temporary designated period of time. The following
signs are included but are not limited to contractor sign, garage sale sign,
community garage sale sign, special event sign, real estate availability
sign, lighter-than-air display, lot identification sign, model home/show home
sign, open house directional sign, sandwich boards, banners, community pride
sign and other signs as determined by the Director of Planning and
Development or his or her designee.



      (35)   “WALL.” A sign attached to or affixed directly to
the wall of a building or structure, parallel to the plane of the building or
structure and extending less than 12 inches from the building or structure.



      (36)   “WINDOW.” A sign painted, etched, or attached
either directly onto the inside or outside of a window.



      (37)   “YARD.”  A sign mounted on a stake or metal frame
that is used for a limited time without regard to message. Examples include,
but are not limited to, campaigns, sales, services, business identification,
and promotions.



      (38)   “YARD CARD (SIGN BOARD).”  A durable,
double-sided, detailed design advertising a community garage sale event. The
card/board may be constructed of PVC or pressure treated wood with a
protective coating or other similar materials.



   “SIGN AREA.” The entire area of a single continuous perimeter
enclosing all elements of the sign which forms an integral part of the sign
and which are organized, related and composed to form a single unit. Where
copy is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of items
of information or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of
the items of information, each item of information shall be considered to be
a single sign.



   “SIGN AREA, GROUND AND PROJECTING SIGN (CALCULATION OF AREA).” The
total area of the sign face which is used to display a sign, not including
its supporting poles or structures. If a sign has two faces that are parallel
and supported by the same poles or structures, the area of the sign shall be
considered as one sign. If the sign has two or more faces that are supported
by the same or different poles or structures and are not parallel, the sign
shall be considered two signs.



   “SIGN AREA, WALL SIGN (CALCULATION OF AREA).” The percentage of the
signable area of a building or structure which may be used for the wall sign.



   “SIGN BACKER.” A background display that is attached to the
building or a part of the sign which is typically a geometric shape and
usually of a contrasting color to either the building and/or the sign face.



   “SIGN PERMIT.” A document signed by the Director of Planning and
Development or his or her designee stating that the sign meets the general
provisions of this subchapter and the Unified Development Ordinance.



   “SIGNABLE WALL AREA.” The total area of the building face on which
the sign is located. Windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
such as decorative molding and secondary building materials are subtracted
from the total area. For buildings divided into separate architectural
planes, only the architectural plane on which the sign is located is used for
calculating “SIGNABLE WALL AREA.” All sign elements shall be located on
the same architectural plane.



   “SIGNATURE MONUMENT.”  An identifying mark, architectural feature,
or water feature located at the entrance to a residential development on a
roadway identified on the Noblesville Thoroughfare Plan. These include, but
are not limited to, a fountain, clock tower, pergola, gazebo, outdoor plaza,
ponds, spire, arbor, or waterfalls.



   “SPECIAL EVENT.”  A noteworthy occasion or activity that is not a
part of a regular service or occasion that is conducted by business,
religious, civic, educational, community, governmental or similar
organizations.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord.
41-9-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 30-9-10,
passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11, passed
3-15-11; Am. Ord. 22-06-13, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 13-02-14, passed 3-11-14;
Am. Ord. 17-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord.
25-07-17, passed 8-15-17; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.162  SIGN PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall erect or display a sign unless the Director of
Planning and Development or his or her designee has issued a permit for the
sign or unless this section exempts the sign from the permit requirements.



   (B)   A person proposing to erect or display a sign shall file an
application for a permit with the Department of Planning and Development. The
application shall contain:



      (1)   Information concerning the location, height, and size of
sign and the date on which it is to be erected or displayed.



      (2)   A drawing or photograph of the building elevation
including identification of building materials and a site plan indicating the
location of the proposed sign and all existing signs displayed by the
activity.



      (3)   If the application is for a wall sign, a drawing to
scale, showing the location of the sign within the signable area of the
building, dimensions, and the percentage of the signable area covered by the
wall sign is required.



      (4)   Specifications for the construction of the sign and for
its illumination, if any, shall be provided.



   (C)   The Director of Planning and Development and/or his or her
designee shall issue a permit for the sign if all of the following are met
where applicable:



      (1)   It complies with the regulations for signs contained in
this subchapter.



      (2)   It complies with a “Program of Signs.”



      (3)   It has been authorized as a variance by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.



      (4)   It complies with special regulations adopted for a
designated “Area of Special Control.”



      (5)   It has been approved as a sign package for a planned
development.



   (D)   Signs listed as exempt in § 159.169 do not require a permit.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.163  SIGN CALCULATIONS STANDARDS.



   (A)   Sign Area.



      (1)   The entire area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing all elements of the sign which form an integral part of the sign
and which are organized, related, and composed to form a single unit.









Signs included as an integral part of a landscape wall or fence shall have
sign area measured by enclosing all elements of the sign which form an
integral part of the site.



      (2)   Where the sign consists of individual letters, words or
symbols attached to a surface, building, canopy, awning, wall or window, the
sign area shall be the area of the smallest, simplest geometric form which
completely encompasses the individual words or symbols. In the case of an
awning/canopy, which wraps around a building, only that portion fronting the
public street shall be used in calculating the signable area.









 



      (3)   Ground signs which maintain a configuration of back to
back faces shall be counted as one sign. In such case where the sign
maintains an axis greater than zero degrees, the sign shall be considered two
signs.









 



      (4)   Signable Wall Area. The signable wall area shall be the
total area of the building face on which the sign will be located. Windows,
doors, awnings and other architectural details, such as decorative molding
and secondary building materials are subtracted from the total area. For
buildings in which the building face is offset into multiple faces, only the
face on which the sign will be located is used for calculating the signable
wall area. All sign elements must be on the same architectural plane.









      (5)   In the case of an awning/canopy which wraps around a
building, only that portion fronting the public street shall be used in
calculating the signable area.



   (B)   Sign Height.



      (1)   The vertical distance measures from the highest point of
the sign to the finished grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign,
unless the sign is located on an artificially constructed earthen berm. In
this instance, the sign height is measured from the highest point of the sign
to the base of the earthen berm.









 



   (C)   Items of Information.



      (1)   An “ITEM OF INFORMATION” means any of the following:
a word, an initial, a logo, an abbreviation; a number; a symbol; or a
geometric shape.



      (2)   However, if the name of the proprietor occupying the
building and its premises contains more than the permitted items of
information, the name may be displayed once on each frontage as an allowable
sign, provided no other sign is displayed on that frontage.



   (D)   Items of Information Allowance.



      (1)   Designation sign - Maximum 20 items of information not
including the center name or planned development name.



      (2)   Changeable copy sign - Maximum 15 items.



      (3)   Window sign (second floor or above tenants in the
Downtown Zoning District) - Six items.



      (4)   Any Sign (other than specified above) - Ten items.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord.
12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 32-07-19,
passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.164  SIGN DESIGN, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Design.



      (1)   Wall signage shall be integrated with the facade design,
and not obscure architectural details and not protrude more than 12 inches
out from the face of the building.



      (2)   Logos and other graphics shall not exceed 30% of the
maximum permitted area of the sign.



      (3)   Script text is permitted as one continuous channel
letter.



      (4)   Designation signs and ground signs shall include the
words “of Noblesville” following any designation of an industrial park,
office park, apartment development, subdivision development or shopping
center name as an integral part of the sign design. The size of the words
“of Noblesville” shall be a minimum of 50% of the height of the largest
group of letters in the development’s name on the sign, and shall not be
counted towards the maximum items of information allowed on the designation
or ground sign. If the word “Noblesville” is already a part of the
development’s name on the sign, there shall be no requirement for the
location of the words “of Noblesville” on the sign. In any case, where
“of Noblesville” is required on the sign, the design, and material used
to include this wording shall be appropriate and similar to the other
lettering on the sign.



      (5)   Ground and designation signs shall meet the minimum
setback requirement from the right-of-way as per this subchapter and the
Unified Development Ordinance.



      (6)   No ground or designation signs shall be located in a
vision corner clearance triangle. (See § 159.120(A)(8).)



      (7)   Awnings may be constructed of canvas or cloth; however,
no illuminated plastic or glossy or reflective materials shall be used.



      (8)   If a raceway is necessary, it shall not extend in width
or height beyond the area of the sign. A raceway shall be finished to match
the background surface to which it is attached or integrated into the overall
design of the sign. Conduits and other electrical components shall be
designed as an integral part of the overall sign structure and hidden from
view to the extent technically feasible. Visible transformers are prohibited.



   (B)   Installation.



      (1)   All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of
the Indiana Building Code and the National Electrical Code.



      (2)   Illuminated signs shall not exceed the foot-candle
standards of this subchapter.



   (C)   Maintenance.



      (1)   Permanent signs shall be kept and maintained in a good
state of repair and in a safe condition at all times. Maintenance of the sign
shall include but not limited to the replacement of defective parts, missing
or damaged sign panels or supports; cleaning, cracked or peeling paint, and
other similar acts required for maintenance of the sign. Weeds, grass, or
vegetation that obscures the view of the sign message shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 94 in the Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   When a sign is not maintained within the provisions of
this subchapter or the Code of Ordinances or determined otherwise to be
unsafe, the Director of Planning and Development or his or her designee,
shall send written notice to the property owner of record on which the sign
is located to remove, repair, or alter the sign within 60 calendar days.
Failure to remove, repair or alter the sign as requested shall result in the
Director of Planning and Development seeking alternative remedies as provided
by law.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord.
12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.165  OTHER SIGN PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Areas of Special Control.



      (1)   This subchapter and the Table of Permitted Permanent
Signs cannot adequately regulate all desirable types and designs of signs in
an area as diverse as Noblesville. The city may therefore, pursuant to §
159.044, designate certain real estate as “Areas of Special Control”
including architectural, historic, or scenic areas.



      (2)   The City of Noblesville shall maintain and shall revise
as required a zoning map of Noblesville indicating the boundaries of all
designated “Areas of Special Control.”



      (3)   The City of Noblesville shall adopt special regulations
for signs in “Areas of Special Control” which shall be consistent with
the character of the specific area.



      (4)   To the extent in conflict, special regulations for
"Areas of Special Control" supersede and may be either more or less
restrictive than the regulations for signs contained in this subchapter.



   (B)   Program of Signs.



      (1)   One or more adjacent activities not located in an
“Area of Special Control” may submit a Program of Signs to the Plan
Commission. The Program of Signs shall contain a visual representation of the
lettering, illumination, color, area, height, placement, and location of the
signs proposed for display. The items of information displayed on the signs
proposed by an activity in the Program of Signs shall not exceed the items of
information allowance.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may approve a Program of Signs if
the signs visually represented in the Program are consistent with the
purposes of this subchapter, are appropriate to the function and
architectural character of the building(s) in which the activity is located,
and are compatible with the existing adjacent activities.



      (3)   An activity whose Program of Signs has been approved by
the Plan Commission may display only those signs that comply with the
approved program.



   (C)   Substitute Provisions.



      (1)   Subject to the property owner's consent, any
non-commercial copy may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any
commercial copy on any sign permitted by this code. If non-commercial copy is
substituted, the sign will continue to be treated as the original commercial
sign under this code and will not be deemed or treated as an off-premise
sign. The content of any non-commercial copy on any sign otherwise permitted
by this subchapter may be changed without complying with any provisions of
this subchapter normally required for sign copy or design approval.



      (2)   The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or
favoring of any particular non-commercial copy over any other non-commercial
copy.



         (a)   This provision does not create a right to increase
the amount of permanent signage on a parcel, lot, or land use.



         (b)   This provision does not affect the requirement
that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted.



         (c)   This provision does not allow a change in the
physical structure of a sign or its mounting device.



         (d)   This provision does not allow the substitution of
off- premises commercial copy in place of on-premises commercial copy or
non-commercial copy.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord.
32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.166  PERMANENT SIGNS.



   The following requirements shall apply to all permanent signs within
the City of Noblesville’s Planning jurisdiction. Refer to "Article 8 -
Zoning Districts" (§§ 159.105 et seq.) for sign regulations specific to the
Corporate Campus Planned Development District and the West Gateway Planned
Development District.



   (A)   Home Occupation (Residential Zone Districts).



      (1)   Permit required: No.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Wall sign.



      (3)   Number: One wall sign shall be permitted.



      (4)   Maximum sign area: One square foot.



      (5)   Maximum ground sign height: N/A.



      (6)   Location: Attached flat against the wall of the
residence.



      (7)   Permitted materials: Any.



      (8)   Illumination: Non-illuminated.



      (9)   Landscaping: N/A.



      (10)   Alternate signage: N/A.



   (B)   Single-Family, Two-Family or Multi-Family Subdivisions.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Ground sign.



      (3)   Number: One ground sign shall be permitted at each
entrance to a recorded, platted residential subdivision.



      (4)   Maximum sign area: 32 square feet.



      (5)   Maximum ground sign height: Six feet.



      (6)   Location: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street
right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway.



      (7)   Permitted materials: The sign materials shall be
constructed of materials which blend with the residential character of the
neighborhood including but not limited to wood, metal, or masonry.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: An area equal to three times the area of
the sign face shall be required for base landscaping around a ground sign.
The landscape area will radiate out a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign shall be provided and shall be planted in such a way to
substantially cover the area with landscape materials such as, but not
limited to annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
A mixture of plant types is required.



      (10)   Alternate signage:



         (a)   Neighborhood signs - masonry pillars marking the
entrance into an individual neighborhood within a larger subdivision. There
may be either a single pillar or a pillar on either side of the street at the
entrance to the smaller neighborhood. The masonry pillar may not exceed five
feet in height, shall have a sign face not exceeding four square feet in
size. Any lighting must be external, and the lighting must be directed
narrowly at the sign face, and may not shine onto any adjacent property or
rights-of-way.



         (b)   The sign located along a thoroughfare road may
include a signature monument that does not exceed a height of 12 feet. The
signature monument shall be designed to enhance the identity of the
community. All features on the signature monument above six feet in height
shall be only architectural elements of the signature monument and shall not
include any identification, description, display, or illustration of the sign.



   (C)   Institutional Uses.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Ground sign and wall sign.



      (3)   Number: One wall sign on the primary building per street
frontage. One ground sign per street frontage for lots with a minimum of 100
feet in width and the building or structure shall be setback a minimum of 35
feet from the adjacent street right-of-way.



      (4)    Maximum sign area.



         (a)   Ground sign: 32 square feet.



         (b)   Wall sign shall not exceed 20% of the signable
wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable area.



      (5)   Maximum ground sign height: Six feet.



      (6)   Location: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street
right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway.
The sign shall be separated from another ground sign located on the same side
of the right-of-way, a minimum distance of 100 linear feet.



      (7)   Permitted Materials.



         (a)   Ground sign shall be constructed of materials that
blend with the character of the building such as but not limited to wood,
metal, or masonry.



         (b)   Wall sign requires individually mounted channel
letters constructed of materials such as wood or metal.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: An area equal to three times the area of
the sign face shall be required for base landscaping around a ground sign.
The landscape area will radiate out a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign shall be provided and shall be planted in such a way to
substantially cover the area with landscape materials such as, but not
limited to annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
A mixture of plant types is required.



      (10)   Alternate signage: A maximum of 30% of the total ground
sign area may be used for changeable copy.



   (D)   Single-Tenant Building or Property, Externally Accessed
Multi-Tenant Building or Property (individual accesses and not part of an
integrated Development).



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Ground sign, wall sign,
suspended porch sign, placard sign.



      (3)   Number and Type.



         (a)   Single-Tenant Building. One sign per street
frontage. One ground sign for lots having a minimum width of 100 feet and a
minimum building setback of 35 feet from the adjacent street right-of-way or
one wall sign. For structures that were formerly residential structures that
have been converted to a business and are located in the "Central Core Map"
illustrated in Appendix G of the Unified Development Ordinance; the owner may
choose to install a suspended porch sign or a placard sign in lieu of a wall
sign. The owner may transfer a permitted sign from one building elevation to
another; however, no elevation is permitted two or more of the same sign
types on the same frontage.



         (b)   Externally Accessed Multi-Tenant Building
(individual accesses). One wall sign per tenant per street or one ground sign
per each street frontage for lots having a minimum width of 100 feet and a
minimum building setback of 35 feet from the adjacent street right-of-way
with signage space for each tenants provided equally.



      (4)   Maximum Sign Area.



         (a)   Ground sign: 45 square feet.



         (b)   Wall sign shall not exceed 20% of the signable
wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable area.



         (c)   Suspended Porch Sign: 16 square feet.



         (d)   Placard Sign: 16 square feet.



      (5)   Maximum ground sign height: 5 feet.



      (6)   Location: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street
right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway.
The sign shall be separated from another ground sign located on the same side
of the right-of-way, a minimum distance of 100 linear feet.



      (7)   Permitted Materials.



         (a)   Ground Sign. The sign shall be constructed of
materials that blend with the character of the building such as but not
limited to wood, metal, or masonry. The copy shall be individually mounted
channel letters, sandblasted, or etched for the single tenant buildings.
Multi-tenant buildings may have tenant identification as panel inserts of
wood, plastic, or other similar materials constructed of a single background
color for all tenant panels. If a building name is used on the sign, the copy
shall be individually mounted channel letters, sandblasted, or etched.



         (b)   Wall sign requires individually mounted channel
letters constructed of materials such as wood, plastic, or metal.



         (c)   Suspended Porch Sign. The sign shall be
constructed of materials that blend with the character of the building such
as but not limited to wood or metal.



         (d)   Placard Sign. The sign shall be constructed of
materials that blend with the character of the building such as but not
limited to wood or metal.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit, internally or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: An area equal to three times the area of
the sign face shall be required for base landscaping around a ground sign.
The landscape area will radiate out a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign, shall be provided and shall be planted in such a way to
substantially cover the area with landscape materials such as, but not
limited to, annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
A mixture of plant types is required.



      (10)   Alternate signage: Awning or canopy signage may be used
in lieu of wall signage. Signage shall be a maximum of 20% of the
awning/canopy area. A projecting sign may be used in lieu of wall signage not
exceeding 15 square feet in area. A maximum of 30% of the total ground sign
area may be used for changeable copy.



   (E)   Internally Accessed Multi-Tenant Building.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Ground sign and wall sign.



      (3)   Number and type: One wall sign per street frontage
identifying the building and one ground sign per street frontage for lots
with a minimum of 100 feet in width and a building setback of a minimum of 35
feet from the adjacent street right-of-way.



      (4)   Maximum Sign Area.



         (a)   Ground sign: See table.



         (b)   Wall sign shall not exceed 20% of the signable
wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable area.



      (5)   Maximum ground sign height: See table.



      (6)   Location: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street
right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway.
The sign shall be separated from another ground sign located on the same side
of the right-of-way, a minimum distance of 100 linear feet.



      (7)   Permitted Materials.



         (a)   Ground Sign. The sign shall be constructed of
materials that blend with the character of the building such as but not
limited to wood, metal, or masonry. The copy shall be individually mounted
channel letters, sandblasted, or etched for the identifying building name.
Tenant identification may be panel inserts of plastic, wood, or other similar
materials, constructed of a single background color and limited to one color
for all copy. Logos are excluded from the color requirement.



         (b)   Wall sign requires individually mounted channel
letters constructed of materials such as wood, plastic, or metal.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit, internally or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: An area equal to three times the area of
the sign face shall be required for base landscaping around a ground sign.
The landscape area will radiate out a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign shall be provided and shall be planted in such a way to
substantially cover the area with landscape materials such as, but not
limited to annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
A mixture of plant types is required.



      (10)   Alternate signage: A maximum of 30% of the total sign
area may be used for changeable copy.



   (F)   Integrated Development.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes (permits required for individual
panel inserts in designation sign).



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Designation sign and wall sign.



      (3)   Number and Type.



         (a)   One designation sign permitted per each street
frontage external to the development including a minimum of 300 feet of
frontage and an established building setback of a minimum of 60 feet.



         (b)   Single-Tenant Building, Externally Accessed
Multi-Tenant Building (individual accesses). One wall sign per street
frontage per tenant. The owner may transfer a permitted sign from one
building elevation to another; however, no elevation is permitted two wall
signs on the same frontage.



         (c)   Internally Accessed Multi-Tenant Building. One
wall sign identifying the building per public/private street frontage. The
owner may transfer a permitted sign from one building elevation to another;
however, no elevation is permitted two wall signs on the same frontage.



      (4)   Maximum Sign Area.



         (a)   Designation sign: See table.



         (b)   Wall sign shall not exceed 20% of the signable
wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural details
make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable area.



      (5)   Maximum designation sign height: See table.



      (6)   Location: Shall be a minimum of ten feet from the street
right-of-way and a minimum of ten feet from the leading edge of the driveway.
The sign shall be separated from another designation sign a minimum of 300
feet on the same street frontage. Designation signs that have been split into
two signs shall be separated a minimum of 700 feet including another
development’s designation sign.



      (7)   Permitted Materials.



         (a)   Designation Sign. The sign shall be constructed of
materials that blend with the character of the building such as but not
limited to wood, metal, or masonry. Panel inserts within the designation
sign, displaying tenant names may be constructed of plastic. A single color
for the background panel inserts must be maintained for the entire sign. The
development name and the City of Noblesville’s name shall be individually
mounted channel letters, sandblasted, or etched.



         (b)   Wall sign requires individually mounted channel
letters constructed of materials such as wood, plastic, or metal.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit, internally or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: An area equal to three times the area of
the sign face shall be required for base landscaping around a ground sign.
The landscape area will radiate out a minimum of five feet from the base of
the sign, shall be provided and shall be planted in such a way to
substantially cover the area with landscape materials such as, but not
limited to, annuals, ground covers, perennials, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
A mixture of plant types is required.



      (10)   Alternate signage: Awning or canopy signage may be used
in lieu of wall signage. An awning/canopy sign is permitted a maximum of 20%
of the signable area. Sites with more than two multi-tenant buildings may be
permitted one directory sign per street frontage per building.



   (G)   Downtown Noblesville. This section applies to real estate
located within the Downtown Zoning District as per the Zoning Map.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes. An encroachment permit is also
required for projecting, awning, canopy, marquee, blade, and sandwich board
signs, if encroaching over or into the right-of-way.



      (2)   Type of sign permitted: Wall, projecting, awning,
canopy, marquee, blade, window and sandwich board signs.



      (3)   Number and Type.



         (a)   Single-Tenant Building.



            (1)   One wall, projecting, awning, canopy, window
or marquee sign per street frontage or public parking lot and/or one blade
sign per street frontage.



            (2)    One sandwich board sign.



         (b)   Multi-Tenant, Multi-Level Building.



            (1)   Ground Floor Tenant.



               A.   One wall, projecting, awning, canopy,
window, or marquee sign per street frontage.



               B.   One blade sign per street frontage.



               C.   One sandwich board sign.



            (2)   Tenant Above the Ground Floor.



                  A.   One blade sign at the ground
floor entrance and/or one window sign in window above ground floor.



                  B.   One wall sign per tenant located
above the windows on the top floor and the below the roof line of the
building.



                     1.   All signage for tenants
above the ground floor shall be grouped within the same one-third (1/3) of
the area available above the windows on the top floor and below the roof line
of the building.



                     2.   Design of the sign(s) shall
use consistent sign types, colors, and materials.



                     3.   Such sign(s) shall be
centered vertically in the area the sign is installed.



 



                     4.   The owner of the building
shall show locations for other possible future tenant signs upon submittal of
the first sign permit.



      (4)   Maximum Sign Area.



         (a)   Awning sign:  20% of awning area.



         (b)   Canopy sign:  20% of canopy area.



         (c)   Marquee sign:  20% of signable wall area with a
maximum of 200 square feet.



         (d)   Blade sign:  Four square feet.



         (e)   Projecting sign:  15 square feet.



         (f)   Sandwich board:  Six square feet. Two feet in
width and three feet in height.



         (g)   Wall sign: Sign shall not exceed 20% of the
signable wall area, unless windows, doors, awnings and other architectural
details make up more than 50% of the building face in which the sign size may
increase to 40% of the signable area.



         (h)   Window sign:



            1.   Ground floor tenants: 15% of the total window
area.



            2.   Second floor and above tenants: 20% of the
total window area on floor in which the use is located. For the tenant having
an entrance to the use on the street/alley facade, a sign is permitted on the
door not to exceed 20% of the total window area of the door.



      (5)   Maximum sandwich board sign height: Three feet.



      (6)   Location: Sign shall not obscure significant
architectural features of the building.



         (a)   Awning sign: May extend to within one foot of the
vertical plane of the curb and must maintain a minimum clearance of eight
feet above the public right of way.



         (b)   Canopy sign: May extend to within one foot of the
vertical plane of the curb and must maintain a minimum clearance of eight
feet above the public right of way.



         (c)   Marquee sign: May extend to within one foot of the
vertical plane of the curb and must maintain a minimum clearance of eight
feet above the public right of way.



         (d)   Blade sign: Permitted at ground floor locations.
May extend to within one foot of the vertical plane of the curb and must
maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet above the public right of way.



         (e)   Projecting sign: Must maintain a minimum clearance
of eight feet above the public right-of-way and may extend to within one foot
of the vertical plane of the street curb. Must maintain a separation of at
least 30 feet from another projecting sign.



         (f)   Sandwich board: Refer to City Code Chapter 94 and
the “sandwich board” section of this subchapter.



         (g)   Wall sign. An activity on the first floor shall
not construct the wall sign above the window sill of the second story. A wall
sign may not exceed two-thirds of the distance between the top of the lower
window and the sill of the upper window.



         (h)   Window sign: 15% of the total window area and are
considered secondary signs.



      (7)   Permitted Materials.



         (a)   Awning sign: Canvas or cloth, no reflective or
glossy materials or illuminated plastic.



         (b)   Canopy sign: Canvas or cloth, no reflective or
glossy materials or illuminated plastic.



         (c)   Marquee sign: N/A.



         (d)   Blade sign: Wood or metal (matching architectural
features of building).



         (e)   Projecting sign: Wood or metal (matching
architectural features of building).



         (f)   Sandwich board: Wood, chalkboard, or finished
metal.



         (g)   Wall sign: Wood, metal, or mural (matching
architectural features of building).



         (h)   Window sign: Vinyl, gold leaf, or substantially
similar materials.



      (8)   Illumination: Halo-lit or externally lit.



      (9)   Landscaping: N/A.



      (10)   Alternate signage: A directory wall sign.



(Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
10-3-09, passed 4-14-09; Am. Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 41-9-09,
passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed
9-28-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13;
Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord. 13-02-14, passed 3-11-14; Am.
Ord. 17-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord.
25-07-17, passed 8-15-17; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.167  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   A sign permit is not required for the following:



      (1)   Real Estate Availability Signs.



         (a)   Permit required: No.



         (b)   One sign per each street frontage or public
off-street parking area. Such signs may only be placed on the premises of the
property for sale.



         (c)   For real estate under five acres, the sign must be
set back at least five feet from the edge of the right-of-way, shall not
exceed six square feet in size and four feet in height. These signs are
located in all zone districts and on a local classified street.



         (d)   For real estate less than five acres located on a
collector, arterial, highway, or expressway of classified streets, said
street having a minimum speed limit of 45 m.p.h., the sign shall be setback
ten feet from the right-of-way, shall not exceed 32 square feet in size, and
a maximum height of eight feet. If the property is on a limited access
highway, the setback of the sign shall be at the property line adjacent to
the limited access highway; but not located in the right-of-way.



         (e)   For real estate more than five acres, the sign
shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the right-of-way,
shall not exceed 32 square feet in size, and no more than eight feet in
height. If the property is on a limited access highway, the setback of the
sign shall be at the property line adjacent to the limited access highway,
but not in the right-of-way.



      (2)   Yard signs (Residentially zoned property). Yard signs
located on private property that meet the following requirements are
permitted.



         (a)   Permit required: No.



         (b)   Shall not obstruct the line of sight of any
operator of a vehicle.



         (c)   Shall not be located in public right-of-way.



         (d)   Shall be owned and maintain by the owner or tenant
in possession of the real estate on which it is located.



         (e)   Shall not exceed six square feet in size.



         (f)   Shall be wall mounted or ground installed. Ground
signs shall be a maximum of 42 inches in height.



         (g)   Shall be limited to no more than two on a property.



         (h)   For a period of time starting 60 days before an
election and ending at the beginning of the sixth day after the election, the
regulations of I.C. 36-1-3-11 shall apply relating to the maximum size of the
sign. During this time period, no sign shall be taller than six feet in
height, but the maximum number of signs per property shall not apply.



      (3)   Yard signs (non-residentially zoned property). Yard
signs located on private property that meet the following requirements are
permitted subject to the regulations listed below.



         (a)   Permit required: No.



         (b)   Shall not obstruct the line of sight of any
operator of a vehicle.



         (c)   Shall not be located in public right-of-way.



         (d)   Shall be owned and maintain by the owner or tenant
in possession of the real estate on which it is located.



         (e)   Shall not exceed six square feet in size.



         (f)   Shall be ground installed. Ground signs shall be a
maximum of 42 inches in height.



         (g)   Shall be limited to no more than two on a
property, and may be displayed on the property for a maximum of 60 days per
calendar year.



         (h)   For a period of time starting 60 days before an
election and ending at the beginning of the sixth day after the election, the
regulations of I.C. 36-1-3-11 shall apply relating to the maximum size of the
sign. During this time period, no sign shall be taller than six feet in
height, but the maximum number of signs per property shall not apply.



   (B)   The following temporary signs require a sign permit:



      (1)   Human portable sign. (effective 12-10-10)



         (a)   Permit required: Yes.



         (b)   Maximum sign: Two feet width, three square feet
total.



         (c)   Maximum Number: One per person at any one time.
Shall not hold more than one portable sign contiguous to another portable
sign to effectively increase the square footage of the sign.



         (d)   No person shall hold or extend the sign over or
into a public street.



         (e)   No person while carrying or displaying a sign
shall impede a sidewalk, multi-use path, driveway, or other access to public
property that restricts the use of the walkway, or access point by the
general public or a continuous landowner.



         (f)   No person shall display a portable sign in a
“residential area” before 7:00 a.m. or sunrise, whichever is later; or
after 7:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever is earlier, based on the time of sunrise
or sunset as published by the National Weather Service at the Indianapolis
International Airport.



         (g)   Applies to both commercial signs and signs
containing political or other protected free speech information.



         (h)   Should the sign contain “commercial speech”,
it may be displayed for a maximum of 28 days during a calendar year.



      (2)   Banners for Non-Residential Uses.



         (a)   Permit required: Yes.



         (b)   A temporary banner may be displayed for special
events. Such banners shall be displayed a maximum of 30 days per special
event. Each business may display a temporary banner for up to 60 days per
calendar year, but there must be a minimum of 60 days separating the
installation of the banners for the special events. The total allotted time
may be subdivided into a banner four times a year for a minimum of seven days
each.



         (c)   Such signs shall be limited to a maximum of 32
square feet in size and must be located on the premises of the business for
which it advertises.



         (d)   An application for a permit must be submitted one
week prior to the installation of the banner on the premises.



         (e)   Banners shall not be illuminated.



         (f)   Banners for multi-tenant buildings,
multi-buildings on a single parcel, and integrated developments shall have a
maximum of two banners for separate uses on the premises at any single time.



         (g)   Banners are prohibited in the Core Central
Business District.



         (h)   No more than one temporary banner may be displayed
at a time.



      (3)   Lighter-than-air Displays for Commercial Uses.



         (a)   Permit required: Yes.



         (b)   Lighter-than-air displays shall be affixed to the
ground on the property of the business erecting the display and shall be
permitted a maximum of 14 days during a calendar year.



         (c)   The display shall be limited to a maximum height
of 18 feet from the ground to the top of the display.



         (d)   An application for a permit must be submitted one
week prior to the display being installed on the premises of the business for
which it advertises.



         (e)   Displays shall not be illuminated.



         (f)   Such displays shall not be permitted on building
rooftops.



         (g)   Displays for multi-tenant buildings,
multi-buildings on a single parcel, and integrated developments shall have a
maximum of two displays for separate uses on the premises at any single time.



      (4)   Construction Signs.



         (a)   Permit required: Yes.



         (b)   Each construction site under construction shall be
permitted one sign per street frontage. Each subdivision under construction
shall be permitted one sign per subdivision entrance.



         (c)   Such sign(s) shall not exceed 64 square feet per
street frontage, and shall not exceed ten feet in height.



         (d)   No two subdivision construction signs shall be
placed within 1,000 linear feet of each other.



         (e)   Prior to the issuance of the Final Certificate of
Occupancy, the construction sign shall be removed from the site.



         (f)   The sign(s) shall be placed on the site upon
receipt of an Improvement Location Permit and the issuance of a Temporary
Sign Permit.



         (g)   Minimum setback ten feet from the edge of
right-of-way.



      (5)   Neighborhood Information Signs.



         (a)   Permit required: Yes. (no fee)



         (b)   Sign boards, yard cards, or banners placed on HOA
property or sign easement shall not exceed 20 square feet in size and five
feet in height. The sign shall be located in the subdivision or real estate
where the event is to occur. If the sign is located in the median of the
street at the entrance to the subdivision, an encroachment permit and fee are
required prior to the placement of said sign.



         (c)   Sign boards, yard cards, yard signs, or banners
shall be permitted a maximum of two times during a calendar year. The sign
may be installed seven days prior to the event and removed the last day of
the event, not exceeding a maximum of 20 days per calendar year.



         (d)   An application for a permit must be submitted one
week prior to the installation of the sign on the premises including a site
plan indicating the location(s) of the sign(s).



         (e)   No additional embellishments are allowed,
including and not limited to balloons, flags, and pendants.



         (f)   Signs shall not be illuminated.



         (g)   Shall not be located in the public right-of-way.



         (h)   Single sign permit for all entrance locations
within the subdivision.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 44-11-97, passed 12-8-97; Am. Ord.
55-11-01, passed 12-11-01; Am. Ord. 42-5-05, passed 6-14-05; Am. Ord.
48-6-05, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 17-5-09,
passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord. 41-9-09, passed
10-13-09; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 30-9-10, passed 9-28-10;
Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord.
13-3-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 24-07-13,
passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord. 37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed
5-12-15; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed
8-9-16; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.168  MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS.



   (A)   Accessory Signs.



      (1)   Permit required: No.



      (2)   Window signs located on the front glass of the building
shall not exceed one square foot.



      (3)   Matter appearing on gasoline pumps including credit card
information, fuel information, and/or other similar matter is permitted if
less than three inches in height. A decal less than one square foot in size
that includes the business name or business logo may be placed at each
fueling station. All advertisement posters and paraphernalia are prohibited.



      (4)   Matter appearing on automatic teller machines (ATM),
including credit card information, bank network information, business name,
business logo and/or other similar matter is permitted if less than three
inches in height. All advertisement posters and paraphernalia are prohibited.
All free standing ATMs shall follow the permanent sign regulations applicable
to the location of the machine.



      (5)   Newspaper vending boxes, DVD/CD vending boxes, soda
machines, and other similar vending boxes.



   (B)   Model Home/Sales Office Signs.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Signs shall be located inside the subdivision under
construction outside of the public right-of-way.



      (3)   Each sales office or model home may have one sign for
each use not to exceed six square feet.



      (4)   Each subdivision’s home builders shall be permitted a
directional sign beyond that already allowed by this chapter. Said sign shall
be both incidental and necessary for the sale, rental, or lease of real
property in the zone district. This sign shall be a maximum of four square
feet in size and shall be required to be located inside the subdivision under
construction. The sign shall not be located within the right-of-way. If
multiple builders are located within the same subdivision, and each has a
model home(s) in different locations of the subdivision, each would be
permitted a single directional sign. No company and/or business names or
logos are permitted on the directional signs.



      (5)   No flags, banners, or other portable signs shall be
permitted.



   (C)   Directory Signs.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   As ground signs shall not exceed four feet in height and
16 square feet in size and shall be located internal to the site and not
legible from adjacent real estate or streets.



      (3)   As wall signs shall not exceed eight square feet.



      (4)   As projecting signs shall clear the sidewalks by a
minimum of eight feet in height and may project no more than four feet from
the building or one-third the width of the sidewalk, whichever is more.



   (D)   Directional Signs.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Shall not exceed four square feet in size or four feet
in height.



      (3)   Shall not contain any logos, business names, or other
copy that denotes the business for which it serves.



   (E)   Electronic Signs.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Shall only be used as a permanent on-premise ground sign
and shall maintain the same size, height, and items of information
restrictions as a non-electronic sign.



      (3)   Shall not be located closer than 1,320 feet to any other
electronic sign on the same street frontage as measured from the center of
the sign structure.



      (4)   Any portion of the sign message shall remain stationary
for a minimum of ten seconds. No portion of the message shall flash, scroll,
twirl, change color, fade in or out, have transitional elements between copy
changes, or in any manner imitate movement at any time.



      (5)   Shall display only those services to the site it is
serving.



      (6)   The electronic portion of a designation or ground sign
shall be limited to a maximum of 30% of the overall sign area.



      (7)   The sign shall be factory certified not to exceed a
maximum illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during
daylight hours and must be dimmed automatically 30 minutes after sunset and
before sunrise to maintain a maximum illumination of 5,000 NITS as measured
from the sign’s face at maximum brightness.



      (8)   A default mechanism shall freeze the sign in one portion
or static message if a malfunction occurs.



      (9)   These signs are not permitted in the DT (Downtown Zoning
District) except for time and temperature signs.



      (10)   These signs shall be full color (RGB electronic LED or
Tri-color electronic LED excluding time and temperature signs.



   (F)   Sandwich Board Signs located in the "DT" Downtown Zoning
District.



      (1) Permit required: Yes. An encroachment permit is also required
prior to the issuance of the sign permit if located in public right-of-way.



      (2)   Sign placement must meet all encroachment requirements
as detailed in City Code Chapter 94.



      (3)   Signs shall be removed from the outside location at the
end of each business day.



      (4)   A ballast weighing a minimum of ten pounds and colored
solid black shall be installed at the base or hang internally from the A-
Frame of the sandwich board sign to ensure stability in windy conditions.



      (5)   More than two violations of the provisions of the
regulations governing these sign types in any one calendar year shall result
in the termination of the sign permit for the sandwich board and require
removal of the sandwich board. A new sandwich board sign shall not be
permitted for the business for a minimum of 12 months from the date of the
sign permit revocation.









 



      (6)   Maximum size: 24 inches by 36 inches.



      (7)   Maximum height: Three feet.



      (8)   Materials: Hardwood, chalk, or finished metal A-Frame.



   (G)   Sandwich Board Located in the “LB” Local Business,
“GB” General Business, or “PB” Planned Business Zoning Districts.



      (1)   Permit required: Yes.



      (2)   Signs shall not located in the right-of-way.



      (3)   Signs shall be removed from the outside location at the
end of each business day.



      (4)   A ballast weighing a minimum of ten pounds and colored
solid black shall be installed at the base or hanging internally from the A-
Frame of the sandwich board sign to ensure stability in windy conditions.



      (5)   Maximum size: 24 inches by 36 inches.



      (6)   Maximum height: Three feet.



      (7)   Permitted materials: Hardwood, steel, vinyl-clad, poly-
plastic A-Frames and other similar materials.



   (H)   Canopy over stacking lane(s).



      (1)   Permit required: Yes



      (2)   One sign is permitted over each stacking lane.



      (3)   Each sign shall not exceed 75% of the height of the
canopy and 25% of the width of the stacking lane.



      (4)   Signs may be internally illuminated or have LED
components.



   (I)   Original Art Mural.



      (1)   Permit required: No. No permit is required, but the
mural must be reviewed by the Department of Planning to ensure that it is not
a mural sign. Once that sign off is received, the applicant will be given a
form to take to Nickel Plate Arts. The Nickel Plate Arts Public Art Committee
will then review the proposal and complete the form provided. A copy of the
completed form will be returned to the Department of Planning upon
completion. No sign permit is required as long as the mural meets the
regulations below.



      (2)   Original art murals shall be permitted only with the
Central Core illustrated in Appendix G.



      (3)   The original art mural shall be permitted only on the
flat planes of walls.



      (4)   The original art mural shall not be painted on or
affixed to obscure architectural features such as windows, doors, pilasters,
cornices, or other building recessed or projecting features.



      (5)   The original art mural shall not include a commercial
message.



      (6)   The dimensions of the original art mural shall stay
within the original dimensions of the wall on which the mural is being
painted or affixed.



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord.
41-9-09, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. 12-2-11,
passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed
7-23-19)



§ 159.169  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   The following signs are subject only to the regulations of this
subchapter:



   (A)   Government signs and legal notices.



   (B)   Memorial plaques and cornerstones and governmental historical
markers.



   (C)   Flags of any country state, unit of local government or
not-for-profit organization.



   (D)   Flags - not to exceed a total of four flags on a property.



   (E)   Nameplates that do not exceed two square feet in size and are
permanently affixed upon a building or structure.



   (F)   Address numbers.



   (G)   Public information signs identifying telephones, restrooms,
and similar facilities. Advertising copy is not permitted on these signs.



   (H)   Menu sign.



   (I)   Traffic control and government information signs.



   (J)   Letters or numbers less than three inches in height, if a part
of a wall sign or window sign.



   (K)   Letters less than 19 inches in height carved into or securely
attached in such a manner that they are an architectural detail of a
building, provided they are not illuminated apart from the building, are not
made of reflective material, and are the same color as the building, and does
not exceed one inch in thickness.



   (L)   Incidental signs.



   (M)   A sign that does not advertise or identify goods, a service,
or an enterprise and which is provided solely for the convenience or
education of the public. This type of sign may include a building's date of
construction, a monument citation, commemorative inscription, or similar
historic information.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 11-4-97, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord.
5-2-02, passed 3-12-02; Am. Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 17-5-09,
passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09, passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord. 37-08-14, passed
9-9-14; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.170  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   Signs which by color, location, or design resemble or conflict
with traffic control signs or signals, or obstruct the view of an
intersection of a street or highway with a railroad crossing, or which are
located upon, over or in any street right-of-way.



   (B)   Signs attached to light poles or standards.



   (C)   Portable signs.



   (D)   Signs which advertise activity, business, project, or service
no longer conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located within six
months of the end of the business activity. The Department of Planning and
Development shall notify the property owner of this requirement approximately
three months after the most recent business activity has ended.



   (E)   Signs that give the appearance of movement such as undulation,
swinging, rotation, or oscillation by natural or artificial means including
pennants, feather banners, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or
other similar devices, except as permitted by this subchapter.



   (F)   Signs containing running lights give the illusion of movement
or have moving parts except for barber poles. Electronic signs or lighting
that flashes, scrolls, twirls, changes color, fades in or out, has
transitional elements between copy changes, or in any manner imitates
movement at any time.



   (G)   Roof signs.



   (H)   Off-premise signs, except as provided in this subchapter for
temporary signs.



   (I)   Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or
located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign.



   (J)   Motor vehicles whose apparent primary purpose is to advertise
business. Motor vehicles engaged in the cartage or goods or the transport of
passengers are exempt form this restriction.



   (K)   Inflatable images such as balloons, beer cans, gorillas,
bunny, etc., except as provided § 159.167.



   (L)   Pole signs.



   (M)   Cabinet signs except as authorized elsewhere in this
subchapter.



   (N)   External neon lighting or LED lighting either used as a part
of a sign or distributed around a building or structure.



   (O)   Signs with decorative backers.



   (P)   Signs displayed for pay or other compensation.



   (Q)   Signs located within the public right-of-way (except traffic
control and government information signs).



   (R)   Weekend directional signs.



   (S)   Window signs are prohibited except those areas located in the
Downtown (DT) Zoning District.



   (T)   Signs more than 25 feet in height.



   (U)   Signs placed on private or public property without the consent
of the owner, owner's representative, holder, lessee, trustee, or other party
controlling the use of such property.



   (V)   Signs painted on, attached to, or maintained upon trees,
rocks, or other natural features.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 5-2-02, passed 3-12-02; Am. Ord.
23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord. 37-08-14,
passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.171  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.



   A legal non-conforming sign shall immediately lose its legal
non-conforming status if:



   (A)   The sign is not kept in good repair and/or in safe condition
for a period exceeding six months.



   (B)   The sign is relocated.



   (C)   The entire sign is replaced.



   (D)   The permit, variance, or condition under which the sign was
allowed expires.



   (E)   The sign is altered to the following extent:



      (1)   Items of information are increased.



      (2)   The size of the sign is increased.



      (3)   Lights and/or other electronic features are added.



      (4)   The intensity of the lighting is increased.



   (F)   The use changes.



   (G)   The use is discontinued for six consecutive months.



(Ord. 23-4-07, passed 5-15-07; Am. Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord.
41-9-09, passed 10-13-09)



§ 159.172  DESIGNATION AND GROUND SIGN BULK REQUIREMENTS.



 



For Commercial and Industrial Districts Adjacent to or Across from Commercial
or Industrial Districts


LANES
 
2 TO 4
 
4 DIVIDED


SPEED (MPH)
 
15 - 25
 
30 - 40
 
45 - 55+
 
15 - 25
 
30-40
 
45 - 55+


Ground sign
 
25 SF
 
45 SF
 
65 SF
 
30 SF
 
60 SF
 
120 SF


Designation sign (<500 foot frontage)
 
37.5 SF
 
67.5 SF
 
97.5 SF
 
45 SF
 
90 SF
 
180 SF


Designation sign (>500 foot frontage)
 
37.5 SF
 
67.5 SF
 
97.5 SF
 
180 SF
 
200 SF
 
300 SF*


   HEIGHT


Ground sign
 
5 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet


Designation sign
 
10 feet
 
12 feet
 
16 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet


* Designation signs of 300 square feet or greater shall be divided into two
signs. The maximum area for any one of the two signs is 200 square feet.


For Commercial and Industrial Districts Adjacent to or Across from
Residential Districts


LANES
 
2 TO 4
 
4 DIVIDED


SPEED (MPH)
 
15 - 25
 
30 - 40
 
45 - 55+
 
15 - 25
 
30- 40
 
45 - 55+


Ground sign
 
20 SF
 
30 SF
 
40 SF
 
25 SF
 
45 SF
 
80 SF


Designation sign (<500 foot frontage)
 
30 SF
 
45 SF
 
60 SF
 
37.5 SF
 
67.5 SF
 
97.5 SF


Designation Sign (>500 foot frontage)
 
30 SF
 
45 SF
 
60 SF
 
180 SF
 
200 SF
 
300 SF+


HEIGHT


Ground sign
 
5 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet
 
6 feet


Designation sign
 
5 feet
 
6 feet
 
12 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet
 
25 feet


* Designation signs of 300 square feet or greater shall be divided into two
signs. The maximum area for any one of the two signs is 200 square feet.




 



(Ord. 17-5-09, passed 6-9-09; Am. Ord. 23-6-09,passed 6-23-09; Am. Ord.
12-2-11, passed 3-15-11; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING



§ 159.180  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of these regulations is to ensure environmentally
sensitive site planning which further is intended to foster aesthetically
pleasing developments by enhancing the biodiversity, reducing the atmospheric
carbon, improving water quality, filtering the air and reducing toxic
chemicals in the environment and increasing the compatibility of adjacent
land uses so as to minimize the harmful impacts of noise, dust, headlight
glare, artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities. These
regulations are intended to promote the prudent use of water, energy
resources, and sustainability through habitat preservation areas, wetlands,
stream bank buffers, wooded areas, waterfront yards, and existing native
vegetation and trees.



   (B)   Broader objectives include:



      (1)   Prohibit clear-cutting of property.



      (2)   Protect and increase the value of residential and non-
residential properties within the city.



      (3)   Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction
of new residential and nonresidential land uses to the city.



      (4)   Protect healthy quality trees and promote the natural,
ecological, environmental, and aesthetic qualities of the city.



      (5)   Emphasize the importance of trees and vegetation as both
physical and visual barriers.



      (6)   Maintain the moisture levels in the area of lands with
natural tree cover.



      (7)   Prevent soil erosion.



      (8)   Minimize the cost of construction and maintenance of
drainage systems necessitated by the increased flow and diversion of surface
waters by facilitating natural drainage systems and amelioration of storm
water drainage problems.



      (9)   Provide shade.



      (10)   Conserve natural resources.



      (11)   Enhance the habitat and food source for birds and other
wildlife, which in turn controls the insect populations and maintains the
balance of natural ecosystems.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11)



§ 159.181  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any application or an improvement location permit and
certificate of occupancy shall require a landscape plan as described herein.
No improvement location permit shall be issued without city approval of such
landscape plan. Prior to the issuance of the FINAL certificate of occupancy,
a certificate of compliance shall be issued for the landscaping including
residential planned development's overall and individual lots, and all
non-residential uses and structures as per this subchapter.  All landscaping
materials are to be guaranteed for a minimum of one year after the issuance
of the certificate of compliance.



   (B)   Division (A) above, notwithstanding construction of individual
single- and two-family dwelling units, shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Sections 159.075 through 159.087.



         (a)   Section 159.083.



         (b)   Section 159.085.



         (c)   Section 159.087.



         (d)   Requires sod in lawn areas



      (2)   Section 159.183.



   (C)   Failure to implement the landscape plan as approved, or
failure to comply with requirements for single- and two-family lots shall be
cause for revocation of the certificate of occupancy.



   (D)   Low Impact Development (LID) Stormwater BMP's may be
incorporated into required landscaping (i.e. Bioretention, Rain Gardens,
Bioswales, etc.) provided the site conditions make LID feasible and that the
intent of the required landscaping is not compromised.



   (E)   Landscaping plans shall include provisions for the following
types of landscaping, as applicable:



      (1)   Parking Lot Landscaping.



         (a)   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.



         (b)   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.



      (2)   Building Base Landscaping.



      (3)   Landscape Buffer Yard.



      (4)   Screening.



   (F)   All landscape plans shall contain the following information,
unless specifically waived by the Director of Planning and Development.



      (1)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and
rights-of-way, sidewalks, curbs, bicycle paths, ground signs, trash
receptacle enclosures and recycling areas, bicycle parking areas, fences,
freestanding electrical equipment, recreational facilities, power lines
(identify type of line such as transmission), transformers, irrigation
systems, and other freestanding structural features including structural
Stormwater BMP's as determined necessary by the Director of Planning and
Development.



      (2)   On the adjacent properties within 20-feet of the site,
include the location of existing buildings, structures and plant materials,
unless waived by the Director of Planning and Development. Include location,
type, quantity, size, and name of plant materials.



      (3)   The location, type, quantity, size and name (both
botanical and common), of all existing plant materials. The notation of all
trees with a diameter of six inches or greater at a point four feet above
grade, as well as details of the estimated canopy size, health, and whether
the tree is to be retained or removed.



      (4)   The location, type, quantity, size and name (both
botanical and common), of all proposed plant materials including but not
limited to trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals/perennials, and turf. The
canopy spread shall be denoted on the plans for all trees.



      (5)   Existing and proposed grading of the site indicating
contours at two foot intervals. Proposed berming shall be indicated using one
foot contour intervals.



      (6)   Elevations of all fences and retaining walls proposed
for location on the site.



      (7)   Elevations, cross-sections, and other details as
determined necessary by the Director of Planning and Development.



      (8)   Summary data indicating the area of the site in the
following conditions:



         (a)   Total area and percentage of the site in
landscaped area.



         (b)   Total area and percentage of the site in domestic
turf grasses.



   (G)   Where the required landscape area exceeds 1,000 square feet in
aggregate, the landscape plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape
architect. A landscape contractor may prepare the landscape plan for either a
ground sign application or a designation size application only.



   (H)   Landscaping shall not be located within drainage and/or
utility easements. However, when landscaping is used as a Stormwater Best
Management Practice (BMP), the BMP must be in an exclusive "BMP Easement" to
prevent damage from other utility work or encroachments and/or from the space
becoming reallocated for other purposes and to ensure perpetuity of the BMP.
These BMPs are regulated under the Rule 13 Stormwater Program and required to
be inventoried and inspected for compliance of maintenance and proper
function. Drainage easements will usually adjoin a major LID practice to
allow for overflow/high flow events and/or a 100-year flood event.



   (I)   The Director of Planning or his/her designee may allow
required plant materials to be moved to alternate locations both on- and
off-site, but only if there are site features or constraints that prevent
installation of such materials in the required locations or it is determined
that there is no appreciable improvement to the site by installing the
landscape materials in the required locations. This may include the
substitution of a particular type of plant material to another type of plant
material.  (Example: one ornamental grass as a substitute for one deciduous
shrub). It should not include a shrub for a tree.



   (J)   Best Management Practice (BMP) can refer to structural
measures (wetlands, ponds, sand filters, etc.) or non-structural measures
(restrictive zoning, reduced impervious area, etc.). BMPs are designed for
the benefit of water quality and quantity. All new construction under the
Stormwater Rule 13 must provide Post- Construction BMPs. The BMPs that meet
the required pollutant removal rate and are regulated under the Stormwater
Rule 13 require MS4 review and approval, special easements, maintenance
agreements, physical maintenance and inspections to ensure proper performance
in perpetuity. Post-Construction BMPs are required to be inventoried and
subject to inspections and maintenance.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord.
22-06-13, passed 7-9-13)



§ 159.182  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ANNUALS.”  A plant that dies at the end of the growing season
both above and below ground.



   “BERM (MOUND).”  A man-made landscape feature used for screening
in which earth is piled up in irregular, round, oblong shapes. Berms do not
have consistent crest elevations but are irregular, creating a more natural
landscape feature.



   “BIORETENTION FACILITIES (RAIN GARDENS).”  A stormwater management
system that uses soil and plants to absorb stormwater runoff and to capture
pollutants. These are small landscaped basins intended to provide water
quality management by filtering stormwater runoff before release into a storm
drain system. (See Appendix H-3 "Stormwater Technical Standards Manual".)



   “BIOSWALE.”  A bioswale is a shallow depression created in the
earth to accept and convey stormwater runoff. A bioswale uses natural means,
including vegetation and soil, to treat stormwater by filtering out
contaminants being conveyed in the water. (See Appendix H-3 "Stormwater
Technical Standards Manual".)



   “BRANCH.” An outgrowing shoot, stem or twig that grows from the
main stem or trunk.



   “BUFFERING.”  Any means of protecting an area of land from the
adverse visual and suitable effects of another area, which may include trees,
shrubs, walls, fences, berms/mounds, space or related landscaping features
required under the UDO for buffering lots, parcels, etc., from adjacent
properties or public rights-of-way for the purpose of increasing visual
shielding or other aspects of privacy or aesthetics.



   “CALIPER.”  The American Association of Nurserymen Standard for
trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six
inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper sizes, and
12 inches above the ground for larger trees.



   “CANE.” A primary stem which starts at a point not higher than 1/4
the height of the plant.



   “CANOPY COVER.” The percent of a fixed area covered by the crown of
an individual plant species or delimited by the vertical projection of its
outermost perimeter. Small openings in the crown are included.



   “CONIFER.” Cone-bearing tree.



   “CONSERVATION.” Protection, improvement, and wise use of natural
resources according to principles that will assure utilization of the
resource to obtain the highest economic and social benefits.



   “CRITICAL ROOT ZONE.” The area of undisturbed natural soil around a
tree defined by a horizontal circle drawn at grade with the center being the
center of the trunk of the tree and a radius equal to the distance from the
trunk to the outermost portion of the drip line.



   “CROWN.” The portion of the tree comprising the branches.



   “CROWN FORM (SHAPE).” The configuration crown of a standing tree or
shrub - circle, triangle, parabola, rectangle, or horizontal ellipse.



   “CROWN WIDTH (DIAMETER).” The span of the crown of a tree or shrub.



   “CURB.”  A concrete boundary marking the edge of a street or other
paved area and providing for a change in grade between the street surface and
the adjacent unpaved portions of the street right-of-way. To promote the use
of LID, a continuous curb shall be avoided and curb breaks strategically
placed to allow stormwater to flow into the Stormwater BMP.



   “DECIDUOUS.” Plants that shed their leaves annually.



   “DRIP LINE.”  The vertical line encompassing the outermost
portions of the tree canopy extending to the ground.



   “EVERGREEN.”  A plant having green leaves or needles throughout
the entire year.



   “FENCE.”  A structure including entrance and exit gates or
openings designed and constructed for enclosure or screening.



   “GROUNDCOVER.”  A species of low-growing plant used for the
purpose of growing over an area of ground.



   “GROWTH HABIT.” The mode or rate of growth, general shape, mature
size, and branching structure of a plant including the changes that take
place seasonally during its life cycle.



   “INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES.” An alien species that is not native to
the ecosystem under consideration and whose introduction does or is likely to
cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human, animal, or plant
health.



   “LANDSCAPE AREA.”  Areas on or adjacent to a lot or right-of-way
or the perimeter of a development that are identified for application of
landscaping regulations. Landscape areas include street tree plantings,
parking lots including islands and perimeter, foundation planting areas,
building base landscaping areas, peripheral buffer yard areas, LID Stormwater
BMPs, and retention/detention pond areas.



   “LANDSCAPE BUFFER YARD.”  An area adjacent to the front, side, and
rear property lines of a development, measured perpendicularly from and
parallel to adjacent property lines and/or right-of-way lines, intended to
provide attractive spaces to reduce the impacts of proposed uses on adjacent
properties and rights-of-way, or to maintain natural features, or as required
by the UDO.  Buffers help to maintain existing trees and natural vegetation,
to block or reduce noise, glare, or other emissions and to maintain privacy.
Landscape buffer yards are in addition to and separate from front, side, and
rear yard setbacks and such landscape buffer yards are not contained within
any lots. This area is common area to be maintained by the property owners,
homeowners association, developer(s) and/or another entity approved by the
Director of Planning and Development.



   “LANDSCAPE ISLAND.”  A landscape area defined by a curb or edge of
pavement and surrounded on all sides by pavement. To function as a LID
Stormwater BMP, the landscape island shall be at a lower grade than the
surrounding pavement and strategic breaks in the curbing shall allow drainage
from pavement to enter into the recessed landscaping area.



   “LANDSCAPE MATERIALS.”  Trees, shrubs, grasses, plants, decorative
fences, walls, berms, irrigation systems, flowerbeds, groundcover, and
edging.  Xeriscaping landscape materials are encouraged to function as LID
Stormwater BMPs. Artificial trees, shrubs, grasses, plants, flowers, and
groundcover are not considered landscape materials.



   “LANDSCAPE PENINSULA.”  A landscaped area defined by a curb or
edge of pavement and surrounded by paving on three sides. To function as a
LID Stormwater BMP, the landscape peninsula shall be at a lower grade than
the surrounding pavement and strategic breaks in the curbing shall allow
drainage from pavement to enter into recessed landscape area.



   “LANDSCAPE PLAN.”  A scaled drawing, prepared and signed by a
licensed landscape architect or a landscape contractor, showing all plant
materials including locations, sizes, species (botanical and common names) at
the time of planting. The mature tree canopy size shall be included.



   “LANDSCAPE, STRUCTURE (HARDSCAPE).”  Decorative fence; walls;
retaining walls; decorative rocks or pavers; fountains or like materials.



   “LANDSCAPING.” The improvements of an area with trees, shrubs,
grasses and other vegetation and/or ornamental objects. “LANDSCAPING” may
include flowerbeds, berms, depressions for LID stormwater BMP's, fountains,
and other similar and man-made objects designed and arranged to create an
aesthetically pleasing effect.



   “LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID).”  A land planning and engineering
design approach with a goal of replicating the pre-development hydrologic
regime of urban and developing watersheds. The primary goal of LID is to
mimic a site's predevelopment hydrology by reducing the impervious surface,
infiltrating, filtering, storing, evaporating, and detaining runoff close to
its source.



   “NATIVE PRAIRIE GRASSES.”  A mixture of perennial grasses that
historically populated the prairie ecosystem of the United States that
contain no trees. The prairie grasses may vary by region.



   “NATURAL AREAS.”  Any critical area such as floodplains, wetlands,
high tree concentrations, critical habitats that contain rare, threatened or
endangered species, wooded slopes, wooded or partially wooded streams,
woodlands, and riparian areas.



   “PERENNIAL.”  A plant that has a life-cycle lasting more than two
years and survives during the winter by an underground root system.



   “PLANT MATERIALS.”  Trees, shrubs, native grasses, groundcover,
perennials, and the like. Xeriscaping landscape materials are encouraged to
function as LID Stormwater BMPs.



   “PLANTING SEASON.”  The spring and fall time periods during which
new plant materials that are installed are most likely to survive the
planting process. Generally, these periods are from April 15 to June 15
(spring) and October 15 to November 15 (fall). This does not prohibit the
installation of plant materials during other times of the year.



   “PERMEABLE PAVERS.”  Any kind of pavement constructed of material
that allows water to penetrate and drain into underlying soils.



   “RAIN BARRELS.”  A container that collects rainwater, managing
rooftop runoff for residential structures.



   “RAIN GARDEN.”  See “BIORETENTION FACILITY”.



   “REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT.”  An architect, specializing in
landscaping, properly licensed and registered in the State of Indiana or
through reciprocity permitted to practice in the State of Indiana.



   “ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.” Generally an area 18 to 24 inches deep and
a distance from the trunk of a tree equal to one half its height or its drip
line, whichever is greater.



   “SCREENING.”  A structure erected or vegetation planted which
eventually is of sufficient height and density for concealing an area from
view.



   “SHRUB.”  A woody plant of relatively low height having several
stems arising from the base and lacking a single trunk.



   “SPREAD.” A term used to indicate the horizontal width of a shrub
or the crown of a tree.



   “STREET TREES.”  Trees growing on public rights-of-way except for
alleys and for medians contained within subdivisions.



   “TREE.”  A perennial woody plant with one main trunk and a rather
distinct and elevated head, ordinarily growing to definite heights and
usually developing branches at some distance from the ground.



      “LARGE SHADE.” Any tree the height of which is 35 feet or
greater at maturity and has a limb spread of 30 feet or more at maturity and
has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



      “MEDIAN SHADE.” Any tree which has a mature height of 25 to
40 feet and has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



      “ORNAMENTAL.” Any tree grown for decorative purposes,
typically small with multi-seasonal interest.



      “SMALL SHADE.” Any tree which has a mature height of less
than 25 feet and has a spreading canopy which screens the sun.



   “TRUNK.” The portion of a stem or stems of a tree before branching
occurs.



   “VEGETATIVE SCREEN.” A visual barrier of vegetation with dense
foliage used to block aesthetically intrusive land uses from view.



   “WILDLIFE HABITAT (SIGNIFICANT).” A place or environment where a
plant, insect, or animal naturally or normally lives and grows including
shelter, food, nesting sites, and protection.



   “WOODLAND.”  Land covered with a dense growth of trees usually
greater in extent than a grove and smaller than a forest.



   “WOODY PLANTS.”  A plant that has a hard stem and has buds that
survive above ground in the winter.



   “XERISCAPING.” An approach to landscaping that minimizes outdoor
water use while maintaining soil integrity through the use of native,
drought-tolerant plants.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 22-06-13, passed 7-9-13)



§ 159.183  DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.



   Landscape plans described above shall be prepared and reviewed based on
the following design standards and guidelines. Design standards are
objectively measurable design requirements that can be definitively evaluated
for compliance. Design guidelines are not precisely measurable but compliance
can be determined through the evaluation process of site plan review.



   (A)   Design Guidelines.



      (1)   Plant Materials.  Plant materials used in conformance
with the provisions of this section shall be of good quality, disease and
pest free at planting, and of a species normally grown in Central Indiana,
and capable of withstanding the extremes of individual site microclimates.
Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture,
color, and for its ultimate growth. A variety of compatible species should be
included in the planting plan for a specific site or development. The use of
drought-tolerant plant material is preferred. The use of salt-tolerant plant
material is preferred for landscaping in or near the rights-of-way.



         (a)   The primary landscaping materials used in and
around private parking areas shall be trees that provide shade at maturity.
Shrubs, groundcover, and other planting materials may be used to compliment
tree landscaping, as described above but shall not be the sole contribution
to the landscaping.



         (b)   The primary landscaping materials used in the
landscape buffer yards and adjacent to the buildings shall be shade trees,
ornamental trees, shrubs, and groundcovers and other planting materials.



         (c)   The primary landscaping materials used in LID
Stormwater BMP's shall be trees, shrubs, and herbaceous vegetation that are
able to tolerate and thrive at various depths and lengths of inundation.
Refer to Appendix H-3 "Stormwater Technical Standards Manual".



      (2)   Softening of Walls and Fences.  Plant materials should
be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences, and
other barriers to create a softening effect.



      (3)   Clearance. Trees shall be planted so that when they
reach maturity, there will be a minimum of ten feet of clearance between the
tree trunks and structures, buildings, overhangs, walls, fences, and/or other
trees.



      (4)   Scale and Nature of Landscaping Material.  The scale
and nature of landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the
structures. Large scaled buildings, for example, should generally be
complemented by larger scaled plants. Form, texture, color, pattern of
growth, and adaptability to local conditions shall be considered when
selecting plant materials.



      (5)   Evergreens.  Evergreens should be incorporated into the
landscape treatment of a site, particularly in those areas where screening
and buffering are required.



      (6)   Planting Beds.  Planting beds should be mulched but
mulch shall not be used as a substitute for plant materials.



      (7)   Preservation of Existing Plant Materials.  Existing
plant material should be incorporated into the landscaping treatment of a
site. The preservation of natural features and landscaping is a criterion for
subdivision and planned development review. (See § 159.191 for additional
requirements).



      (8)   Protection of Plant Materials.



         (a)   The interior dimensions, specifications, and
design of any planting area or planting median proposed to be constructed
shall be sufficient to protect the landscaping materials planted therein and
to provide for proper growth.



         (b)   Clearance of trees and vegetation during the land
development process shall be limited to that necessary for and directly
related to the construction of improvements specifically authorized by the
improvement location permit.



         (c)   In locations where plants will be susceptible to
injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate
curbs, tree guards or other devices.



         (d)   Landscaping installed adjacent to parking areas
shall require that all plant materials are set back from the edge of the
pavement/concrete a sufficient distance so that parked vehicles do not
overhang the landscape area and destroy or damage the plant materials.



      (9)   Designing for Safety.  Landscaping shall not be
approved which would inhibit or make more difficult the use of emergency
vehicles, and all approved landscaping plans will give consideration to
safety precautions which will protect both vehicular and the pedestrian
public. Landscaping modifications will also be considered for public
buildings, including schools, to allow for greater visibility and allow for
natural surveillance around the building structure. Plantings in landscaping
areas shall not obstruct line-of-sight or vision corner clearance areas. To
maintain site lines trees shall be planted a minimum of 20 feet from the curb
of intersecting streets, five feet from a driveway, and ten feet from a
street light or street regulatory or warning signs. Adequate provisions for
snow storage shall be considered by the Director of Planning and Development
or his or her designee.



      (10)   Detention/Retention Basins and Ponds.  Detention/
retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped. Such landscaping should
include shade and ornamental trees, evergreens, shrubs, hedges, turf,
groundcover, and other plant materials. To enhance the stormwater quality
benefits of detention/retention basins and ponds, native plants shall be used
to filter and trap harmful sediments and pollutants before they reach the
basin or pond. Refer to Appendix H-3 "Stormwater Technical Standards Manual".



      (11)   LID Stormwater BMP's. LID Stormwater BMP's shall be
landscaped. Areas included in rain gardens or vegetated sites including
features created to meet Stormwater Management Requirements Ordinance No.
24-5-06 and any amendments thereto shall be counted toward any interior site
or parking lot landscaping, and if vegetated to meet the requirements for
landscaped buffers shall count towards those buffer requirements.



      (12)   Domestic Turf Grasses.  Domestic turf grasses should
be used in areas with little or no slope to prevent the runoff or irrigation
water.



      (13)   Energy Conservation.  Plant material placement will be
designed to reduce the energy consumption needs of the development.



         (a)   Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and
west sides of buildings to provide shade from the summer sun.



         (b)   Evergreen and other plant materials should be
concentrated on the north side of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter
winds.



      (14)   Height of Landscaping.



         (a)   Where proposed landscaping or screening is to abut
a public road or parking area, the measured height of materials used shall be
based on the grade of the abutting road or parking area and the top of the
material used.



         (b)   Where a proposed landscape or screening area is to
abut an adjoining neighbor’s property line, the measured height of
materials used shall be based on the grade of the abutting property line and
the top the material used.



      (15)   Noise Reduction. Properties adjacent to highly traveled
roads, and/or commercial or industrial uses shall arrange landscaping to
reduce the intensity of noise by reflecting, deflecting, or absorbing sound.
Earth berms, walls, fences and/or plantings providing physical separation are
examples of techniques to reduce or absorb noise.



   (B)   Design Standards.



      (1)   Selection.  Permitted plant materials are outlined in
Table 12.0.4.E and the following:  All plants shall conform to the American
Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1) size and width specifications.



         (a)   Trees.



            1.   Canopy Trees.  Unless otherwise noted, all
canopy trees proposed to be used in accordance with this classification shall
be a minimum of 12 feet in height and have a minimum trunk caliper of two and
one-half inches at the time of planting 12 inches above the grade. The trees
should be of a variety which will attain an average mature spread greater
than 35 feet.  Canopy trees that are multi-stemmed must be a minimum of 12
feet in height, and have a minimum of three stems at the time of planting.



            2.   Understory Trees.  All understory trees
proposed to be used in accordance with this classification shall be a minimum
of eight feet in height and have a minimum trunk caliper of one and one-half
inches at the time of planting. They should be of a variety that will attain
an average mature height of greater than 15 feet.  Understory trees that are
multi-stemmed must be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a minimum of
three stems at the time of planting.



            3.   Evergreen Trees.  All evergreen trees
proposed to be used in accordance with this classification shall be a minimum
of six feet in height at the time of planting. They should be of a variety
that will attain an average mature height of greater than 15 feet.



            4.   Evergreen Understory Trees.  All evergreen
understory trees proposed to be used in accordance with this classification
shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting. They should
be of a variety that will attain an average mature height of equal to or less
than 15 feet.



         (b)   Shrubs and Grasses.



            1.   Evergreen Shrubs.  Unless otherwise noted,
all shrubs to be used in accordance with this classification shall have a
minimum height of 18 inches at the time of planting and a maximum height of
four feet at maturity. Shrubs used to form hedges shall be of a non-deciduous
species and shall be spaced not more than 36 inches apart so as to form a
continuous visual screen and a minimum of 36 inches in height above grade.



            2.   Deciduous Shrubs.  Unless otherwise noted,
all shrubs to be used in accordance with this classification shall have a
minimum height of 18 inches at the time of planting and a maximum height of
four feet at maturity.



            3.   Ornamental Grasses.  All ornamental grasses
used in accordance with this classification shall be a minimum height of 24
inches at the time of planting and a maximum height of four feet at maturity.
Ornamental grasses may be used to supplement shrub plantings within perimeter
parking landscape areas and interior parking islands but shall not constitute
more than 20% of the plantings in these areas. Normal maintenance of
ornamental grasses constitutes trimming back the grasses to no more than four
inches in height in the spring of each year.



         (c)   Native Prairie Grasses and/or Wildflowers.  Due
to circumstances where maintaining large areas of turf grasses is impractical
or difficult, establishing an area of native prairie grasses or wildflowers,
may be permitted at the discretion of the Director of Planning and
Development, under the following conditions:



            1.   Must be set back from the property lines by a
minimum of five feet. The setback is not required where the defined landscape
area abuts another similar private or public landscape area.



            2.   Must be a minimum of 15 feet from any
building foundation.



            3.   Must be maintained at least once per year
through mowing or, burning if appropriate, and permits are obtained through
the Indiana Department of Environmental Management (IDEM) and the Noblesville
Fire Department.



 


   Table 12.0.4.B.


   Additional Permitted Landscape Materials


Trees
 
Permitted — See § 159.183(B)(1)(a)


Shrubs and Grasses
 
Permitted — See § 159.183(B)(1)(b)


Evergreen Groundcover
 
Permitted if less than 30 inches in height at maturity


Flowers
 
Permitted but cannot exceed 50% of planting area and shall not exceed 36
inches in height at maturity


Turf
 
Permitted



 



 


   Table 12.0.4.B.


   Additional Permitted Landscape Materials


Bark and Mulch
 
Permitted but cannot exceed 75% of the planting area and in combination with
vegetation


Rocks, Stone, and Gravel
 
Permitted for building base landscaping material only. Landscaping rock and
stone are permitted provided it meets a 3/4 inch or 1-1/2 inch in size and
shall meet INDOT course aggregate sizes five through 8.


Other Impervious Materials (brick pavers, concrete pavers, decorative
concrete)
 
Permitted in planting areas under 24 inches wide in lieu of plants. Asphalt
is prohibited.



 



         (d)   Prohibited Landscape Materials.  Prohibited
landscape materials include rock, gravel, stone used in internal and
perimeter parking lot areas and landscape buffer yards; asphalt,
thorn-bearing plant species and the ‘Juniper’ plant species. Flowering
species such as roses may be authorized by the Director of Planning and
Development.



      (2)   Clustering of Trees.  Where trees are required based on
a linear footage calculation, it may be possible for these trees to be
planted in clusters as opposed to being evenly spaced in a line. In the case
where clustering is used, no tree shall be located any closer than ten feet,
or any further than 50 feet from the next closest required tree. Any such
clustering plan must be approved by the Director of Planning and Development
prior to installation of the landscaping.



      (3)   Staggering Requirement for Trees and Shrubs.  When
required for perimeter parking landscaping and buffering, trees and shrubs
may be required to be planted in staggered rows to provide the effective
diagonal planting of the plants.



         (a)   Tree Staggering.  These rows should be planted in
a manner to provide for equal spacing both in width and depth between each
plant.









 



         (b)   Shrub Staggering.  Shrubs should be planted in an
alternating pattern formed by two rows, two feet apart on center, each of
which is made up of shrubs six feet on center.









 



      (4)   Undulating Planting Beds.  Where applicable, it is
desirable to create undulating planting beds to provide more landscape
interest, as opposed to trees and shrubs being evenly spaced in a straight
line.



      (5)   Mixing Plant Species.  When more than 20 shrubs and ten
trees are required on a site to meet these regulations, a mix of species
shall be provided. The following table indicates the maximum quantity of
trees and shrubs of the same species and genus that may be planted. In
addition, shrubs should generally be divided equally between deciduous and
evergreen varieties.



 


   Table 12.0.B.4.6


   Mixing Plant Species


Total

Trees

Planted

on Site
 
Total

Shrubs

Planted

on Site
 
Minimum

Number of Species Required
 
Maximum Percentage of any Single Species


10 to 30
 
20 to 200
 
2
 
70%


30 to 100
 
200 to 400
 
3
 
50%


> 100
 
> 400
 
4
 
30%



 



      (6)   Berms.  Berms shall maintain a maximum height of six
feet and a minimum height of three feet.  The berm shall be required to
maintain a 3 to 1 slope.  The top of such berms shall be located as closely
as possible to the property line of the use. The landscaping required in this
case shall be equal in number to the landscaping number otherwise required
for buffering of the use. In terms of height, the landscaping plus the berm
shall be required to meet the height standard that would otherwise be
required for the buffering of the use.



      (7)   Fences or Walls.  Decorative fences or walls shall be
permitted, in addition to required landscaping, between a nonresidential
development and adjacent residential structures or along the frontage of
residential subdivisions. This standard does not apply to individual
single-family or two-family residences. Fences or walls shall comply with the
following:



         (a)   Fences and walls shall be solid, opaque, and
constructed of wood or masonry.



         (b)   No fence shall be located inside of any required
front yard setback unless granted a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals
or a waiver from the Plan Commission and/or Council.



         (c)   In order to break the visual monotony of a masonry
or wood fence or wall, at least one shrub or vine shall be planted abutting
the wall for every ten feet of wall length, but not necessarily evenly spaced
ten feet apart.



         (d)   The required shrubs/vines shall be installed
outside of the fence/wall, and the fence/wall shall be erected a minimum of
four feet inside the property line to allow for the planting and maintenance
of the shrubs/vines.



         (e)   In lieu of the vine or shrubbery requirements
above, the Director of Planning and Development shall be authorized to
approve a masonry wall having significant design variation evenly spaced at
internals of not more than 20 feet.



      (8)   Duplicate Planting Requirements.  It is not the intent
of this chapter to generate multiple rows of trees and shrubs resulting from
implementation of this chapter together with street tree requirements and/or
other landscaping treatments. In these instances, the most restrictive
standard shall be used. In some instances, where the building or parking lot
setback from the right-of-way is greater than 20 feet, street trees may still
be required in addition to other landscaping requirements, per the discretion
of the Director of Planning and Development.



      (9)   Application Variations.



         (a)   Central Core Map (Appendix G).  Due to the more
compact layout of the Central Core Map, normal landscaping requirements may
be impractical, therefore modified parking lot and landscaping buffer
requirements are outlined in the associated tables in §§ 159.184 and
159.185.



         (b)   Corporate Campus Planned Development District
(CCPD).  See § 159.107 for landscaping requirements.



         (c)   Federal Hill Planned Development District
(FeHiPD).  See § 159.109 for landscaping requirements.



         (d)   Village Center Planned Development District
(VCPD).  See § 159.109 for landscaping requirements.



         (e)   All Other Areas.  Landscaping standards as set
forth within this chapter, apply to all areas within the Noblesville Planning
Jurisdiction outside of the Central Core Map, Corporate Campus Planned
Development District, Federal Hill Planned Development District, and the
Village Center Planned Development District as described above.



      (10)   Installation Prior to Certificate of Occupancy.  All
landscaping required by the approved landscaping plan shall be installed
prior to issuance of the final certificate of occupancy unless approved by
the Director of Planning and Development for weather related reasons or
unique circumstances. Where landscaping cannot be installed, a surety bond
must be posted with the city covering 110% of the estimated installation
costs including the plant materials.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord.
22-06-13, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord.
25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)



§ 159.184  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Intent.  Parking lot landscaping required by this section is
intended to promote attractive, safe, off-street parking lots by providing
minimum requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaped areas.
This section places a high priority on the safe flow of pedestrians and
vehicles within a parking lot. It also requires adequate safe emergency lanes
for fire trucks and other emergency vehicles.



   (B)   Application.



      (1)   Required parking lot landscaping shall consist of two
types: 1) Interior Parking Lot Landscaping, and 2) Perimeter Parking Lot
Landscaping as described below. The standards required for these two types of
landscaping shall be determined by the "class" of parking lot proposed on the
site. The parking lot "class" shall be determined by the total number of
proposed parking spaces for a given use.



         (a)   Class A      0 to 20 spaces



         (b)   Class B      21 to 50 spaces



         (c)   Class C      51 to 200 spaces



         (d)   Class D      >200 spaces



      (2)   Where parking lots and/or parking lot landscaping were
legally existing as of the effective date of this chapter, but do not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, such parking lots shall be considered
legally non-conforming. Upon any expansion to such non-conforming parking
lots and/or parking lot landscaping, or the expansion or alternation of a
structure associated with that parking lot and/or parking lot landscaping,
the entire parking lot existing and expanded shall be subject to the
requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.



      (1)   Planting Islands.  In some cases where parking is
required for a use, a certain percentage of the paved area must be maintained
as landscape areas which include landscape islands and peninsulas. To
function as an "LID Stormwater BMP", the landscape island or peninsula shall
be at a lower grade than the surrounding pavement and curbing shall allow
drainage from pavement to enter into recessed landscape areas. For the
purposes of calculating this requirement the following table shall be
employed.



 


   Table 12.0.5.C.1.


   INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS



 

Percent of Required Landscaping in Parking Lot

 

Maximum Parking Lot Island Size (Square Feet)



Class A
 

1%

 

180



Class B
 

5%

 

750



Class C
 

8%

 

1,000



Class D
 

11%

 

No Maximum




 



         (a)   All single row parking landscape islands and
peninsulas shall be a minimum of 180 square feet in area with a minimum width
of nine feet measured from back of curb to back of curb or edge of pavement.
Each island and peninsula shall contain a minimum of one canopy tree and five
evergreen or deciduous shrubs, or ornamental grasses. If the landscape island
is intended to function as an "LID Stormwater BMP", then the plant material
should be able to tolerate and thrive at various depths and lengths of
inundation. Refer to Appendix H-3 "Stormwater Technical Standards Manual."



         (b)   All double row parking landscape islands shall be
a minimum of 240 square feet in area with a minimum width of nine feet
measured from back of curb to back of curb or edge of pavement. Each island
and peninsula shall contain a minimum of two canopy trees and ten evergreen
or deciduous shrubs, or ornamental grasses.



         (c)   All interior parking rows shall be terminated at
both ends with landscape islands. The exterior parking rows abutting the
perimeter parking lot landscaping area, which are not adjacent to a
structure, shall require the installation of one additional canopy tree at
both ends of the exterior row. All parking islands shall be dispersed so as
to define aisles and limit unbroken rows of parking to a maximum of 100 feet
in length.  For calculating purposes, handicapped parking spaces shall count
as one parking space.  (See illustrations below.)





















 



         (d)   One hundred percent of every parking lot island or
peninsula outside of shrub masses shall be planted in turf or other approved
groundcover in the appropriate density to achieve complete cover within two
years as determined by the approved landscape plan.



         (e)   If the specific application of the interior
landscape requirements will seriously limit functions of the building site,
the Director of Planning and Development shall have the authority to permit
consolidation and relocation of these landscaped areas on the building site.



         (f)   The primary plant materials used in parking lots
shall be canopy tree species, in conformance with applicable provisions of §
159.183(A) and (B) above.  Understory trees, shrubbery, hedges, and other
plant materials may be used to supplement the canopy tree plantings, but
shall not be the sole contribution to such landscaping.



   (D)   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping.



      (1)   Intent and Application.  The landscape requirements
identified below provide for the enhancement of all parking lots by
recognizing two distinct conditions. The first condition is where parking
lots are located within front and corner side yards, where a uniform scheme
of landscaping is required to protect the aesthetics along public streets.
The second condition is where parking lots are located within rear and
interior side yards and minimum requirements for beautification of both
residential and nonresidential uses are desired. The intent is to require a
higher level of landscaping abutting or adjacent to residential uses
(principally multi-family uses) than for non-residential uses. It should be
noted that the issue of reducing impacts between dissimilar uses is addressed
in § 159.186.



      (2)   Area and Configuration.



 


   Table 12.0.5.D.2.


   PERIMETER PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS



Parking lots adjacent to, abutting, or by yard type

 

Central Core Map

 

All Other Areas

 

Required Trees (per 100 linear feet)

 

Required Shrubs (per 100 linear feet) (Minimum height 24-inches at time of
planting)



Public street, private street, front yards abutting residential uses/ zone
district
 
10 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

width)
 
20 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

width)
 
2 staggered

canopy
 
33 staggered

deciduous or evergreen

shrubs


Rear and interior side yards abutting or across from a residential use/ zone
district
 
10 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

width)
 
10 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

width)
 
3 staggered

canopy trees and 2 under- story
 
33 staggered

deciduous or evergreen

shrubs


Rear and interior side yards abutting a non-residential use/ zone district
 
5 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

width)
 
10 feet

(Perimeter

landscape

Width)
 
2 staggered

canopy
 
33 staggered

deciduous or evergreen

shrubs



 



1.   For calculation purposes, plant quantities are rounded up to the
nearest whole number when the calculation is .5 or greater.



2.   Refer to tree and shrub staggering diagrams.



3.   Setbacks are the minimum required unless specified elsewhere in this
chapter.



         (a)   These requirements may be altered by the Director
of Planning and Development, Plan Commission, or the Board of Zoning Appeals
to protect vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to facilitate free movement of
emergency vehicles.



         (b)   All trees shall be planted within ten feet of the
parking lot edge.



         (c)   All shrubs shall be planted within five feet of
the parking lot edge.



      (3)   Shared Parking Facilities.  All paved areas that
encroach upon the required ten foot perimeter parking lot landscape areas,
except those abutting a public right-of-way shall conform to the following.



         (a)   The total area that is removed must be provided as
interior parking lot landscaping on those parcels. This area shall not be
counted towards the overall required interior parking lot landscaping as
stated above.



         (b)   Plantings in these areas shall comply with the
standards stated in this section.



   (E)   Parking Garages.  All parking garages shall be required to
meet the following landscape and urban design requirements:



      (1)   Perimeter Landscaping.  Parking structures shall
provide along any street frontage pedestrian-related amenities such as
sitting areas, planters, and visually interesting wall surfaces at the street
level. There shall be such amenities provided so that 20% of the building
facade will contain such spaces. Such amenities shall be evaluated through
Site Plan Review. In all cases, there shall be a minimum sidewalk width along
the street of eight feet that shall not be impeded by such pedestrian-related
amenities.



      (2)   Interior Landscaping.  Interior landscaping
requirements for parking garages may be met by providing hanging baskets,
landscape planters, and/or flower boxes around the exterior of the first
three levels of the parking garage structure.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 22-06-13, passed 7-9-13)



§ 159.185  BUILDING BASE LANDSCAPING.



   The entire base of each commercial/industrial/institutional and
multi-family building shall be surrounded by a landscape strip as prescribed
in the table below. Such landscaping shall not be counted toward the overall
required plantings for the interior parking lot. These landscape strips may
be broken by pedestrian access ways; however, these access ways may not
constitute more than 10% of the total area of the required landscape strip.
No more than 40% of the required building base landscape area shall be
located on any one side of the building. Shrubs and ornamental trees along
foundation walls of structures shall be planted no closer than two feet and
eight feet, respectively. In certain circumstances additional standards shall
be required as follows:



 

Table 12.0.6.
BUILDING BASE LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS


 
 

Central Core Map1

 

All Other Areas

 

Required Trees (per 100 linear feet)

 

Required Shrubs (per 100 linear feet)



Buildings adjacent to or across from parking area, public road or residential
use/ zone district
 
10 feet

(landscape width)
 
10 feet

(landscape width)
 
3 understory trees
 
33 deciduous or evergreen shrubs, or ornamental grasses


Building adjacent to or across from a similar use, commercial or industrial
uses, or private road
 
5 feet

(landscape width)
 
10 feet

(landscape width)
 
2 understory trees
 
15 deciduous or evergreen shrubs, or ornamental grasses



 



1.   Where zero front yard setbacks are permitted and utilized, building
base landscaping requirements are waived. If the front yard setback utilized
is less than the building base landscaping requirement, the building base
landscaping requirement may be reduced by the difference of the two.



2.   For calculation purposes, plant quantities are rounded up to the
nearest whole number when the calculation is .5 or greater.



   (A)   Loading Areas.  Where a drive-thru or loading area is
permitted or required for a use, and where it is necessary to locate this
drive-thru or loading area inside of the building base landscaping, the
affected landscape areas may be moved. In these cases, an area of landscaping
equal to the amount removed must be added to other areas of the building's
base landscaping.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)



§ 159.186  LANDSCAPE BUFFER YARDS.



   (A)   Applicability.  The regulations of this section shall
establish the dimensions and improvement requirements of landscape buffer
yards as required for transitions between uses and along the city's corridors.



   (B)   Changes in Landscape Buffer Yards for Planned Developments. 
Landscape buffer yards may be established, increased, or decreased by the
Plan Commission and Common Council as part of the zoning approval of any
planned development.



   (C)   General Restrictions.  Landscape buffers around an entire
land use shall be reserved for the planting of material and installation of
other buffering materials as required within this section. No parking,
sidewalks, stormwater detention facilities, regulated drains, fences, walls,
accessory buildings, structures, easements or other impervious surfaces shall
be permitted to be located inside any required landscape buffer yard.
Allowable encroachments include landscaping and earthen berms. Consideration
may be given to driveways and sidewalks needed to service a use or building
and can be administratively approved by the Director of Planning and
Development, or decorative walls/fences approved by the Plan Commission and
Council for a planned development. All landscape buffer yards shall include a
variety of landscape plants per development. Buffering requirements, when
applicable, shall be used to supplement all other required landscaping and
shall not be used in lieu of other required landscaping, unless otherwise
stated in this subchapter.



   (D)   Maintenance of Landscape Buffer Yards.  Landscape buffer
yards are designated as Common Area/Landscape Buffer Yard and shall be
maintained by the homeowner's association and/or developer as per the
declaration of covenants for the subdivision and/or planned development.
Other acceptable recordable documentation for the maintenance of the
landscape buffer yards may be approved by the Director of Planning and
Development on a case-by-case basis.



   (E)   Size and Improvement of Landscape Buffer Yards.  The size and
improvement of the landscape buffer yards for various situations shall be as
per the table below.



 

Table 12.0.7.E.
LANDSCAPE BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS



Proposed Use or Zoning District

 

Landscape Buffer Yard Width

 

Required Trees (per 100 linear feet)

 

Required Shrubs (per 100 linear feet) (Minimum 24-inches at the time of
planting)

 

Other Requirements





Downtown as per adopted map per Appendix G
 
Exempt
 
Exempt
 
Exempt
 
Exempt


GB, PB, LB, VC

Adjacent to or abutting a residential use/zone
 
30 feet
 
2 staggered evergreen canopy trees and 1 deciduous canopy tree
 
33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.


I1, I2, I3

Adjacent to or abutting a residential use/zone
 
40 feet
 
2 staggered evergreen canopy trees and 1 deciduous canopy tree
 
33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.


Park, Recreation, Institution al Uses Adjacent to or abutting a residential
use/zone
 
25 feet
 
2 staggered canopy trees
 
16 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with the required landscaping. {A
berm may be used to supplement the required landscaping. }


R5, RMH, ZLL, Land Use Variance

Adjacent to or abutting a residential use/zone
 
15 feet
 
2 staggered evergreen under-story trees and 1 deciduous under-story tree
 
16 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with the required landscaping. {A
berm may be used to supplement the required landscaping. }


Downtown as per adopted map per Appendix G
 

Exempt

 

Exempt

 

Exempt

 

Exempt



GB, PB, LB, VC

Adjacent to or abutting a residentia l use/zone
 

30 feet

 

2 staggered evergreen canopy trees and 1 deciduous canopy tree

 

33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.



I1, I2, I3

Adjacent to or abutting a residentia l use/zone
 

40 feet

 

2 staggered evergreen canopy trees and 1 deciduous canopy tree

 

33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.



Park, Recreation , Institutio nal Uses

Adjacent to or abutting a residentia l use/zone
 

25 feet

 

2 staggered canopy trees

 

16 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with the required landscaping. A
berm may be used to supplement the required landscaping.



R5, RMH, ZLL, Land Use Variance

Adjacent to or abutting a residentia l use/zone
 

15 feet

 

2 staggered evergreen understory trees and 1 deciduous understory tree

 

16 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with the required landscaping. A
berm may be used to supplement the required landscaping.



Adjacent to or abutting an Arterial or Expressway
 
40 feet
 
3 staggered canopy trees of a minimum 3.5- inches caliper
 
33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.


CCPD
 
See § 159.109(G), landscaping requirements
 
See § 159.109G), landscaping requirements
 
See § 159.109(G), landscaping requirements
 
See § 159.109(G), landscaping requirements


Planned Development s
 
50 feet
 
3 staggered canopy trees or evergreen trees
 
33 total staggered deciduous and evergreen shrubs
 
Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.


Adjacent to or abutting an Arterial or Expressway
 

40 feet

 

3 staggered canopy trees of a minimum 3.5-inches caliper

 

33 staggered deciduous or evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.



CCPD
 
See § 159.107(F)(8)(b)6. Perimeter Site Buffering. For specifics not
addressed in this noted section, refer to “Planned Developments” (see
below).


Planned Development s
 

50 feet

 

3 staggered canopy trees or evergreen trees

 

33 total staggered deciduous and evergreen shrubs

 

Fences or walls may be used in combination with landscaping. A berm may be
used to supplement the required landscaping.





 



1.   Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as turf or
other groundcover approved by the Director of Planning and Development.



2.   Ornamental grass may be substituted for shrubs up to a maximum of 20%.



3.   For calculation purposes, plant quantities are rounded up to the
nearest whole number when the calculation is 0.5 or greater.



4.   Refer to tree and shrub staggering diagrams.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed 7-13-10; Am. Ord.
25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord.
31-09-13, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



§ 159.187  SCREENING.



   (A)   Standards.  Standards for screening shall be established
below. When the following standards differ from standards otherwise outlined
by this chapter, the most restrictive standard shall apply.



   (B)   Applicability.  This section shall apply to the following:



      (1)   Trash Receptacle Enclosures.  All trash receptacles
shall be completely screened by a wall on three sides matching the materials,
colors, and architecture of the principal building located on the parcel. The
fourth side shall consist of a metal gate or other similar materials
completely hiding the trash receptacle. The enclosure must measure a minimum
of six feet in height or two feet above the height of the trash receptacle,
whichever is greater. Trash receptacle enclosures shall not be located in
front of any building, adjacent to a collector, arterial, or expressway, or
adjacent to any residential use.



         (a)   Landscaping is required on three sides of the
enclosure and shall include evergreen understory trees at three feet on
center or evergreen canopy trees five feet on center, and a minimum height of
six feet.



      (2)   Service/Material Yard and Storage Areas.  All service
yards shall be completely screened by a fence, split faced block wall,
continuous evergreen screen, or combination of the three. The screen must
measure a minimum of seven feet in height. All non-vegetative screen methods
shall as closely as possible match the architecture of the building which the
service yard is serving.



         (a)   Landscaping shall include evergreen understory
trees at three feet on center or evergreen canopy trees five feet on center,
and a minimum height of seven feet.



      (3)   Display Areas.  All display areas which front on a
public or private street shall be required to plant three deciduous trees per
100 linear feet of frontage of display area onto the public or private street
or any fraction thereof.



      (4)   Heating and Cooling Facilities. Ground mounted heating
and cooling units for non-residential and multi-family structures shall be
completely screened.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 25-7-10, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord.
32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed 11-10-15)



§ 159.188  STREET TREES.



   Street trees shall be installed within any new subdivision pursuant to
§ 159.087.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08)



§ 159.189  INSPECTION.



   The Director of Planning, or a duly appointed representative, shall
have the authority to visit any lot to inspect the landscaping and check it
against the approved plan on file. Upon completion of the required
landscaping, as per the approved plan, it shall require an inspection to
determine that the landscaping complies with the approved plan and shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a FINAL certificate of occupancy for the
structure. A certificate of compliance shall be issued for those landscaping
areas that comply with the approved landscaping design plans. For those
landscaping areas, which are not one- or two-family structures, the posting
of a three-year maintenance bond is required for 110% of the cost of
installation and plant materials. The cost of installation shall be certified
by landscape contractor or licensed landscape architect.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08)



§ 159.190 CHANGE TO AN APPROVED LANDSCAPE PLAN.



   Any change or deviation to an approved landscape plan shall require the
approval of the Director of Planning and Development. Changes which do not
conform to this subchapter shall be subject to the procedures for a variance
as established in §§ 159.040 through 159.045 or §§ 159.105 through
159.108 for planned developments, a part of this chapter.  Landscape
improvements made to a lot that are not in conformance with an approved
landscape plan shall be a violation of this chapter, and subject to the fines
and penalties established in §§ 159.220 through 159.226 and Appendix A of
the Unified Development Ordinance.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08)



§ 159.191  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Plant Installation.  All landscaping materials shall be
installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by
the American Nursery and Landscape Association as “American Standards for
Nursery Stock” and the “Noblesville Arboriculture Specifications
Manual” for street trees.



   (B)   Maintenance.



      (1)   The owner/developer of the premises shall be responsible
for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscaping materials and
structures in accordance with these standards and as indicated on the
landscaping plan certified by the Director of Planning and Development. All
landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition so as to present
a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, and plant materials not in this
condition shall be replaced when necessary and shall be kept free of weeds,
refuse, and debris.



      (2)   If any planting material dies or is removed, it shall be
the responsibility of the property owner/developer to replace the materials
immediately. The replacement landscaping must match the existing landscaping
being replaced in height, size, number, and bulk. In cases where a practical
difficulty exists in the adherence to this standard, the Director of Planning
and Development may authorize replacement landscaping different than that
required above. Such alternative landscaping must meet the intent and
objectives outlined in this subchapter and such authorization must be
received prior to the removal of the original landscaping.



      (3)   Fences, walls, and other barriers shall be maintained in
good repair. Irrigation systems shall be maintained in good operating
condition to promote the health of the plant materials and the conservation
of water. The enforcement of the above shall be stated in covenants adopted
as part of this approval process when applicable.



(Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



§ 159.192  NATURAL AREA PROTECTION.



   The purpose and intent of this section establishes regulations for the
preservation of natural areas to prevent the unnecessary cutting, removal, or
killing of trees, and/or native vegetation; to provide protection for these
critical areas including woodlands or high tree concentrations; critical
habitats that contain rare, threatened or endangered species; wooded 100-year
floodplains; wooded wetlands; wooded slopes; wooded or partially wooded
stream corridors with drainage areas greater than 50 acres; and riparian
areas. The intent is to promote the health, attractiveness, and safety of the
community; to foster aesthetically pleasing and environmentally sensitive
development that protects and preserves the appearance and character of the
city, and encourages preservation of natural areas such as mature tree stands
and stream corridors. These regulations promote important physical and
psychological benefits through the use of preservation and protection of the
natural areas reducing noise and light pollution; promoting innovative and
cost conscious approaches to design, installation, and maintenance of said
areas, and establishes procedures for the administration and enforcement.
These regulations apply to both new site development and any redevelopment of
a site.



   (A)   Natural Area Tree Preservation Plans.



      (1)   Tree preservation plans shall be submitted prior to any
site development including redevelopment of a site, grading, excavating,
construction of a new building or structure, new site development and/or any
other use or permit as deemed appropriate by the Director of Planning or his
or her designee.



      (2)   Evaluation of the tract’s natural areas shall be
undertaken by an arborist, landscape architect, or horticulturalist.



      (3)   All trees which possess a diameter requirement of a
minimum of six inches shall be inventoried and included on the tree
preservation plan.



      (4)   Tree preservation plans shall detail locations, sizes,
and common name of preserved trees, individual shrubs, areas of dense tree or
shrub concentrations, and other natural features that are to be preserved or
removed.



      (5)   Existing trees that are preserved shall be credited
toward required landscaping requirements based on the sizes and locations of
such preserved trees.



      (6)   Fencing, barriers, or other materials shall be specified
on the tree preservation plan. All tree preservation plans shall be approved
by the Director of Planning and Development or his/her designee.



   (B)   Tree Preservation.



      (1)   Trees must have a life expectancy of greater than ten
years.



      (2)   Trees/vegetation shall be in good condition.



      (3)   Trees shall have a relative sound and solid trunk with
no extensive decay.



      (4)   Trees shall have no more than one major dead limb or
several minor dead limbs.



      (5)   Trees shall have no major insect or pathological
problems.



   (C)   Tree Preservation Efforts.



      (1)   The practicality of arranging the site plan components
around existing natural areas shall adhere to the following:



         (a)   Plans for groups of structures should be designed
to preserve areas of high tree concentrations, desirable individual tree
specimens, and desirable stands of trees and shrubs.



         (b)   The condition of the vegetation with respect to
its continued vitality.



         (c)   The possibility of preserving vegetation through
pruning rather than removal.



         (d)   The desirability of a particular tree or species
by reason of its appearance, historic or ecological significance, botanical
characteristics, and the function that the vegetation would fulfill as a site
plan component.



         (e)   The practicality and economic possibility of
designing the location and grades of proposed structures and paving to
preserve existing vegetation.



         (f)   The potential for interference with utility
services along the use of the roads and walkways.



   (D)   Credits for Saving Mature Trees.  Where it is possible to
save older and/or larger trees, each tree determined to qualify and
designated on the landscape plan subsequently shall be saved and credited
toward other required tree plantings. The location of the trees to be saved
shall be used to determine the areas where landscaping requirements can be
redirected. The diameter of the trees that qualify under this section, and
the respective credits that they merit, are listed in the table below:



 

   Table 12.0.12.D.

   TREE PRESERVATION CREDITS


Diameter of Tree

(measured at a point four feet above grade)
 
Credit


Less than 2.5 inches
 
No Credit


2.6 inches to 5.9 inches
 
1 to 1


6 to 17.9 inches
 
2 to 1


18 inches or greater
 
3 to 1



 



   (E)   Protection Practices.



      (1)   Protecting the root zone is the most critical factor in
tree preservation throughout the development process. Disturbances within
this area directly affect tree survival. To protect the root zones, the
following standards apply:



         (a)   When earthwork, grading, or construction
activities are planned adjacent to a natural area, a limit of disturbance
line shall be shown on the construction plans and tree preservation plans.
All such areas shall be protected through installation of temporary fencing,
barriers, or other measures approved by the Director of Planning. Such
fencing, barriers, or other materials shall be installed and identified
through signage as a “TREE PRESERVATION ZONE” (multiple signs) prior to
commencing land disturbance, and shall remain throughout the period of
construction.



         (b)   Barriers shall be used to protect trees during
site development. The root zone of trees shall include no less than the total
area beneath the tree(s) canopy as defined by the farthest canopy of the
tree(s) plus a five-foot wide protective buffer.



         (c)   Disturbed areas adjacent to tree preservation
zones shall be mulched to provide additional protection to tree roots.



         (d)   Grading measures or protective devices, such as
tree wells, tree walls, or specialized fill and pavement designs, shall be
installed when necessary to preserve identified tree specimens.



         (e)   Grade changes adjacent to tree preservation zones
shall not result in alteration to soil or drainage conditions that would
adversely affect existing vegetation. These areas shall be evaluated for
flood tolerance and stormwater routed around these areas deemed intolerant of
an increase of additional flow from urbanization.



         (f)   Construction site activities such as parking,
material storage, burry pits, concrete washout, etc., shall not be allowed
within the tree preservation zone.



         (g)   The determination of sight-distance clearances
along roadways shall be completed graphically and submitted to the Department
of Planning and Development for review and approval.



         (h)   No disturbance shall be permitted within the tree
preservation zone including trenching, backfilling, driving or parking
equipment, and/or dumping of trash, oil, paint, or other materials
detrimental to plant health. No vehicles, machinery, tools, chemicals,
construction materials, or temporary soil deposits shall be permitted within
such barriers. No notices or other objects shall be nailed or stapled to
preserved trees.



         (i)   Mature trees shall not be topped. The trees shall
be pruned according to procedures established by the American National
Standards Institute A300 Pruning Standards.



         (j)   Should any tree designated for preservation die
within five years of project completion, the owner/developer/ association
shall replace such tree with a tree of equal tree preservation value within
180 days based on the following calculations:



 

Table 12.0.12.E.j.

TREE PRESERVATION REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENT


Diameter of Tree Removed
 
Calculation for required number of replacement trees at 2.5 inches caliper


Less than 8 inches
 
Diameter of tree removed divided by 2.5


8 to 16 inches
 
2 times diameter of tree removed divided by 2.5


Greater than 16 inches
 
4 times diameter of tree removed divided by 2.5



 



         (k)   Trees, vegetation, and shrub removal shall not be
permitted prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit.



         (l)   Plantings, landscaping, and removal of existing
natural areas shall be subject to inspections to verify compliance.



(Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 32-10-11, passed 11-15-11; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 159.200  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (GENERAL).



   The standards contained in this subchapter shall apply to all uses in
all zoning districts unless otherwise stated.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)



§ 159.201  LIGHTING.



   All on-site lighting of buildings, lawns, and parking areas shall be
designed so as not to shine or cause glare in excess of 0.5 footcandle onto
any adjacent building or property, or onto any public street or vehicle
thereon. Regulations relating to minimum parking lot lighting may be found in
§§ 159.140 et seq. - Off-Street Parking and Loading.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



§ 159.202  GLARE AND HEAT.



   No use on a property shall produce any glare or heat that is
detectable, without the aid of instruments, at the property lines of the lot
on which the use is located.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.203  NOISE.



   (A)   Excessive noise shall be required to be muffled so as not to
be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness, or volume.



 


Table 13.4 Sound Limits




Sound Pressure Level Limits Measured in dB(A)’s



Districts
 

Day

 

Night



Industrial
 

65

 

60



Commercial
 

60

 

50



Residential and all other districts
 

55

 

45




 



      (1)   Where the emitting and receiving premises are in
different districts, the limits governing the more restrictive district shall
apply to any regulated noise entering that district.



      (2)   The levels specified may be exceeded by l0 dB for a
single period, no longer than 15 minutes in any one day.



   (B)   Noises shall be measured with a sound level meter meeting the
standards of the American National Standards Institute. The instrument shall
be set to the A-weighted response scale and the meter to slow response.



   (C)   Exempt activities:



      (1)   Home maintenance activities;



      (2)   Noise created by chainsaws, construction, and
maintenance activities, other than home maintenance, between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.;



      (3)   The noises of safety signals, warning devices and
emergency pressure relief valves and any other emergency activity;



      (4)   Traffic noise on existing roads;



      (5)   Emergency construction or repair work by public/private
utilities, at any hour; and



      (6)   Noise created by any recreational activities which are
permitted by law including but not limited to parades, sporting events,
concerts, and firework displays.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



§ 159.204  ODORS.



   No use on a property shall emit any objectionable odor, or combination
of odors that is detectable, without the aid of instruments, at the property
lines of the lot on which the use is located.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.205  SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER.



   No use on a property shall release fly ash, dust, smoke, or any other
type of particulate matter that violates air quality requirements. All
activities shall comply with the applicable regulations of the city, county,
state, and/or federal authorities having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.206  VIBRATION.



   No use on a property shall cause any objectionable vibrations or
concussions that are detectable, without the aid of instruments, beyond the
boundary lines on which the use is located.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.207  NOXIOUS OR TOXIC MATERIALS.



   No use on a property shall accumulate or discharge outside of any
building, materials generally known to be toxic or noxious. Such uses shall
comply with the applicable regulations of all city, county, state, and/or
federal authorities having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.208  FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS.



   The storage, use and/or manufacture of combustible, flammable and/or
explosive materials shall comply with the current regulations of the Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.209  SOLID WASTE AND WATER MATERIALS.



   (A)   No use on a property shall accumulate on the lot or discharge
beyond the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in violation
of the applicable regulations of the city, county, state, and/or federal
authorities having jurisdiction.



   (B)   No authorization of a use under this Unified Development
Ordinance includes the authority to discharge liquid or solid wastes into
public waters unless approved by city, county, state, and/or federal
authorities having jurisdiction.



   (C)   No use shall produce erosion or pollutants in such quantity as
to be detrimental to adjacent properties or conflict with public water
quality standards, in violation of the applicable regulations of the city,
county, state, and/or federal authorities having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.210  ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE.



   No use shall cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting radio,
television, or other equipment in the vicinity.



(Ord. 09-03-12, passed 3-27-12)  Penalty, see § 159.999



NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES



§ 159.220  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and Scope.  Within the districts established by this
chapter or by amendments that may later be adopted, there exist the following:



      (1)   Non-conforming lots;



      (2)   Non-conforming uses of land;



      (3)   Non-conforming structures;



      (4)   Non-conforming uses of land and structures in
combination; and



      (5)   Non-conforming characteristics of use; which were lawful
before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments
hereto.  It is the intent of this chapter to permit these non-conforming
uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their
survival.  It is further the intent of this chapter that non-conforming uses
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses which are prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.



   (B)   Illegal Uses.  Illegal uses existing at the time this
ordinance is enacted shall not be validated by virtue of its enactment.



   (C)   Burden of Owner to Establish Legality of Non-conformity.  The
burden of establishing the legality of a non-conformity that is lawfully
existing under the provisions of this chapter is upon the property owner of
the non-conformity and not upon the City.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.221  GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Avoidance of Undue Hardship.  Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use
of any building or development on which construction was lawfully begun prior
to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which
actual building construction has been carried on diligently.  Where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
prior to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be
construction, provided that the work shall be carried on diligently.



   (B)   Uses Under Conditional Use Provisions are Not Non-conforming
Uses.  Any use which is permitted as a conditional use in a district under
the terms of this chapter shall be deemed a conforming use in such district
without further action.



   (C)   Ordinary Repair and Maintenance.  On any non-conforming
structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use, work may
be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on
repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to
an extent not exceeding 10% of the current replacement cost of the
non-conforming structure and market value of real estate, or non-conforming
portion of the structure, whichever the case may be, provided that the cubic
content existing when it became non-conforming shall not be increased. 
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of such official.  If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure
containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful by
reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired,
or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which
it is located.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.222  NON-CONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Single Non-conforming Lots of Record.  In any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record
after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter
notwithstanding limitation imposed by other provisions of this chapter. 
Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with
other lots in the same ownership.  This provision shall apply even though
such lots fail to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district provided that yard dimensions and
requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is
located.



Note: This section shall apply only to single-family residences.



   (B)   Lots in Combination.  If two or more lots or a combination of
lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of
record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or
part of the lots with no buildings do not meet the requirements established
for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter; and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot
width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below
the requirements stated in this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.223  NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   (A)   Authority to Continue.  Where, at the time of adoption of
this chapter, lawful uses of land exist which would not be permitted by the
regulations imposed by this chapter, the uses may be continued so long as
they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.



   (B)   Enlargement of Structure.  No such non-conforming uses shall
be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than
was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.



   (C)   Moving.  No such non-conforming uses shall be moved in whole
or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by
such uses at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.



   (D)   Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment.  If any such
non-conforming uses of land are discontinued or abandoned for more than one
year (except when government action impedes access to the premises), any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by
this chapter for the district in which such land is located.



   (E)   New Construction.  No additional or accessory structure not
conforming to the requirements of this chapter shall be erected in connection
with such non-conforming use of land.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.224  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Authority to Continue.  Where a lawful structure exists at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not
now be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on
area, lot, coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, bulk, or other
requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful.



   (B)   Structural Alteration or Enlargement.  No such non-conforming
structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to
decrease its nonconformity.



   (C)   Extension of Use.  A non-conforming use may be extended
throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed
for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.



   (D)   Moving.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for
any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.



   (E)   Damage or Destruction.  Should such non-conforming structure
or non-conforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to the
extent of more than 50% of the fair market value of the building immediately
prior to the damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.225  NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND LAND IN
COMBINATION.



   If a lawful use involving individual structures, or a structure and
land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this chapter that would not now be allowed in the district under the terms of
this chapter, the lawful uses may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, except as otherwise provided below.



   (A)   Structural Alteration or Enlargement.  No existing structure
devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is
located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.



   (B)   Substitution of Non-conforming Use.  If no structural
alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a structure or structure and
land, may, upon appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals, be changed to another
non-conforming use provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals shall find that
the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district
than the existing non-conforming use.  In permitting such change, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in
accordance with other provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Change in Use.  Any structure, or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the
non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed.



   (D)   Termination by Discontinuance or Abandonment.  When a
non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and land combination, is
discontinued or abandoned for more than one year (except when government
action impedes access to the premises), the structure or structure and land
in combination shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.226  NONCONFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USE.



   (A)   Authority to Continue.  If a characteristic of development or
use lawfully exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter that would not now be allowed in the district under the terms of this
chapter, the lawful characteristic of development or use may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, except as otherwise provided below. Such
characteristics of development or use shall include, but not be limited to,
items such as landscaping, lighting, parking lots, refuse containers,
driveway surfacing, and screening.



   (B)   Alterations to the Site Requiring Compliance.  Any additions
to the building or the site that increase the area by more than 40% will
require that any nonconforming characteristics of development or use shall
comply with the standards of this chapter.



(Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



§ 159.227  NON-CONFORMING USES IN THE FLOOD HAZARD (FH) DISTRICT.



   (A)   Non-conforming Status for Flood Hazard (FH) District.  Any
building, structure, or other use in the Flood Hazard (FH) District which is
not in conformance with this chapter constitutes a non- conforming use.



   (B)   Structural Alteration or Enlargement in a Floodway.  In a
floodway, no non-conforming use may be expanded or enlarged nor can a
building undergo substantial modification without a permit for construction
in floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.



   (C)   Structural Modification in a Floodway Fringe or Flood Plain. 
In a floodway fringe or flood plain, a building which constitutes a
non-conforming use may undergo substantial modification provided such
modification is on a one-time-only basis and further provided that such
modification does not increase the value of the building by more than 40% of
its pre-improvement market value (excluding the value of land), unless such
building is permanently changed to a conforming use.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)  Penalty,
see § 159.999



§ 159.228  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   Regulations relating to non-conforming signs may be found in § 159.171.



(Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



§ 159.229  NON-CONFORMING STATUS FOR R1 AND R1/PD SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Any building, structure, or use located in an approved R1 or
R1/PD zoning district shall adhere to the standards and requirements adopted
for the PD (Planned Development), Primary and/or Secondary Subdivision Plats,
and/or the Rl Bulk Standards as listed in Table 5, Summary of Residential
Bulk Requirements (see § 159.106).



   (B)   Any existing structure or proposed structure meeting the
requirements of the adopted planned development, primary or secondary plat,
and/or the requirements above, shall be allowed to construct a new structure
or modify an existing structure without having to seek a variance from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 18-5-11, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 10-03-13, passed 4-9-13)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 159.240  AUTHORITY.



   The Director of Planning and Development or his authorized
representatives are hereby designated to enforce this chapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.241  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever the Director of Planning and Development receives a complaint
alleging a violation of this chapter, he shall investigate the complaint and
shall take whatever action is warranted in accordance with this subchapter.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.242  PERSONS LIABLE.



   The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who
participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that
is contrary to the requirements of this chapter may be held responsible for
the violation, suffer the penalties, and be subject to the remedies herein
provided.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.243  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Director of Planning and Development or his authorized
representatives pursuant to this subchapter, may make inspections of all
buildings, structures and premises located within the jurisdiction of this
chapter to determine their compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Such inspections shall be made between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
on any day except Sunday.  All inspections shall be subject to the following
standards and conditions.



   (A)   An inspection may take place only if a complaint has been
received by the Director of Planning and Development pursuant to this
subchapter, and such complaint, in the opinion of the Director of Planning
and Development, provides reasonable grounds for the belief that a violation
exists, or such inspection is undertaken as part of a regular inspection
program whereby certain areas of the City are being inspected in their
entirety by the direction of the Director of Planning and Development.



   (B)   The Director of Planning and Development or his authorized
representative shall furnish to the owner, tenant, or occupant of the
building, structure, or premises sought to be inspected, sufficient
identification and information to enable the owner, tenant, or occupant to
determine the purpose of the inspection, and that the person is a
representative of the City.



   (C)   The Director of Planning and Development or his authorized
representative may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for a search
warrant or other legal process for the purpose of securing entry to any
premises if the owner, tenant, or occupant shall refuse to grant entry.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96)



§ 159.244  PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS.



   If the Director of Planning and Development (Director) finds that any
provision of this chapter is being violated, he or she shall provide written
notice to the persons responsible for such violation, indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The notice
shall also state what further action the Director may anticipate taking to
enforce this chapter (which shall not be a limit on the enforcement authority
of the Director) and that an appeal of his or her decision may be taken.
Additional written notice(s) may be provided at the Director's discretion.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.245  STOP WORK ORDERS.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where delay would threaten the
effective enforcement of this chapter, pose a danger to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or the Director otherwise determines that it is
appropriate under the circumstances, the Director may enforce this chapter
without prior written notice by invoking any penalties or remedies authorized
in this subchapter, and/or may impose a stop work order as follows:



   (A)   The Director may issue an order requiring suspension of the
pertinent construction or other activity (stop work order) if: construction
or activity of proceeding in violation of any standard set forth in building
codes adopted by the city, violation of state law pertaining to safety during
construction, violation of this chapter, or violations of orders or
directives of the Director;



      (1)   Construction is proceeding in such a manner that, if
allowed to continue, there is a reasonable probability that it will be
substantially difficult to correct the violation; or



      (2)   Construction, for which a building permit is required,
is proceeding without a building permit being in force.



   (B)   The stop work order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   State the construction or activity to which it is
applicable and the relevant violation(s);



      (3)   Be posted on the property on which the pertinent
construction or activity is occurring;



      (4)   State the contact information for a representative of
the city that may be contacted with information concerning the condition(s)
under which the construction or activity may be resumed;



      (5)   Where available, be provided to the contractor or
property owner.



   (C)   The issuance of a stop work order shall in no way limit the
enforcement authority or application of penalties provided elsewhere in this
chapter.



(Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.246  REVOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVALS.



   An improvement location permit, certificate of occupancy, building
permit, or any other development approval may be revoked by the Director of
Planning and Development in accordance with this subchapter if the recipient
of the approval fails to develop or maintain the property in accordance with
the plans submitted, the requirements of this chapter, or any additional
requirements lawfully imposed in connection with the issuance of the
approval.  Before a development approval can be revoked, the Director of
Planning and Development shall undertake the following procedures:



   (A)   Notice and Opportunity to Comment.  The Director of Planning
and Development shall cause a written notice of intent to revoke the
development approval to be delivered to the recipient of the approval at
least ten working days prior to the date of the proposed revocation.  The
notice of intent to revoke the approval shall inform the recipient of the
alleged reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain a hearing on
the allegations.  The notice shall also inform the approval holder of the
alleged grounds for the revocation.



   (B)   Hearing.  If the development approval holder desires a
hearing, the Director of Planning and Development shall set a date for a
public hearing.



   (C)   The Director of Planning and Development Decision.  After the
expiration of the ten working day notice and comment period, or within ten
working days of the close of the public hearing, the Director of Planning and
Development shall, by written order, render his decision on the proposed
revocation.  The written order shall contain a statement of the specific
reasons and findings of fact that support his decision.



   (D)   Notification of Decision.  The Director of Planning and
Development shall send his decision within five working days to the approval
holder and any other person(s) previously requesting notification.



   (E)   Evidence.  The burden of presenting sufficient evidence to
the Director of Planning and Development to conclude a development approval
should be revoked for any of the reasons set forth in this subchapter shall
be upon the party proposing the revocation.



   (F)   Result of Revocation.  No person may continue to make use of
land or buildings in the manner authorized by any development approval after
the approval has been revoked in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (G)   Records.  A record of all written notices of the intent to
revoke a development approval shall be kept on file in the office of the
Director of Planning and Development.  At least once a year, the Director of
Planning and Development shall make public a listing of his decisions, by
address, regarding the written notices of the intent to revoke a development
approval.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.247  APPEALS.



   A decision of the Director of Planning and Development or his
authorized representatives may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals
pursuant to § 159.043(B).



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.248  PRIVATE REMEDIES RESERVED.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be interpreted to prevent any person
entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter from bringing an appropriate action to secure
relief.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 159.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, conditional
uses, or planned developments shall constitute a common nuisance. Any person
convicted of violating this chapter may be fined in accordance with Appendix
A - Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses. In addition, any person
convicted of violating this chapter shall be required to pay all costs and
expenses, including the city and Department's attorneys' fees, related to
adjudicating the offense.



   (B)   Separate Offense.  Each day a violation of this chapter
continues after receipt of a notice of violation pursuant to this subchapter
shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 32-07-19, passed 7-23-19)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




APPENDIX A:  SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES



Section



   1.   Application and Filing Fees



   2.   Charge for Ordinance Violations



   3.   Other Expenses



   The Common Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, establish a
schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for
improvement location permits, amendments, appeals, variances, conditional use
permits, plan approvals, and other matters pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this chapter requiring investigations, legal, advertising,
postage, and other expenses. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the
office of the Director of Planning and Development and may be altered or
amended only by the Common Council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and
expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application
or appeal.



§ 1.  APPLICATION AND FILING FEES.



   (A)   Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   Conditional Use.



         (a)   General:  $600.



         (b)   Change of Development Plan:  $350 (previously
approved under conditional use procedure).



      (2)   Appeal:  $200.



      (3)   Variances.



         (a)   Developmental Standards:



            1.   Single-family: $320 plus $50 per each
additional variance.



            2.   All others: $600 plus $50 per each additional
variance.



         (b)   Land Use Variance:  $800 plus $35 per acre.



         (c)   Fence Variance ONLY (Single-Family or Two Family
Dwellings):  $150.



   (B)   Plan Commission.



      (1)   Change of Zoning Classification:



         (a)   Residential: $800 plus $35 per lot.



         (b)   Non-residential: $900 plus $65 per lot.



         (c)   Modification to zoning commitments:$500.



      (2)   Subdivision:



         (a)   Primary Plat:



            1.   Residential: $800 plus $35 per lot.



            2.   Non-residential: $1,000 plus $65 per lot.



         (b)   Secondary Plat:



            1.   Residential: $400 plus $35 per lot.



            2.   Non-residential: $500 plus $65 per lot.



         (c)   Plat Vacation: $300 plus $35 per lot.



         (d)   Amended plat or replat:



            1.   Residential: $300 plus $35 per lot.



            2.   Non-residential:$450 plus $65 per lot.



         (e)   Waiver from subdivision standards:$500 per waiver.



      (3)   Planned Unit Development:



         (a)   Preliminary Development Plan:



            1.   Residential: $1,200 plus $35 per acre.



            2.   Non-residential: $1,200 plus $65 per acre.



         (b)   Detailed Development Plan:



            1.   Residential: $750 plus $35 per acre.



            2.   Non-residential: $950 plus $65 per acre.



         (c)   Amended Development Plan (Previously Approved):



            1.   $550 (text only).



            2.   $550 plus $65 per acre.



         (d)   Special Consideration: $1,000.



      (4)   Program of Signs (Amendments, and/or Waivers): $500.



      (5)   Architectural Review Board: $600.



         (a)   Architectural Review by Staff (for building
elevations previously approved by the Architectural Review Board where minor
modifications have been made to the building elevation. The elevations shall
meet the adopted Planned Development Ordinance regulations): $50 per model
elevation.



      (6)   Modification to Zoning Commitments:  $425.



   (C)   Improvement Location Permit.



      (1)   Per structure:  Included in Building Permit fee.



      (2)   Land Disturbance/Grading/Infrastructure/Use Lacking a
Permanent Structure such as a parking lot and miscellaneous uses and/or
items: $150 plus $65 per acre.



   (D)   Plan Review Fees (Technical Advisory Committee).



      (1)   Fees calculated based on number of sheets in
construction plans minus the Noblesville Standard Sheets.



 


Number of Sheets

 

Review Fees






5 or less

 

$500




6

 

$765




7

 

$930




8

 

$1,085




9

 

$1,260




10 to 20

 

$1,325




21 to 40

 

$1,590




41 to 60

 

$1,855




61 to 80

 

$2,120





 



      (2)   An additional charge for each revision beyond the second
submitted revision (see Technical Advisory Plan Resubmittal Fee) e.g. the
initial TAC review, first resubmittal and second resubmittal are included as
part of the original fee.



   (E)   General Construction Inspection Fees (monies are invoiced and
collected prior to the issuance of an Improvement Location Permit or Building
Permit).



 


Infrastructure Type

 

Unit Rate

 

Minimum Fee



Streets (includes curbs, signs, trees, trails & sidewalks)
 

$0.50 per ft. (centerline)

 

$250



Sanitary sewer (includes daily observations and testing)
 

$1.00 per ft.

 

$500



Storm sewer (RCP >= 12" diameter and includes daily observations and testing
 

$0.50 per ft.

 

$250



Erosion control
 

$25 per acre

 

$100




 



   (F)   Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.



      (1)   Residential (road impact fees, park impact fees and
sanitary sewer fees, if applicable are collected wit the issuance of the
building permit).



         (a)   Single-Family Residential: $780 plus $.11/sq. ft. (



         (b)   Two-Family Dwellings:  $780 plus $.11/sq. ft.



         (c)   Multi-Family Dwelling:



            1.   Apartments: $780 plus $.11/sq. ft. plus $100
per unit plus C of O per building.



            2.   Condominiums or Townhomes: $780 plus $.11/sq.
ft. plus C of O per unit.



         (d)   Mobile Homes (approved mobile home parks) - $200
per mobile home.



         (e)   Addition to Existing Building:



            1.   Single-family or two-family:  $150 plus
$.10/ sq. ft.



            2.   Multi-family:  $200 plus $.15/sq. ft.



         (f)   Accessory structures including detached garages,
pole barns, mini-barns, open decks:



            1.   Single-family or two-family:  $75 plus
$.06/sq. ft.



            2.   Multi-family:  $100 plus $.06/sq. ft.



         (g)   Remodeling*:  $125 plus $.10/sq. ft.



* Fee is for installation or renovation, including installation of central
heating and air conditioning system, rewiring, plumbing, and replacement of
windows. Application for an improvement location permit is not required.



         (h)   Basement Finish:  $200 plus $25 C of O.



         (i)   Foundation only:  $200.



         (j)   Electrical Upgrade or Change of Service (increase
of service size, phasing on existing service, panel replacement): $75.



         (k)   New service (electrical): $150



      (2)   Non-residential Buildings (Industrial, Institutional,
and Commercial) (Road Impact Fees and Sanitary Sewer Fees, if applicable, are
collected with the issuance of the Building Permit).



         (a)   Each structure:  $800 plus $.20/sq. ft. total
floor area.



         (b)   Addition to existing structure:  $300 plus
$.15/sq. ft. of total floor area.



         (c)   Remodeling*:  $300 plus $.20/sq. ft.



* Fee is for installation or renovation, including installation of central
heating and air conditioning system, rewiring, plumbing, and replacement of
windows. Application for an improvement location permit is not required.



         (d)   Tenant finish:  $200 plus $.15/sq. ft.



         (e)   Foundation only release:  $400.



         (f)   Commercial Accessory Structure not used for
storage of supplies or inventory having a maximum size of 200 sq. ft.: $100
plus $40 certificate of occupancy.



         (g)   Electrical Upgrade or Change of Service (increase
of service size, phasing on existing service, panel replacement):  $100.



         (h)   New service (electrical): $200



      (3)   Miscellaneous permits and fees.



         (a)   Cell Towers, underground vaults, hoods,
underground or above-ground tanks and similar uses: $200 plus $40 C of C.



         (b)   Demolition:  $150 plus $50 for each additional
structure on the same parcel/lot.



         (c)   Moving or changing the location of a Building:



            1.   Principal Building:  $120 + $60 certificate
of occupancy.



            2.   Accessory Building:  $48 + $60 certificate
of occupancy.



            3.   Any building moved to a location outside the
jurisdictional limits of the city:  $60.



         (d)   Amendment to an Approved Building Permit: $125. (A
20% or less increase in the square footage of the original building per
submitted plan. If the square footage percent is greater than the 20%, the
fee is calculated as $125 plus the square footage fee for the construction
type.)



         (e)   Incorrect posting of permit and/or address cards:
$100.



         (f)   Building Permit Replacement Cards:  $25.



         (g)   Removal of “Do Not Occupy”* Sticker:  $100.



* This sticker is placed in a conspicuous location by the building inspector
upon the failure of a rough-in inspection.



         (h)   Permanent Swimming Pool:  $175 plus $.10/sq. ft.
plus $25 certificate of occupancy.



         (i)   Off-Street Parking Lots (Operated by private
enterprise for revenue purposes.  Excludes local, state, federal government
units.): $5/space.



         (j)   Fence Permit:  $25.



         (k)   Zoning Verification Letter:  $85.



         (l)   Technical Advisory Committee Plan
Re-submittal:$500 (Paid prior to TAC review).



         (m)   Certificate of Compliance (landscaping only): 
$75.



         (n)   Home Occupation (annually):  $40.



         (o)   Temporary Use (annually): $300.



         (p)   Sales Trailers:  $500.



         (q)   Mobile Food Vehicles (annually): $1,000.



         (r)   Change of Use (building) e.g. office to commercial
or commercial to apartment(s):  $50.



      (4)   Inspection Fees (per each re-inspection of construction
and/or site phase(s)).



         (a)   Re-inspection.



            1.   Residential:



               A.   First inspection: $75.



               B.   Each re-inspection: $200.



            2.   Non-residential:



               A.   First inspection: $100.



               B.   Each re-inspection: $300.



         (b)   Missed Inspection.



            1.   Residential:  $500.



            2.   Non-residential (commercial, industrial,
institutional):  $1,000.



         (c)   Timed Inspection*: $75.



* The payment of this fee allows a specific time to be scheduled with the
Department of Planning for a required building inspection. The inspection
will then be conducted within 20 minutes of the scheduled time. Notification
to the Planning Department shall be, at a minimum, the business day prior to
the inspection day.



         (d)   Same Day Inspections: $200.



         (e)   *Saturday/After Regular Business Hours:  $250 per
hour with minimum of 2 hours.



* 48 hours notice prior to the requested Saturday or After Business Hour
inspection time.  Inspection will be as per availability of inspector(s).



      (5)   Certificates of Occupancy.



         (a)   Residential.



            1.   Single-Family, Multi-Family (Apartments): 
$100 per building.



            2.   Two-Family, Multi-Family (Condominiums,
Townhomes):  $100 per unit.



            3.   Mobile Home in Approved MH Park:  $100 per
unit.



            4.   Accessory Building:  $25.



            5.   Temporary:  $75.



         (b)   Industrial, Commercial, Institutional.



            1.   Temporary:  $125.



            2.   Final*:  $125.



* Notification to the Planning Department shall be a minimum of 48 hours
prior to the requested inspection for a Final Certificate of Occupancy.



         (c)   Occupying a Structure without a Certificate of
Occupancy.



            1.   Residential:  $1,100.



            2.   Commercial:  $3,000.



      (6)   Sign Permits.



         (a)   Permanent:  $150 plus $1/sq. ft. plus $25 C of C.



         (b)   Construction Sign:  $75.



         (c)   Temporary Signs:  $50.



         (d)   Panel Change Only:  $75.



         (e)   Secondary Window Sign:  $50 plus $25 certificate
of occupancy.



         (f)   Signs with approved variances granted by the Board
of Zoning Appeals: no fee.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 64-12-96; Am. Ord. 47-12-99, passed
1-10-00; Am. Ord. 25-5-01, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord. 36-08-02, passed 9-10-02;
Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord. 29-4-05, passed 5-10-05; Am. Ord.
48-6-05, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 76-9-05, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord.
89-10-06, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. 1-1-07, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 22-4-07,
passed 4-10-07; Am. Ord. 13-3-08, passed 4-15-08; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed
12-9-08; Am. Ord. 11-3-09, passed 4-28-09; Am. Ord. 22-6-09, passed 6-23-09;
Am. Ord. 26-7-09, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord.
33-10-11, passed 10-25-11; Am. Ord. 24-07-13, passed 8-13-13; Am. Ord.
13-02-14, passed 3-11-14; Am. Ord. 17-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord.
37-08-14, passed 9-9-14; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord.
61-12-15, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 33-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



§ 2.  CHARGE FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Zoning and Subdivision.  Violations of the provisions of this
chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variances, conditional uses, or planned developments shall constitute a
common nuisance. Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be
fined $300 and not more than $2,500 for a first violation, and not less than
$500 and not more than $7,500 for subsequent violations. Each day of any
violation or non-compliance shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation of this chapter. In addition, any person receiving a
“judgement” for violating this chapter shall be required to pay all costs
and expenses, including the city and Department’s attorneys’ fees,
related to adjudicating the offense.



   (B)   Building.  Any person or corporation who shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter of the Code or fail to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build, reconstruct, or
structurally alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or
plan submitted and approved there under shall, for each and every violation
or non-compliance, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
fined not less than $300 and not more than $2,500 for a first violation, and
not less than $500 and not more than $7,500 for subsequent violations. Each
day of any violation or non-compliance shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation of this chapter. In addition, any person receiving a
“judgement” for violating this chapter shall be required to pay all costs
and expenses, including the city and Department’s attorneys’ fees,
related to adjudicating the offense.



   (C)   Human Portable Signs (Commercial Signs and Signs containing
political or other protected free-speech information). (Effective 12-10-10) 
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section of the Unified Development (Code of Ordinances) or fail to comply
therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a Class
C Infraction for the first time offense in a calendar year and may be fined
up to $2,500. For second time offenses within a calendar year, it shall be
considered a Class B Infraction and may be fined up to $7,500; and the third
or subsequent offenses within a calendar year shall be a Class A Infraction
and may be fined up to $7,500. In addition, any person receiving a
“judgement” for violating this chapter shall be required to pay all costs
and expenses, including the city and Department's attorneys' fees, related to
adjudicating this offense.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 64-12-97; Am. Ord. 21-6-97, passed
7-28-97; Am. Ord. 47-12-99, passed 1-10-00; Am. Ord. 36-08-02, passed
9-10-02; Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord. 76-9-05, passed
10-11-05; Am. Ord. 89-10-06, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. 1-1-07, passed 1-9-07;
Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 31-9-10, passed 9-28-10; Am. Ord.
61-12-15, passed 1-12-16; Am. Ord. 33-07-19, passed 7-23-19)



 



§ 3.  OTHER EXPENSES.



   (A)   Performance Bond (also Certified Check, Certificate of
Deposit, or Irrevocable Letter of Credit).  110% of the estimated cost of
completion of the required public improvements or other site improvements,
including landscaping, as may be required by the Planning Department or
Engineering Department.



   (B)   Maintenance Bond.



      (1)   15% of the total cost of the required public
improvements or other site improvements, including landscaping, as may be
required by the Planning Department or Engineering Department.



   (C)   Reports.



      (1)   Comprehensive Plan:  $15.



      (2)   Unified Development Ordinance:  $25.



      (3)   Planning Department Annual Report:  no charge.



      (4)   Final Benchmarking Report:  $15.



      (5)   Interim Benchmarking Reports:  $15.



   (D)   Photocopy Prices.



      (1)   Price per side of page (black & white).



         (a)   81/2 x 11:  10¢.



         (b)   81/2 x 14:  10¢.



         (c)   11 x 17:  20¢.



      (2)   Price per side of page (color).



         (a)   81/2 x 11:  $1.



         (b)   81/2 x 14:  $1.50.



         (c)   1l x 17:  $1.50.



   (E)   Map Prices.



      (1)   24 x 36 inches (black & white): $10.



      (2)   34 x 44 inches (black & white): $15.



      (3)   24 x 36 inches (color): $25.



      (4)   34 x 44 inches (color): $35.



      (5)   11 x 17 inches (color): $3.



   (F)   Quick Pay Account (QPA).  The QPA account is a non-interest
bearing account into which building contractors can deposit money from which
fee payments can be debited.  Fees will be debited from this account at the
builder’s request to pay fees associated with their construction
projects.  This program is voluntary and individual accounts can be closed
with written notification from the builder.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 25-5-01, passed 6-12-01; Am. Ord.
36-08-02, passed 9-10-02; Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3–11-03; Am. Ord.
76-9-05, passed 10-11-05; Am. Ord. 89-10-06, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord.
1-1-07, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 61-12-15,
passed 1-12-16)



APPENDIX B:  APPLICATIONS AND FORMS



Section



   1.   Applications



   2.   Forms



§ 1.  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Plan Review.  Applications for site plan review shall contain
the information listed under § 159.041 for the Site Plan Review as required,
and the following additional requirements:



      (1)   The application for the site plan shall be signed by the
owner attesting to the accuracy of all information supplied by the
application.  The following information is the minimum required:



         (a)   Name, address, and phone number(s) of applicant.



         (b)   Legal description of property.



         (c)   Existing and/or proposed use.



         (d)   Zoning District.



         (e)   Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions and the shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size
and location of the existing buildings on the lot, if any; and the location
and dimensions of the proposed building(s) or alteration. (Plot plan.)



         (f)   Building heights.



         (g)   Number of dwelling units, if applicable.



         (h)   Number of off-street parking spaces and/or loading
berths, if applicable.



         (i)   Landscape Plan, in accordance with §§ 159.180
through 159.188, if applicable.



         (j)   Any other matters which may be necessary to
determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter,
as determined by the Director of Planning and Development or his
representative.



      (2)   In addition, site plans in any flood hazard area shall
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required, where applicable:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
lowest floor including basement of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any structure has been floodproofed;



         (c)   Certification by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structure meet the floodproofing criteria in this chapter;



         (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. A
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering study is required and any watercourse
changes submitted to IDNR for approval and then to FEMA as a letter of Map
Revision.



         (e)   Indiana Department of Natural Resources approval
in a floodway.



   (B)   Conditional Uses.  An application for a Conditional Use
permit shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Development and the
Board of Zoning Appeals by at least one owner or lessee of property for which
such Conditional Use is proposed.  At a minimum, the application shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant.



      (2)   Description of existing use.



      (3)   Zoning district.



      (4)   Description of proposed Conditional Use.



      (5)   A narrative statement evaluating the effects of such
elements as noise, glare, odor, fumes, and vibration upon adjoining property;
a discussion of the general compatibility with adjacent and other properties
in the district; and the relationship of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Plan.



      (6)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Director
of Planning and Development, which shall include but not be limited to:



         (a)   A legal description of the real estate involved;



         (b)   Location and size of all existing and proposed
buildings and structures;



         (c)   Location and dimensions of building lines,
right-of-way lines, setbacks, regulated drains and public and private
easements (existing and proposed);



         (d)   Elevation contours and spot elevations sufficient
to determine drainage both existing and proposed;



         (e)   Drainage calculations sufficient for sizing
drainage structures based on a 10-year storm along with retention/detention
for a 100-year storm with developed site condition and a release rate of a
10-year storm under undeveloped site conditions;



         (f)   Details of drainage structures including cover
details for all structures under paved areas;



         (g)   Layout of drives and other traffic and drainage
features on opposite side of street or adjacent properties;



         (h)   Location of septic facilities, sanitary sewer
lines and all utilities existing and proposed and connection plans for
sanitary sewer facilities including details if necessary;



         (i)   Location of parking and loading areas, traffic
access and circulation, open space, landscaping, refuse and service areas,
signs, turning radii, and proposed vehicle and projected turning paths from
turning radius templates;



         (j)   Vicinity map showing all property boundaries and
zone districts within a 1/4 mile radius of the property; and



         (k)   Any other information the Board of Zoning Appeals
may require to determine if the proposed conditional use meets the intent and
requirements of the zoning ordinance and is appropriate for the location for
which it is proposed.



   (C)   Variances.  A variance from the terms of this chapter shall
not be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted to the Director and the Board of
Zoning Appeals containing:



      (1)   Name, address, and phone number of applicants;



      (2)   Legal description of property;



      (3)   Description of nature of variance requested;



      (4)   Site plan depicting all information necessary for the
Board's decision;



      (5)   Technical information as determined by the Director of
Planning and Development and the Technical Advisory Committee.



      (6)   A narrative statement demonstrating that the requested
variance conforms to the standards of § 159.043(C)(5).



      (7)   Upon consideration of the factors of this section and
the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.



   (D)   Amendments.



      (1)   Applications for Change of Zoning or Planned Development
amendments to the zoning ordinance/map shall contain at least the following
information:



         (a)   Name, address, and phone number of applicant;



         (b)   Present use;



         (c)   Present zoning district;



         (d)   Proposed zoning district;



         (e)   A vicinity map at a scale approved by the Director
of Planning and Development showing property lines, thoroughfares, existing
and proposed zoning, and such other items as the Director of Planning and
Development may require;



         (f)   A list of all property owners and their mailing
addresses who are within, contiguous to, or directly across the street from
the parcel(s) proposed to be rezoned and others that may have a substantial
interest in the case;



         (g)   A statement on how the proposed amendment relates
to the Comprehensive Plan;



         (h)   A fee as established from time to time by the
Common Council; and



         (i)   Any other matters which may be necessary to
determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this chapter,
as determined by the Director of Planning and Development or his
representative.



   (E)   Subdivisions.



      (1)   Contents of Sketch Plat Application.



         (a)   Sketch Plan Map.  A sketch at a scale of
approximately 200 feet to one inch shall show information for the property
which is proposed to be subdivided, and for adjoining properties for a
distance of at least 200 feet, and shall include:



            1.   The boundary of the property to be subdivided
and its true relationship to the right-of-way of the existing road(s) upon
which it may border;



            2.   The location, width, and type of use of any
existing roads, rights-of-way, easements or other special purpose areas
within the property, or immediately adjacent thereto, and the location of
towers, poles, or other structures in connection with electric transmission
lines;



            3.   The approximate location of any existing
underground utilities, such as sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil
transmission lines, etc., within the property or immediately adjacent
thereto, with approximate pipe size and directions of slope;



            4.   Existing topography with contour intervals
not greater than five feet, giving bench marks together with drainage
channels, streams, springs, swamps, flood zones, rock outcrops, existing
buildings, wooded areas, or other features likely to affect the plan.  The
source and accuracy of the topographic details shown on the plan shall be in
terms of U.S.G.S data and/or field survey.



            5.   A general layout of proposed streets, blocks,
and lots for the entire parcel under control of the subdivider.



            6.   Identification of any general area to be set
aside for schools, parks, or other community facilities.



            7.   Identification of sites for uses other than
single-family dwellings.



            8.   General indications of how the subdivision is
to be provided with water service, sanitary sewers, and storm drainage.



         (b)   Supplemental Information.



            1.   Location of the parcel to be subdivided,
identified by street, block, and adjacent subdivisions (with block and lot
numbers) as applicable, or in the case of unsubdivided properties, location
by township range and section (metes and bounds).



            2.   Legal description of any existing legal
rights-of-way or easements affecting the property.



            3.   Listing of any existing covenants on the
property.



            4.   Zoning classification.



            5.   The location and name of all adjacent
subdivisions, if any, and names of owners of adjacent unsubdivided property.



         (c)   Other Application Requirements.  The subdivider
shall file an application with the Planning Department for approval of the
primary plat.  The application shall:



            1.   Be made on applications adopted by the Plan
Commission and available at the Department of Planning and Development or
online;



            2.   Be submitted at least 49 days prior to a
regular meeting of the Plan Commission to allow adequate time for reviews by
staff and Technical Advisory Committee, and Architectural Review Committee,
if required;



            3.   Be accompanied by a minimum of three paper
copies of the primary plat drawing, digital submission of plans, reports,
etc., and any supplemental information, as described in division (E)(2),
below.  Copies to agencies outside of City Government including Hamilton
County and all utilities are the responsibility of the applicant.  Copies to
those agencies should be submitted to those agencies on the same day as the
Planning Department submittal;



            4.   Be accompanied by a minimum of three paper
copies of provisional construction plans.  Copies to agencies outside of
City Government including Hamilton County and all utilities are the
responsibility of the applicant.  Copies to those agencies should be
submitted to those agencies on the same day as the Planning Department
submittal; and



            5.   Be accompanied by a non-returnable fee as
described in Appendix A, Fees, Charges, and Expenses.



      (2)   Contents of Primary Plat Application.  Applications for
primary plats shall comply generally with the approved sketch plan.  The
following items are required for the primary plat application:



         (a)   Primary Plat Map.  The Primary Plat drawing shall
be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and/or engineer at a scale no smaller
than 100 feet to 1 inch.  It shall be prepared on paper and the sheets shall
be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used.  All sheets shall be
of such size as is acceptable for filing in the office of the County
Recorder, but shall not be larger than 34 x 44 inches.



The Primary Plat Map shall show information for the property which is
proposed to be subdivided, and for adjoining properties for a distance of not
less than 500 feet, and shall include the following:



            1.   Location of property lines, existing
easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing
wooded areas or trees eight inches or more in diameter, measured four feet
above ground level; and the location, width, and names of all existing or
platted streets or other public ways within the tract.



            2.   The location of property, with respect to
surrounding property and streets, including the names of all adjoining
property owners of record, the names of adjoining developments, and names of
adjoining streets.



            3.   Location, size, invert elevations, and slopes
of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures
within the tract and existing permanent buildings and utility poles on the
tract.



            4.   Approximate topographic contours shown at
five foot intervals in rolling or hilly terrain and two foot intervals in
level terrain, as determined by the Planning Director, and referenced to sea
level datum and an established bench mark.



            5.   The approximate location and width of
proposed streets and rights-of-way.



            6.   Proposals for connection with existing water
supply and sanitary sewer systems, or alternative means of providing water
supply and sanitary waste disposal and treatment; primary provisions for
collecting and discharging surface water drainage.



            7.   The approximate location, dimensions, and
areas of all proposed or existing lots.



            8.   The approximately location, dimensions, and
area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground
use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed
subdivision.



            9.   A vicinity map showing streets and other
general development of the surrounding area. The primary plat shall show all
school and improvement district lines with the districts properly designated.



            10.   The location of temporary stakes to enable
the local officials to find and appraise features of the proposed layout in
the field, if needed.



            11.   Soils Data—See § 159.084.



            12.   Graphic scale, north arrow, and date.



            13.   The names of the owners as shown in the
Assessor's files.  This information may be shown on a separate current tax
map or plat reproduction from the Assessor's Office showing the subdivision
superimposed thereon.



            14. Whenever the primary plat covers only a part of
an applicant's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at the scale
no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet, a sketch of the entire holdings,
including the proposed subdivision area, showing an indication of the
probable future street and drainage systems for the remaining portion of the
tract.



         (b)   Supplemental Information.



            1.   Subdivision Name.  The name of subdivision
if property is within an existing subdivision, or proposed name if not within
an existing subdivision.



            2.   Ownership and Right to Develop.



               a.   Name and address, including telephone
number, of legal owner(s) or agent of property.



               b.   Citation of any existing legal
rights-of-way or easements affecting the property.



               c.   Existing covenants on the property, if
any.



            3.   Preparer of Plat.  Name and address,
telephone number, and registration number of the professional engineer and
surveyor responsible for subdivision design, public improvements, and for
surveys.



            4.   Location and Description.  Location of
property by lot or section, township, range, and county (metes and bounds).



            5.   The presence or absence of any exceptions to
the development standards for the zoning district in which it is located, any
general development standards, or §§ 159.075 through 159.087; as evidenced
by the listing of any exceptions in the primary plat application;



            6.   The presence or absence of any protective
covenants for the subdivision which would alter its impact from what would
typically be permitted in the zoning district in which it is located; as
evidenced by the inclusion of any covenants in the primary plat application.



      (3)   Contents of Secondary Plat Application.  Applications
for secondary plat approval shall comply with the approved primary plat. 
The secondary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and/or
engineer at a scale no smaller than 1 inch equals 100 feet and the sheets
shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used.  All sheets
shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in the office of the County
Recorder, but shall not be larger than 34 inches by 44 inches.



The secondary plat map shall show the following:



         (a)   The dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot; the bearings of all
lines to a minimum of one-half minute.



         (b)   The location, width or size of existing streets,
easements, water bodies, and other pertinent features such as swamps,
railroad, building, parks, public trails, cemeteries, drainage ditches,
bridges and culverts, as determined by the Plan Commission.



         (c)   The location and width of all proposed streets,
easements, alleys, and other public ways, and proposed street rights-of-way
and building set-back lines.



         (d)   The locations, dimensions, and areas of all
proposed or existing lots including dimensions of all lot lines expressed in
feet and hundredths of a foot; and bearings of all lines to a minimum of
one-half minute.



         (e)   The location and dimensions of all property
proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or
private reservation, with designation of the proposed thereof, and
conditions, if any, of dedication or reservation.



         (f)   The name and address of the owner of land to be
subdivided; the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the owner;
and the name and address of the land surveyor or engineer. Also citation of
last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved, giving
grantor, grantee, date, and land record reference.



         (g)   The date, north arrow, and scale.



         (h)   Sufficient data acceptable to the Engineer of
appropriate jurisdiction to determine readily the location, bearing, and
length of lines for reproduction of such lines upon the ground.



         (i)   The location of all proposed and existing
monuments.



         (j)   Name of the subdivision.



         (k)   Indication of the use of any lot as single-family,
two-family, multi-family, commercial, industrial, governmental,
institutional, etc.



         (l)   Lots shall be consecutively numbered, and blocks
shall be lettered in alphabetical order.



         (m)   The plat should include the following notations
(when necessary):



            1.   Explanation of drainage easements;



            2.   Explanation of site easements;



            3.   Explanation of reservations:



            4.   Endorsement of owner with date and signature.



         (n)   A block or space shall be set aside on the
secondary plat to include the signature of the Plan Commission President,
Plan Commission Secretary, Board of Works and/or County Commissioners, and
the Director of Planning and Development.



   (F)   Residential Mobile Home (RMH) Park or Subdivision. 
Applications for Residential Mobile Home Parks or Subdivisions shall contain
the following information.  In addition, the Mobile Home Subdivision shall
comply with all requirements for subdivisions given in this chapter and in
division (E) of this section.



      (1)   A vicinity key map at an appropriate scale.



      (2)   Description:



         (a)   Proposed name of such mobile home park.



         (b)   Location by legal description, and city, town, or
civil township.



         (c)   Name and address of the applicant.



         (d)   Name, address, and seal of registered professional
engineer or land surveyor preparing the plat.



         (e)   Scale of the plan, north arrow, and date.



      (3)   Existing Conditions:



         (a)   Boundary line of proposed mobile home park
indicated by solid heavy line.



         (b)   Location, width, and names of all existing or
prior dedicated streets or public ways abutting or in said area of the
proposed mobile home park, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and
other public open spaces within said area, and location of permanent
buildings or structures.



         (c)   Any existing sewers, water mains, culverts,
drainage tile, or underground facilities within the area of the proposed
mobile home park.



         (d)   Existing zoning of proposed mobile home park and
adjacent tracts.



         (e)   Other conditions on the tract such as water
courses, marshes, rock outcropping, wooded areas, etc.



      (4)   Proposed Conditions:



         (a)   Layout of streets and sidewalks with width
thereof, whether dedicated or private street, together with typical cross
section to meet City or County standards.



         (b)   Layout of any alleys, crosswalks, and easements.



         (c)   If lots are laid out, the dimensions and number
thereof.



         (d)   Land to be set aside for common use of the tenants
of the mobile home park.



         (e)   All setback lines.



         (f)   Location of all proposed permanent buildings,
storage area, office and community center.



      (5)   Improvement Plan:  At the time of filing the
development plan, the applicant shall also file five copies of the proposed
improvement plans which shall contain the following information:



         (a)   Description: The same information as contained
above.



         (b)   Proposed Conditions:



            1.   Plan and profile sheets of the proposed
mobile home park streets, including typical cross section showing pavement
design.



            2.   Plans for the proposed handling of surface
water drainage, including plan and profile sheets of storm sewers, if
included in the proposed improvements, to the satisfaction of the County
Surveyor and Engineer of appropriate jurisdiction.



   (G)   Zero Lot Line (ZLL) Development.  Applications for Zero Lot
Line (ZLL) Development shall contain the following information. In addition,
Zero Lot Line Developments shall comply with all requirements for
subdivisions given in this chapter and in division (E) of this section.



      (1)   A location map indicating existing zoning on the site
and adjacent area.



      (2)   Site plan at no less than 1 inch equals 100 feet,
including the following information:



         (a)   Lot lines and setbacks;



         (b)   Location, shape, size, and height of existing and
proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements, entrance features, storm
water detention areas, sidewalks and sanitary sewer design;



         (c)   Existing and proposed landscaping;



         (d)   Recreation facilities (if applicable);



         (e)   Stage of development, if any;



         (f)   Location of off-street parking;



         (g)   Indication of exterior graphics;



         (h)   Indication of design methods used to conserve
energy;



         (i)   Landscaped areas both interior as well as the
adjacent perimeter treatment.



      (3)   Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any
other structures such as recreation buildings.  The total amount of lineal
exterior wall area and that portion which has visual and physical access to
outside patio/court areas shall be indicated for each typical unit.



      (4)   Information indicating the following:



         (a)   Gross and net acreage;



         (b)   Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage);



         (c)   Building heights and stories;



         (d)   Building coverage for each lot;



         (e)   Amount of common open space in square feet (if
applicable);



         (f)   Total trees provided and total trees required;



         (g)   Parking required and provided;



         (h)   Such other architectural and engineering data as
may be required to evaluate the project;



         (i)   Sidewalks and other access paths (required).
Minimum width of sidewalks is four feet.



         (j)   Where there are no public street lights, front
yard dusk to dawn lights are required on each individual lot.



   (H)   Village Center Planned Development (VCPD).  Applications and
plans shall follow the outlined steps for Planned Developments within Article
8 - Zoning Districts (herein §§ 159.105 - 159.109) and division (I) of this
section.



   (I)   Planned Developments.



      (1)   Contents of concept plan.



         (a)   Concept plan.  A plan for the development of land
brought by the applicant/petitioner to a pre-submittal meeting that shows in
general terms the proposed land use, circulation, natural characteristics,
and typical development of the area to be developed including the affected
adjacent properties and traffic. Maximum scale 1" = 60' and shall include:



            1.   The boundary of the property and its true
relationship to the right-of-way of the existing road(s) upon which it may
border.



            2.   Existing topography with contour intervals
not greater than five feet, giving bench marks together with drainage
channels, streams, springs, swamps, flood zones, rock outcrops, existing
buildings, wooded areas, or other features likely to affect the plan.  The
source and accuracy of the topographic details shown on the plan shall be in
terms of E.I.F.S. data and/or field survey.



            3.   A general layout of proposed streets, blocks,
and lots for the entire parcel under control of the developer.



            4.   Identification of any general area to be set
aside for schools, parks, or other community facilities.



      (2)   Preliminary development plan.



         (a)   Contents of plan.



            1.   Completion of preliminary development plan
application, filing fee, Technical Advisor Committee (TAC) fee and other
related fees.



            2.   Three sets full sized plans (minimum size 24"
by 36").  These are to be scaled drawings prepared by a land surveyor,
engineer, and/or architect.  Scale of drawings 1" = 20', 1" = 30' or 1" =
40'.  All sheets shall be numbered in sequence.  All construction drawings
shall include the name and address, telephone number, email address and
registration number of the professional engineer, architect, landscape
architect, and surveyor responsible for the design, public improvements, and
for surveys.



            3.   A CD or DVD containing all information shall
be filed in Portable Document Format (PDF), Version 7 or later at the time of
submittal. Each drawing shall be converted to a PDF as a separate document.
Do not file as one total document. Reference this chapter, Noblesville
Standards, and Stormwater Technical Standards for additional guidance and
requirements.



            4.   A site plan indicating the location and
configuration of the planned development including parcels, lot lines, uses,
building locations and recreational areas, vehicular access ways, pedestrian
ways (sidewalks/trails) (denote if trails are a part of the Noblesville
Alternative Transportation Plan), floodplains and wetlands (adopted community
and panel numbers of FIRMS, delineation and type of wetlands), and
watercourses by location and name including drainage swales.  All items
dimensioned.



            5.   The location, width, and type of use of any
existing roads, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-ways, burial grounds,
watercourses, easements or other special purpose areas within the property,
or immediately adjacent thereto, and the location of towers, poles, or other
structures in connection with electric transmission lines. Clearly identify
all easements and existing and proposed rights-of-way. Identify any woodland
areas. Identify any trees existing on the property greater than seven inches
in diameter by species, caliper, and condition, and any native vegetation.
All items dimensioned.



            6.   A landscaping plan drawn by a landscape
architect or a landscape contractor including company name, address,
telephone number and email address. Scale 1" = 20' or 1" = 30'. The plan
should include the location of trees, shrubs, and ground cover.
Identification of the plant species (botanical and common names), sizes at
the time of planting by caliper, height, and/or container size. Identify all
trees to be used as street trees on a separate plan including species,
caliper, and location and include on the overall plan. (Street trees shall be
approved by the Urban Forester).



            7.   The approximate location of any existing
underground utilities, such as sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil
transmission lines, etc., within the property or immediately adjacent
thereto, with approximate pipe size and directions of slope.



            8.   General indications of how the development is
to be provided with water service, sanitary sewers, and storm drainage, gas,
electricity, etc. Location, size, invert elevations, and slopes of existing
sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the
tract and existing permanent buildings and utility poles on the tract.



            9.   Parcel identification numbers as per Hamilton
County Tax Mapping to be included on plan.



            10.   Non-residential planned developments shall
include 360-degree color elevations for all buildings denoting materials
used, location of materials on building, percentage of different types of
materials on building, height, and colors.  (Provide two 24" by 36" drawings
(minimum size) and digital submission).



               A.   Include floor plans (provide two 24" by
36" drawings (minimum size)).



               B.   Include a materials board.  (Provide
one board) and digital version.



            11.   Lighting plan including type of fixtures
proposed with perspective or elevation drawings.  The lighting plan shall
denote the general locations.  Include cut-sheets for fixture types. 
Single sheet and digital submission.



            12.   Development summary table including gross
and net acreage for the entire project, open space area, building coverage,
floodplain and wetland areas, right-of-ways, and detention/retention areas.
These shall be indicated on the plans.



            13.   Grading plan. Topographic contours shown at
five foot intervals in rolling or hilly terrain and two foot intervals in
level terrain, as referenced to sea level datum and an established benchmark.



            14.   Soils map and data. Two copies of a
preliminary geological soils report prepared by a qualified soils geologist
registered in the State of Indiana addressing slope stability, ground water
seepage, erosion hazards, expansive soils, fault related hazards, and
conclusions and recommendations on the proposed soils regarding the
development.



            15.   Location map indicating the section,
township, and range.



            16.   Proposed zoning classification of all
property being developed and surrounding zoning classifications.



            17.   A vicinity map showing the location of the
parcel to be developed, identified by street, block, and adjacent
subdivisions (with block and lot numbers) as applicable, or in the case of
un-subdivided properties, location by township, range, and section (metes and
bounds). Include the names of the adjoining property owners of record, the
names of the adjoining developments, uses, and the names of adjoining
streets. Include school district lines and identify.



            18.   Name of proposed development.



         (b)   Supplemental information (single copy).



            1.   Legal description of property.



            2.   Legal description and recorded documents of
any existing easements and/or right-of-way dedications affecting the
property. If existing, indicate recorded instrument numbers on the plans.



            3.   A statement of the proposed uses for the
entire development and how it relates to the adopted Comprehensive Master
Plan.



            4.   A statement identifying any variations from
the underlying zoning district development standards, and §§ 159.075
through 159.087.  Include a justification for each standard that is proposed
to be varied.



            5.   Feasibility statements concerning the
infrastructure such as sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, electricity, etc.



            6.   A statement of the stages proposed for the
development indicating the sequence and phasing.



            7.   Proposed covenants.



            8.   Any bonds for improvements as may be required.



         (c)   Residential planned developments.



            1.   360-degree architectural elevations of all
proposed buildings including accessory buildings, clubhouses/pool structures,
and residential houses. Include heights, color names, and location of
materials on buildings.



            2.   Floor plans.



            3.   A sample materials board indicating colors,
and types of materials, and location of materials used.



            4.   Architectural Review Board application.



            5.   Seven paper sets of the elevations including
any deviations from the adopted standards for architectural review.  Include
the proposed and/or adopted standards.  The elevations and supporting
documentation may be submitted in a booklet form provided the drawings are to
a scale and scalable.  A digital submission of all elevations, plans and
documentation is required.



      (3)   Detailed development plan.



         (a)   Contents of plan.



            1.   Completion of detailed development plan
application, filing fee, TAC application and TAC fee.  Filing deadlines are
as per the adopted Schedule of Meeting Dates and Filing Deadlines.  All
plans shall be clearly readable.  All drawings shall include graphic scale,
north arrow, date, and revision(s) dates as per reason for the revisions and
by whom.



            2.   Three sets full sized plans (minimum size 24"
by 36").  These are to be scaled drawings prepared by a land surveyor,
engineer, and/or architect.  Scale of drawings 1" = 20', 1" = 30' or 1" =
40'.  All sheets shall be numbered in sequence.  All construction drawings
shall include the name and address, telephone number, email address and
registration number of the professional engineer, architect, landscape
architect, and surveyor responsible for the design, public improvements, and
for surveys.  If the area is part of the Corporate Campus Planned
Development District, Federal Hill Planned Development District, and/or
Village Center Planned Development District or a phase of an overall detailed
development plan, include all information pertinent to the development of the
individual parcel.



            3.   A CD or a DVD containing all information in
Portable Document Format (PDF), Version 7 or later is required at the time of
filing.  Each drawing submission, e.g., construction plans, landscaping
plans, architectural plans, etc., shall be converted to a PDF as a separate
document.  Do not file all drawings as one total document.  Civil
drawings/construction drawings for the overall development are required. 
Reference this chapter, Noblesville Standards, and Stormwater Technical
Standards for additional guidance and requirements.



            4.   A development plan indicating all uses,
parcels, lot lines, building location pads, recreational areas, vehicular
access ways, pedestrian ways (sidewalks/trails) (denote if it is part of the
Noblesville Alternative Transportation Plan), floodplains and wetlands
(adopted community and panel numbers of FIRMS, delineation and type of
wetlands), and watercourses by location and name including drainage swales. 
All items dimensioned.



            5.   The location, width, and type of use of any
existing roads, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-ways, burial grounds,
watercourses, easements or other special purpose areas within the property,
or immediately adjacent thereto, and the location of towers, poles, or other
structures in connection with electric transmission lines. Clearly identify
all easements and existing and proposed rights-of-way. Identify any woodland
areas. Identify any trees existing on the property greater than seven inches
in diameter by species, caliper, and condition, and any native vegetation.
All items dimensioned.



            6.   A landscaping plan drawn by a landscape
architect or a landscape contractor including company name, address,
telephone number and email address. Scale 1" = 20' or 1" = 30'. The plan
should include the location of trees, shrubs, and ground cover.
Identification of the plant species (botanical and common names), sizes at
the time of planting by caliper, height, and/or container size. Identify all
trees to be used as street trees on a separate plan including species,
caliper, and location and include on the overall plan.  (Street trees shall
be approved by the Urban Forester).



            7.   The location of any existing underground
utilities, such as sewers, water mains, storm drains, gas or oil transmission
lines, etc., within the property or immediately adjacent thereto, with
approximate pipe size and directions of slope.



            8.   Parcel identification numbers as per Hamilton
County Tax Mapping to be included on plan.



            9.   Non-residential planned developments shall
include 360-degree color elevations for all buildings denoting materials
used, location of materials on building, percentage of different types of
materials on building, height, and colors.  [Provide two 24" by 36" drawings
(minimum size)] and digital submission.



               A.   Include floor plans.  Provide two 24"
by 36" drawings (minimum size).



               B.   Include a materials board.  (Provide
one board.)



            10.   Lighting plan including type of fixtures
proposed including perspective or elevation drawings.  The lighting plan and
digital submission shall denote the locations providing a photometric plan of
the foot-candles to the property lines.



            11.   Development summary table including gross
and net acreage for the entire project, open space area, building coverage,
floodplain and wetland areas, right-of-ways, and detention/retention areas.
Indicate locations of the above on the plans.



            12.   Grading plan. Topographic contours shown at
five foot intervals in rolling or hilly terrain and two foot intervals in
level terrain, as referenced to sea level datum and an established benchmark.



            13.   Location map indicating the section,
township, and range.



            14.   A vicinity map showing the location of the
parcel to be developed, identified by streets, block, and adjacent
subdivisions (with block and lot numbers) as applicable, or in the case of
un-subdivided properties, location by township, range, and section (metes and
bounds). Include the names of the adjoining developments, uses, and the names
of adjoining streets.



            15.   Name of development.



         (b)   Supplemental information.



            1.   Legal description of property (single copy).



            2.   Drainage reports (three copies).



            3.   Final draft of covenants (single copy).



            4.   Post Water Quality (BMP) report (three
copies).



         (c)   Additional information (when applicable).



            1.   Completion of secondary plat, application and
filing fee.  Filing deadlines are as per the adopted Schedule of Meeting
Dates and Filing Deadlines.  All plans shall be clearly readable.  All
drawings shall include graphic scale, north arrow, and date.



The secondary plat map shall show the following:



            2.   The dimensions of all boundary lines of the
property expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot; the bearings of all
lines to a minimum of one-half minute.



            3.   The location, width or size of existing
streets, easements, water bodies, and other pertinent features such as
swamps, railroad, building, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges and
culverts, as determined by the Plan Commission.



            4.   The location and width of all proposed
streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways, and proposed street
rights-of-way and building setback lines.



            5.   The locations, dimensions, and areas of all
proposed or existing lots including dimensions of all lot lines expressed in
feet and hundredths of a foot; and bearings of all lines to a minimum of
one-half minute.



            6.   The location and dimensions of all property
proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or
private reservation, with designation of the proposed thereof, and
conditions, if any, of dedication or reservation.



            7.   The name and address of the owner of land to
be subdivided; the name and address of the subdivider, if other than the
owner; and the name and address of the land surveyor or engineer. Also
citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property
involved, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land record reference.



            8.   Sufficient data acceptable to the engineer of
appropriate jurisdiction to determine readily the location, bearing, and
length of lines for reproduction of such lines upon the ground.



            9.   The location of all proposed and existing
monuments.



            10.   Name of the subdivision.



            11.   Lots shall be consecutively numbered, and
blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order.



            12.   The plat should include the following
notations (when necessary):



               A.   Explanation of drainage easements;



               B.   Explanation of site easements;



               C.   Explanation of reservations;



               D.   Endorsement of owner with date and
signature.



            13.   Signature blocks for the Plan Commission,
Board of Public Works, or County Commissioners, and the Director of Planning
and Development.



            14.   One Mylar and one paper copy.  Owner(s) and
surveyor shall sign prior to submission on Mylar.  Mylar not required until
all Technical Advisory Committee comments have been satisfactorily addressed
and notification by the Planning Department to submit the Mylar has been
requested.



            15.   Posting of bonds accepted by the Engineering
Department required prior to placement on the Board of Public Works agenda. 
All required County Government signatures shall be obtain prior to submission
to the Board of Public Works.



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 49-10-14, passed 10-28-14; Am. Ord.
25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



§ 2.  FORMS.




PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN CHECKLIST




A PRE-FILING MEETING is required prior to submittal of documentation. Contact
the Department of Planning and Development, 14701 Cumberland Road, Suite 300,
Noblesville, IN 46060, 317-776-6325.



Complete the list below and submit it along with the application, filing fee
and other required documentation by the deadline.



FAILURE TO SUBMIT ALL THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW ON OR BEFORE THE FILING DEADLINE
WILL RESULT IN THE APPLICATION NOT BEING DOCKETED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
AGENDA. STAFF WILL REVIEW THE TOTAL SUBMISSION WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS AFTER
SUBMITTAL AND NOTIFY THE APPLICANT OF THE NOTICE TO PROCEED WITH THE
APPLICATION'S HEARING DATE.



Two (2) complete copies of proposed plans must be submitted with application.



APPLICANT      STAFF



_____      _____   1.   Completed application including notarized
signatures of owner(s) and applicant(s)



_____      _____   2.   A check in the amount of $700 plus $25
per acre (MAXIMUM FEE: $5,000)



_____      _____   3.   A separate check in the amount of $50 as
surety for sign placement on property



_____      _____   4.   Attach legal description of the property
involved in the planned development



_____      _____   5.   Sketch plan showing the location of
planned development, ownership, use, and zoning of adjacent properties



_____      _____   6.   Site plans indicating proposed streets,
all buildings with their yards and use, common open space, recreational
facilities, parking areas, buffer areas, service areas and other facilities
that indicate the CHARACTER of the planned development (Minimum size: 24" by
36")



_____      _____   7.   Preliminary development plans and
feasibility statements for (1) roads including the classification, right of
way widths, pavement widths, (2) sidewalks or pathways (3) sanitary sewers;
(4) storm drainage; (5) water supply system; (6) street lighting; (7) any
proposed signage; and (8) other public utilities (Minimum size: 24" by 36")



_____      _____   8.   Landscape Concept Plan showing the
landscape intent, types of plant materials to be provided, intensity and
scale of landscape with site details to fully explain the concept



_____      _____   9.   General Information on all service
facilities, driveways, private streets, paths and ofd street parking
facilities



_____      _____   10.   Statement listing the exceptions from
the requirements of the base zone and reasons for the zoning change
explaining why the existing zoning would not accommodate the proposed
development



_____      _____   11.   Explanation of the proposed Planned
Development including how the proposed Planned Development meets the
objectives of all adopted land use policies



_____      _____   12.   Statement of present and proposed
ownership of all land within the project



_____      _____   13.   Development schedule Indicating the
stages in which the project will be constructed.  Emphasizing the area,
density, use and public facilities to be developed with each stage and
approximate time line



_____      _____   14.   Proposed ordinance and covenants of the
Planned Development District



ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION MAY BE REQUIRED PRIOR TO THE PLAN COMMISSION MEETING



ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS



_____      _____   14 SETS OF PLANS MUST BE SUBMITTED FOR REVIEW BY
THE TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE



RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS



_____      _____   ARCHITECTURAL PLANS FOR ALL PROPOSED DWELLINGS
AND OTHER BUILDINGS INDICATING 360-DEGREE BUILDING ELEVATIONS WITH SUFFICIENT
DETAIL TO UNDERSTAND THE STYLE AND DESIGN OF ALL BUILDINGS INDCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO THE NUMBER, SIZE, AND TYPE OF DWELLING UNITS. A NARRATIVE MAY BE
ATTACHED TO DESCRIBE ANY COMMITMENTS FOR THE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN. EIGHT (8)
SETS ARE TO BE SUBMITTED ON PAPER NO LARGER THAN 11" BY 17"



NON-RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS



_____      _____   A COMPLETE SET OF 360-DEGREE COLOR BUILDING
ELEVATIONS FOR EACH PROPOSED STRUCTURE IN SUFFICIENT DETAIL TO DETERMINE THE
MATERIALS USED, COLORS, AND OTHER BUILDING ELEMENTS ARE PROPOSED. LEGEND
DETAILING MATERIALS/COLORS. TWO (2) SETS ON 11" BY 17" PAPER




PRELIMINARY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT APPLICATION




APPLICATION # _______________________   FILING DATE ___________



THIS APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED AND ACCOMPANIED BY THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION (SEE ATTACHED LIST). IT MUST BE FILED AT LEAST 42 DAYS PRIOR TO
THE PLAN COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING DATE BY THE LEGAL OWNERS OF FIFTY PERCENT
(50%) OR MORE OF THE REAL ESTATE INVOLVED IN THIS PETITION. THE UNDERSIGNED
OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY HEREBY REQUESTS THE CONSIDERATION OF A CHANGE OF
ZONING TO A PRELIMINARY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



APPLICANT'S NAME _______________   TELEPHONE # ____________________



APPLICANTS ADDRESS ________________________________________________



PROPERTY OWNER'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # __________



PROPERTY OWNER'S MAILING ADDRESS __________________________________



ATTORNEY'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE #________________



ARCHITECT'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________



ENGINEER'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________



SURVEYOR'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________



EXISTING      PRESENT ZONE      PROPOSED ZONE
USE __________   DISTRICT __________   DISTRICT ______________



16-DIGIT PARCEL ID #(s) ___________________________________________



PROPOSED NAME OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ______________________________



The undersigned, having been duly sworn, upon oath says that above
information is true and correct as he/she is informed and believes.



______________________________      ___________________________



Signature of Applicant            Signature of Owner***



______________________________      ___________________________



Printed or Typewritten Name         Printed or Typewritten Name



Subscribed and sworn to before me,      Subscribed and sworn to before
this ____ day of _______, 200__      me, this ____ day of _______, 200__



______________________________      ___________________________
Notary Public                  Notary Public



______________________________      ___________________________
Printed/Typewritten Name            Printed/typewritten Name



My Commission expires ______         My Commission expires _____



***If the owner is not available to sign the application, a notarized
statement acknowledging that the owner is aware of the Planned Development
proceedings is required.




DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN CHECKLIST




Department of Planning and Development, 14701 Cumberland Road, Suite 300,
Noblesville, IN 46060 317-776-6325



Complete the list below and submit it along with the application, filing fee
and other required documentation by the deadline.



FAILURE TO SUBMIT ALL THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW ON OR BEFORE THE FILING DEADLINE
WILL RESULT IN THE APPLICATION NOT BEING DOCKETED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
AGENDA. STAFF WILL REVIEW THE TOTAL SUBMISSION.



APPLICANT      STAFF



_____      _____   1.   Completed application including notarized
signatures of owner(s) and applicant(s)



_____      _____   2.   A check in the amount of $250 plus $20
per acre (MAXIMUM FEE: $5,000)



_____      _____   3.   A survey of the entire area with accurate
legal descriptions for both all subdivided lands and un-subdivided lands



_____      _____   4.   A Secondary Plat for (name of
subdivision) then followed by the words "A detailed development plan"



_____      _____   5.   Final Detailed Site Plan designating the
following:



               a.   the land divided into conventional
lots, open space areas, and building areas
               b.   infrastructure improvements Including
construction details
               c.   detailed landscaping plan induding
common and botanical names, sizes at the time of installation as well as at
maturity, quantities of plants
               d.   permanent signage, lighting, and street
fixtures
               e.   any additional information as may have
been required by the Plan Commission or Common Council



_____      _____   6.   Certifications, seals, and signatures
requirement for the dedication of land and the recording of the document as
required by the Unified Development Ordinance



_____      _____   7.   Tabulations on each separate subdivided
use area, including land area, number of buildings and number of dwelling
units per acre



_____      _____   8.   Common Open Space Documents
               a.   conveyed to a municipal or public
corporation
               b.   conveyed to a not-for-profit
corporation or entity established for the purposes of benefiting the owners
and tenants of the Planned Development or adjoining property owners
               c.   guarantee by restrictive covenants
describing the open space and its maintenance and improvements



_____      _____   9.   IMPROVEMENTS - A guarantee of
performance. The owner or developer shall guarantee the completion of all
required improvements and facilities by either completing the improvements
and having them accepted by the City Engineer in advance of the Detailed Plan
Approval or submitted an -irrevocable letter of credit or other surety deemed
sufficient by the City Engineer in an amount equal to a minimum of 125% of
the construction cost estimate



_____      _____   10.   Construction schedule



_____      _____   11.   Proposed deed restrictions and or
covenants of the subdivision



_____      _____   12.   Fourteen (14) sets of plans must be
submitted for review by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)



ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION MAY BE REQUIRED




DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION





Department of Planning and Development




APPLICATION # _______________________   FILING DATE ___________



THIS APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED AND ACCOMPANIED BY THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION (SEE ATTACHED LIST).  IT MUST BE FILED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
FILING DEADLINES.  THE UNDERSIGNED OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY HEREBY REQUEST
THE CONSIDERATION OF A DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



APPLICANT'S NAME _______________   TELEPHONE # ____________________



APPLICANT'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________



PROPERTY OWNER'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # __________



PROPERTY OWNER'S MAILING ADDRESS __________________________________



ATTORNEY'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE #________________



ARCHITECT'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________



ADDRESS ___________________________________________________________



ENGINEER'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________



ADDRESS ___________________________________________________________



EXISTING ZONING DISTRICT ____________   TOTAL ACREAGE _____________



16-DIGIT PARCEL ID #(s) ___________________________________________



NAME OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT AND SECTION ___________________________



MILES OF NEW STREETS DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE _____________________



ACREAGE FOR OPEN SPACE ______________   DENSITY PER ACRE __________



The undersigned, having been duly sworn, upon oath says that above
information is true and correct as he/she is informed and believes.



______________________________      ___________________________
Signature of Applicant            Signature of Owner***



______________________________      ___________________________
Printed or Typewritten Name         Printed or Typewritten Name




Subscribed and sworn to before me,      Subscribed and sworn to before
this ____ day of _______, 200__      me, this ____ day of _______, 
200__



______________________________      ___________________________
Notary Public                  Notary Public



______________________________      ___________________________
Printed/Typewritten Name            Printed/typewritten Name



My Commission expires ______         My Commission expires _____



***If the owner is not available to sign the application, a notarized
statement acknowledging that the owner is aware of the Planned Development
proceedings is required.




A CHANGE OF ZONING CHECKLIST




A PRE-FILING MEETING is required prior to submittal of documentation. Contact
the Department of Planning and Development, 14701 Cumberland Road, Suite 300,
Noblesville, IN 46060, 317-776-6325.



Complete the list below and submit it along with the application, filing fee
and other required documentation by the deadline.



FAILURE TO SUBMIT ALL THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW ON OR BEFORE THE FILING DEADLINE
WILL RESULT IN THE APPLICATION NOT BEING DOCKETED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
AGENDA. STAFF WILL REVIEW THE TOTAL SUBMISSION AND NOTIFY THE APPLICANT OF
THE NOTICE TO PROCEED WITH THE APPLICATION'S HEARING DATE.



APPLICANT      STAFF



_____      _____   1.   Completed application including notarized
signatures of owner(s) and applicant(s)



_____      _____   2.   A check in the amount of $550 plus $20
per acre (MAXIMUM FEE: $5,000)



_____      _____   3.   A separate check in the amount of $50 as
surety for the sign placement



_____      _____   4.   The proposed change of zoning amendment
submitted in ordinance form (three originals unbound)



_____      _____   5.   A statement of how the proposed change of
zoning relates to the adopted Comprehensive Master Plan for the City of
Noblesville's zoning jurisdiction



_____      _____   6.   A vicinity map showing the location of
the property including parcel lines, all existing improvements, proposed
improvements, and existing zoning districts within one-quarter mile of the
area for the zone map change



ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION MAY BE REQUIRED




A CHANGE OF ZONING APPLICATION
(ZONE MAP AMENDMENT)
Department of Planning and Development




 



APPLICATION # _______________________   FILING DATE ___________




THIS APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED AND ACCOMPANIED BY THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION (SEE ATTACHED LIST). IT MUST BE FILED AT LEAST 42 DAYS PRIOR TO
THE PLAN COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING DATE BY THE LEGAL OWNERS OF FIFTY PERCENT
(50%) OR MORE OF THE REAL ESTATE INVOLVED IN THIS PETITION. THE UNDERSIGNED
OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY HEREBY REQUEST THE CONSIDERATION OF A CHANGE OF
ZONING.




APPLICANT'S NAME _______________   TELEPHONE # ____________________




APPLICANT'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________




PROPERTY OWNER'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # __________




PROPERTY OWNER'S MAILING ADDRESS __________________________________




ATTORNEY'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE #________________




ADDRESS ___________________________________________________________




TOWNSHIP NAME _______________   SECTION ____   TWP _____ RANGE ____




16-DIGIT PARCEL ID #(s) ___________________________________________




EXISTING      PRESENT ZONE      PROPOSED ZONE
USE __________   DISTRICT __________   DISTRICT ______________




ATTACHED LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY FOR THE CHANGE OF ZONING.




The undersigned, having been duly sworn, upon oath says that above
information is true and correct as he/she is informed and believes.




______________________________      ___________________________
Signature of Applicant            Signature of Owner***




______________________________      ___________________________
Printed or Typewritten Name         Printed or Typewritten Name




Subscribed and sworn to before me,      Subscribed and sworn to before
this ____ day of _______, 200__      me, this ____ day of _______, 200__





______________________________      ___________________________
Notary Public                  Notary Public




______________________________      ___________________________
Printed/Typewritten Name            Printed/typewritten Name




My Commission expires ______         My Commission expires _____





***If the owner is not available to sign the application, a notarized
statement acknowledging that the owner is aware of the change of zoning (zone
map amendment) proceedings is required.





PRIMARY PLAT CHECKLIST




A PRE-FILING MEETING is required prior to submittal of documentation. Contact
the Department of Planning and Development, 14701 Cumberland Road, Suite 300,
Noblesville, IN 46060, 317-776-6325.




Complete the list below and submit it along with the application, filing fee
and other required documentation by the deadline.




FAILURE TO SUBMIT ALL THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW ON OR BEFORE THE FILING DEADLINE
WILL RESULT IN THE APPLICATION NOT BEING DOCKETED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
AGENDA. STAFF WILL REVIEW THE TOTAL SUBMISSION WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS AFTER
SUBMITTAL AND NOTIFY THE APPLICANT OF THE NOTICE TO PROCEED WITH THE
APPLICATION'S HEARING DATE.




Two (2) complete copies of proposed plans must be submitted with application.




APPLICANT      STAFF




_____      _____   1.   Completed application including notarized
signatures of owner(s) and applicant(s)




_____      _____   2.   A check in the amount of $500 plus $10
per lot (MAXIMUM FEE: $5,000)




_____      _____   3.   A separate check in the amount of $50 as
surety for sign placement on property




_____      _____   4.   Attach legal description of the property




_____      _____   5.   Sheet size not to exceed 24" by 36";
scale 1"= 50'; north arrow and date




_____      _____   6.   Sketch plan showing the location,
ownership, use, zoning of adjacent properties and property to be subdivided




_____      _____   7.   Vicinity Map indicating the location of
property in relation to highways, county roads, legal drains, flood hazard
areas, and other physical features in the area




_____      _____   8.   Location, width, names, dimensions of
existing and proposed streets; including rights-of-way and dedications; and
easements, drainage ways, etc.




_____      _____   9.   Landscape Concept Plan showing the
landscape intent, types of plant materials to be provided, intensity and
scale of landscape with site details to fully explain the concept




_____      _____   10.   Location and dimensions of existing
parts, buildings, and open spaces




_____      _____   11.   Location of existing utilities including
sewers, water lines, communication lines and poles




_____      _____   12.   Contours at vertical intervals of two
(2) feet or less, if the general slope of the site is less than 10%. At
vertical intervals of five (5) feet or less, if the general slope of the land
is 10% or greater




_____      _____   13.   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions,
bearings, angles, and references to corporation, section, township, and range
lines




_____      _____   14.   The layout of lots showing dimensions,
square footage of each lot, yard setbacks of building setback lines,
distances, radii and chords




_____      _____   15.   Preliminary plans and feasibility
statements for (1) roads including the classification, right of way widths,
pavement widths; (2) sidewalks or pathways; (3) sanitary sewers; (4) storm
drainage; (5) water supply system; (6) street lighting; (7) any proposed
signage for identification of subdivision; (8) flood hazard areas; and (9)
other public utilities




_____      _____   16.   Provide drawing indicating the proposed
sanitary sewers with connections to main sewer system, lift stations, and
other appurtenances, if any. If private sewage system provide a drawing
locating the system in relation to a well, residential structure and adjacent
lot systems. Private sewage systems shall be installed according to the
Hamilton County Health Department standards




_____      _____   17.   A statement of the proposed use of the
lots, stating the type of housing (single-family, two-family, multi-family)
with number of proposed units. If it is a commercial or industrial plat,
identify type of use so as to reveal the affect of the development on
traffic, fire hazards, or congestion of population




_____      _____   18.   Proposed covenants and restrictions of
subdivision




_____      _____   19.   Fourteen (14) sets of plans must be
submitted for review by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)




ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION MAY BE REQUIRED PRIOR TO THE PLAN COMMISSION MEETING





PRIMARY PLAT APPLICATION
Department of Planning and Development




APPLICATION # _______________________   FILING DATE ___________




THIS APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED AND ACCOMPANIED BY THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION (SEE ATTACHED LIST). IT MUST BE FILED AT LEAST 42 DAYS PRIOR TO
THE PLAN COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING DATE BY THE LEGAL OWNERS OF FIFTY PERCENT
(50%) OR MORE OF THE REAL ESTATE INVOLVED IN THIS PETITION. THE UNDERSIGNED
OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY HEREBY REQUEST THE CONSIDERATION OF A PRIMARY PLAT.




APPLICANT'S NAME _______________   TELEPHONE # ____________________




APPLICANT'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________




PROPERTY OWNER'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # __________




PROPERTY OWNER'S MAILING ADDRESS __________________________________




ATTORNEY'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________




ENGINEER'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________




SURVEYOR'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________




TOWNSHIP NAME _______________   SECTION ____   TWP _____ RANGE ______




DIMENSIONS OF SUBDIVISION ________________   TOTAL ACREAGE ________




16-DIGIT PARCEL ID #(s) ___________________________________________




PROPOSED NAME FOR PRIMARY PLAT ____________________________________




The undersigned, having been duly sworn, upon oath says that above
information is true and correct as he/she is informed and believes.




______________________________      ___________________________
Signature of Applicant            Signature of Owner***




______________________________      ___________________________
Printed or Typewritten Name         Printed or Typewritten Name





Subscribed and sworn to before me,      Subscribed and sworn to before
this ____ day of _______, 200__      me, this ____ day of _______,
                        200__




______________________________      ___________________________
Notary Public                  Notary Public




______________________________      ___________________________
Printed/Typewritten Name            Printed/typewritten Name




My Commission expires ______         My Commission expires _____





***If the owner is not available to sign the application, a notarized
statement acknowledging that the owner is aware of the Primary Plat
proceedings is required.





SECONDARY PLAT CHECKLIST




Department of Planning and Development, 14701 Cumberland Road, Suite 300,
Noblesville, IN 46060, 317-776-6325



Complete the list below and submit it along with the application, filing fee
and other required documentation by the deadline.



FAILURE TO SUBMIT ALL THE ITEMS LISTED BELOW ON OR BEFORE THE FILING DEADLINE
WILL RESULT IN THE APPLICATION NOT BEING DOCKETED ON THE PLAN COMMISSION
AGENDA.




APPLICANT      STAFF




_____      _____   1.   Completed application including notarized
signatures of owner(s) and applicant(s)




_____      _____   2.   A check In the amount of $250 plus $10
per lot (MAXIMUM FEE: $5,000)




_____      _____   3.   Name of subdivision followed by the words
"Secondary Plat"




_____      _____   4.   Scale 1"= 50'; north arrow and date




_____      _____   5.   The secondary plat should have
incorporated all modifications required by the Plan Commission or members of
the Technical Advisory Committee; otherwise it shall conform to the primary
plat and may constitute only that portion of the overall approved primary
plat which the sub-divider proposes to record and develop at this time,
provided that such portion conforms to the Unified Development Ordinance and
meets the approval of the Plan Commission




_____      _____   6.   Accurate boundary lines with dimensions
and angles, which provide a survey of the tract of land and closing with an
error of not more than one foot in five thousand feet




_____      _____   7.   Accurate dimensions of easements for
utilities and any limitations on such easements




_____      _____   8.   Accurate dimensions of any property to be
dedicated or reserved for public, semi-public or community use




_____      _____   9.   Lot numbers and dimensions




_____      _____   10.   Building setback lines and dimensions




_____      _____   11.   Location of, type, material of monuments
shall meet the Noblesville Standards or those of the County depending on
jurisdiction




_____      _____   12.   Plans and specifications for all public
improvements required in the Unified Development Ordinance as well as any
other applicable standards




_____      _____   13.   Restrictions of all types which will run
with the land and become covenants in the deeds to the lots




_____      _____   14.   Profiles, typical cross-sections,
locations, specifications and other explanatory data for the installation of
sanitary and storm sewers or private well and septic systems, roads, and
water distribution




_____      _____   15.   Certification seals and signatures as
required for the dedication of land and recording of the plat as set forth in
the Unified Development Ordinance, Noblesville Standards or as required by
the County as per jurisdiction




_____      _____   16.   A certified statement by a registered
professional engineer or as required by the City Engineer as to the estimated
cost for all public improvements




_____      _____   17.   Three (3) copies on reproducible mylar
or KC5 no larger than 15.5" by 17" for recording purposes




_____      _____   18.   Fourteen (14) sets of construction plans
must be submitted for review by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)




ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTATION MAY BE REQUIRED





SECONDARY PLAT APPLICATION
Department of Planning and Development




APPLICATION # _______________________   FILING DATE ___________



THIS APPLICATION MUST BE COMPLETED AND ACCOMPANIED BY THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION (SEE ATTACHED LIST). IT MUST BE FILED AT LEAST 42 DAYS PRIOR TO
THE PLAN COMMISSION PUBLIC HEARING DATE BY THE LEGAL OWNERS OF FIFTY PERCENT
(50%) OR MORE OF THE REAL ESTATE INVOLVED IN THIS PETITION. THE UNDERSIGNED
OWNER(S) OF THE PROPERTY HEREBY REQUEST THE CONSIDERATION OF A SECONDARY PLAT.



APPLICANT'S NAME _______________   TELEPHONE # ____________________




APPLICANT'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________




PROPERTY OWNER'S NAME ____________________   TELEPHONE # __________




PROPERTY OWNER'S MAILING ADDRESS __________________________________




ENGINEER'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________




ENGINEER'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________




SURVEYOR'S NAME _____________________   TELEPHONE # _______________




SURVEYOR'S ADDRESS ________________________________________________




TOWNSHIP NAME _______________   SECTION ____   TWP _____ RANGE ______




DIMENSIONS OF SUBDIVISION ________________   TOTAL ACREAGE ________




16-DIGIT PARCEL ID #(s) ___________________________________________




SECONDARY PLAT NAME AND SECTION ___________________________________




MILES OF NEW STREETS TO BE DEDICATED FOR PUBLIC USE _______________




The undersigned, having been duly sworn, upon oath says that above
information is true and correct as he/she is informed and believes.




______________________________      ___________________________
Signature of Applicant            Signature of Owner***



______________________________      ___________________________
Printed or Typewritten Name         Printed or Typewritten Name




Subscribed and sworn to before me,      Subscribed and sworn to before
this ____ day of _______, 200__      me, this ____ day of _______, 200__



______________________________      ___________________________
Notary Public                  Notary Public



______________________________      ___________________________
Printed/Typewritten Name            Printed/typewritten Name



My Commission expires ______         My Commission expires _____



***If the owner is not available to sign the application, a notarized
statement acknowledging that the owner is aware of the Secondary Plat
proceedings is required.



(Ord. 04-01-03, passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



APPENDIX C: OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES



Note: This table is best viewed in PDF. Click APPENDIX C: SCHEDULE to view in
PDF.



 

Official Schedule of Uses


P=Permitted

C=Conditional

A=Accessory

=Prohibited
 

Residential

 
Commercial
 
Industrial
 
Flood Hazard


TYPE OF USE
 

SR

 

R-1

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

R-5

 

RM H

 

L B

 

G B

 

D T

 

P B

 

I-1

 

I-2

 

I-3

 

FH






RESIDENTIAL USES
*Permitted in area indicated in Appendix G



Accessory dwelling unit
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Bed & breakfast establishment
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 




Board or lodging house
 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 




Downtown mixed-use residential
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 




Dwelling, single-family detached
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P*

 


 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 




Dwelling, two-family
 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dwelling, multi-family of 3 or more dwelling units
 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Home occupation
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Manufactured homes, individual
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Mobile home parks/subdivisions
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Nursing/retirement/convalesce nt facility
 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 


 

C

 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Residential care homes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Temporary shelters
 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 




Townhouse
 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

C

 


 


 


 


 




EDUCATIONAL USES


Care centers, child & adult care services
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Colleges and universities
 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 




Montessori schools
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Preschool/nursery school
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

A

 


 


 




Schools, (business and trade)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Schools, (primary and secondary)
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 




INSTITUTIONAL USES


Church, temple, place of worship
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Fire and/or police station
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Government office
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Hospital
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 


 


 




Library
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Penal or correctional facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Post office
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Public service facility
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 




CULTURAL/ENTERTAINMENT USES


Amphitheater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 


 


 




Campground
 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C



Club or lodge (private)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Clubhouse (accessory to a residential development)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Drive-in theater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Fairgrounds
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 


 




Gallery and/or museum
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Hotel or motel
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Indoor cinema or theater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Meeting or party hall
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Stadium or arena
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 




MISCELLANEOUS USES


Cemetery
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Parking garage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 




TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION USES


Airport
 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 




Bus or rail passenger terminal
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 




Helipad or heliport
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 




Marina
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C



Parking as a primary use (private or public)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 




Wireless telecommunication service facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 




SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS (Subject to buffers from protected areas)


Adult cabaret
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Adult media store
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Adult motion picture theater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Lingerie modeling studio
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Massage studio
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Nude model studio
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Sex shop
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Video viewing or arcade booth
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




RECREATIONAL USES


Amusements (outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 

C

 


 


 


 




Commercial recreation (indoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Commercial recreation (outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Disc golf courses
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Driving range (primary use)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 

C

 

P

 


 


 




Golf courses
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Health/fitness facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Public parks and playgrounds
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Sports parks (outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Shooting gallery (indoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 


 




COMMERCIAL/RETAIL/SERVICE USES


Animal hospitals & veterinarian offices (with commercial kennels)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

P

 


 




Animal hospitals & veterinarian offices (without commercial kennels)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Ambulance service
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

C

 

P

 


 




Automated teller machine (ATM) (stand alone structure)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Automobile fuel station
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

C

 

P

 


 


 


 




Automobile rental
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Automobile repair/body shop
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Automobile sales including service and storage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Automobile service and repair (indoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 


 




Bar, tavern, lounge, night club or brewpub
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Car washes
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

A

 

P

 

A

 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Commercial kennel
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

C

 

P

 


 




Drinking place
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Financial, insurance & real estate services
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Laundry/dry cleaners with on- site plant
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Laundry/dry cleaners without on-site plant
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Manufactured home/recreational vehicle/mobile home sales
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 




Marine craft sales, repair, and service
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 


 




Mortuary or funeral home
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

P

 


 


 


 




Offices
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Office & clinics of physicians, dentists, or other health care practitioners
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Outdoor sales and/or display
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Personal care establishment
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Professional and technical services
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

A

 


 


 




Restaurant (with drive-thru)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Restaurant (without drive-thru)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Restaurant drive-in or drive- thru (as a primary use)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 


 




Retail nursery or greenhouse
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

C

 


 


 




Retail sales
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

A

 


 


 




INDUSTRIAL USES


Assembly of finished goods
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Automobile impound lot
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 


 




Beverage bottling
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Borrow pit/top soil removal and storage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 




Chemical processing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 




Confined feeding operation
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 




Contractor’s office with outdoor equipment and material storage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Distribution facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Equipment repair and service (indoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 




Food production, except animal processing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Grain elevator
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 




Junk and/or salvage yard
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 




Laboratory
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Machinery and equipment repair
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Manufacturing (general)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 


 




Manufacturing (light)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Mineral/sand/gravel extraction
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 




Nursery/greenhouse for production purposes ONLY
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Packaging of finished goods
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Petrochemical facilities
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 




Printing and publishing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 




Recycling center
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 




Research facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 




Sanitary landfill
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Stone processing activities
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 




Supply yard
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 




Towing and recovery yard
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 




Training facility
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

P

 


 




Truck terminal
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 




Warehousing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 




Warehousing, mini-storage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 


 

C

 

C

 


 


 




Wholesale trade (indoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

C

 

C

 

C

 

P

 

P

 


 




Wholesale trade (outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 




AGRICULTURAL USES
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P





 



(Ord. 62-12-95, passed 1-22-96; Am. Ord. 5-2-97, passed 3-10-97; Am. Ord.
15-3-00, passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. 21-4-00, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 04-01-03,
passed 2-11-03; Am. Ord. 33-6-04, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 57-9-04, passed
9-28-04; Am. Ord. 64-11-08, passed 12-9-08; Am. Ord. 23-06-10, passed
7-13-10; Am. Ord. 24-7-10, passed 8-10-10; Am. Ord. 18-5-11, passed 6-14-11;
Am. Ord. 29-9-11, passed 10-11-11; Am. Ord. 31-09-13, passed 9-24-13; Am.
Ord. 17-04-14, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 48-10-14, passed 11-10-14; Am. Ord.
25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 53-10-15, passed 11-10-15; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



 

Official Schedule of Uses
Corporate Campus Planned Development District
P=Permitted
SC=Special Consideration
A=Accessory
=Prohibited


TYPE OF USES
 
Single Family
 
Multi- Family
 
Office
 
Office/ Flex Uses
 
Comm.
 
Comm./ Office
 
Indust./ Office
 
Community
 
Regional Rec. & Enter- tainment
 
Agricultural/ I-O




RESIDENTIAL USES


Accessory dwelling unit
 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dwellings, single family detached
 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dwellings, two-family
 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dwellings, multi-family of 3 or more dwelling units
 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Dwelling units located on 2nd floor or above on non- residential buildings
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Garages, community
 


 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Garages, private
 

A

 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Home occupations
 

A

 

A

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Manufactured homes, individual (double section)
 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Manufactured home parks or subdivisions (double section)
 

SC

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Mobile homes
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL USES


Animal hospitals and veterinarian's offices
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 




Fire and police stations
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Government offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Hospitals
 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 

P

 


 


 

P

 




Library
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Mortuary or funeral home
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Offices
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

SC

 

SC

 

SC



Offices and clinics of medical doctors, physicians, dentists or other health
care practitioners
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

SC

 




Post office
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

p

 

P

 

P



EDUCATIONAL USES


Nursery school/preschool
 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

A

 

P

 


 

A



Schools, primary and secondary
 

SC

 

SC

 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 




Colleges and universities
 

SC

 

SC

 


 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 


 

SC

 


 




Schools, business and trade
 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 


 

SC

 


 




MISCELLANEOUS USES


Cemetery
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P



Parking garages (public or commercial)
 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 

P



AGRICULTURAL USES
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



CULTURAL/ ENTERTAINMENT USES


Ampitheater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Entertainment related facilities and uses
 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

A

 




Galleries and museums
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 

SC

 


 




Clubhouse, accessory to a residential development
 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Cinemas and theaters, except drive-in theaters
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Disc golf course
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

P

 

SC



Drive-in theater
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 




Driving range
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

P

 

SC



Expositions, indoor or outdoor
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Festivals
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Golf courses
 

SC

 

SC

 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Hotels
 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 


 

P

 




Parks and playgrounds, non-commercial
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Places of public assembly
 


 


 


 

A

 

P

 

P

 


 

SC

 

P

 




Places of worship
 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 


 

SC



Recreation, indoor/commercial
 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 

SC



Sports parks, indoor
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

P

 




Sports parks, outdoor
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




Stadium or arena
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 




COMMERCIAL USES (RETAIL SERVICE)


Automobile fuel station
 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 


 


 


 




Automobile service
 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 


 


 




Automobile repair/body shop
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Automobile sales, including service and storage
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Automobile rental
 


 


 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 


 


 


 




Bar, tavern, lounge or brewpub
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Car wash
 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 


 


 




Drinking places
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Marine craft sales, repair, and service
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Restaurant, sit-down
 


 


 


 

SC

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Restaurant, carry-out only
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Restaurant (drive-in/drive- through facility), primary use
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Restaurant (drive-in/drive- through), accessory use
 


 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Nursery, plant materials, primary
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Nursery, plant materials, accessory
 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 


 


 




Retail sales
 


 


 

A

 

A

 

P

 

P

 


 


 

A

 




Services, except for laundries/dry cleaners on-site
 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 

P

 


 


 


 




Laundries/dry cleaners with on-site plant
 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 




INDUSTRIAL USES
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Agricultural processing, primary
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Agricultural processing, accessory
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P



Assembly of finished goods
 


 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 


 


 




Chemical processing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Confinement feeding operations
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Contractor’s office
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 




Distribution facilities
 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

P

 


 


 




Food production, except canning factories and/or animal processing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P



Laboratory
 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P



Machine and equipment repair
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Manufacturing, general
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P



Manufacturing, light
 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

P

 


 


 

P



Newspaper and/or job printing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

P

 


 


 




Packaging of finished goods
 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

P

 


 


 




Petrochemical facilities
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 




Processing of raw goods
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Quarries and other excavation activities
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Research facilities
 


 


 


 

P

 

P

 


 

P

 


 


 

P



Recycling centers
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Supply yard
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




Stone processing activities
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Warehousing
 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Mini-storage warehousing
 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 


 

SC



Wholesale trade, indoor
 


 


 


 

SC

 

P

 

SC

 

P

 


 

P

 

P



Wholesale trade, outdoor
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 




TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION USES


Airports
 

SC

 

SC

 


 


 


 


 

SC

 


 

SC

 




Heliports and/or helipad
 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

SC

 




Public service facilities
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Wireless communication service facilities
 


 


 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 

P

 

SC

 

P

 

P





 



(Ord. 26-06-02, passed 7-9-02; Am. Ord. 12-02-03, passed 3-11-03; Am. Ord.
26-4-03, passed 5-13-03; Am. Ord. 53-9-04, passed 10-12-04; Am. Ord.
82-10-05, passed 11-15-05; Am. Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07; Am. Ord.
10-03-13, passed 4-9-13; Am. Ord. 25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord.
46-07-16, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord. 12-04-17, passed 4-25-17)



APPENDIX C-1 OFFICIAL SCHEDULE OF USES
Federal Hill Planned Development Use Matrix for Land Use Subdistricts



 

Official Schedule of Uses

Federal Hill Planned Development

P = Permitted Use

SC = Special Consideration

A = Accessory Use

= Prohibited


TYPE OF USE
 
Riverwalk
 
West Logan Street
 
Professional Office
 
Hospital
 
Mixed Residential




RESIDENTIAL USES


Dwelling, Single-Family Detached
 


 


 


 


 

SC



Dwelling, Two-Family
 


 


 


 


 

SC



Dwelling, Multi-Family of 3 or more dwelling units
 


 


 


 


 

SC



Dwelling Unit located on 2nd floor of or above a non-residential building
 


 

P

 


 


 

SC



Dwelling Unit located on ground floor of non-residential building
 


 


 


 


 




Accessory Dwelling Unit
 


 


 


 


 




Bed & Breakfast Establishment
 


 


 


 


 




Board or Lodging House
 


 


 


 


 




Home Occupation
 


 


 


 


 

A



Manufactured Homes, Individual
 


 


 


 


 




Mobile Home Parks/Subdivisions
 


 


 


 


 




Nursing/Retirement/Convalescent Facility
 


 


 


 


 




Residential Care Homes
 


 


 


 


 

SC



Temporary Shelters
 


 


 


 


 




Townhouse
 


 


 


 


 

SC



EDUCATIONAL USES


Care Centers, Child & Adult Care Services
 


 


 


 


 




Colleges and Universities
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Montessori Schools
 


 


 


 


 




Preschool/Nursery School
 


 


 


 


 




Schools, (Business and Trade)
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Schools, (Primary and Secondary)
 


 


 


 


 




INSTITUTIONAL USES


Church, Temple, Place of Worship
 


 


 


 


 




Fire and/or Police Station
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Government Office
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Hospital
 


 


 


 

P

 




Library
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Penal or Correctional Facility
 


 


 


 


 




Post Office
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Public Service Facility
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



CULTURAL/ENTERTAINMENT USES


Amphitheater
 

SC

 

SC

 

SC

 


 




Campground
 


 


 


 


 




Club or Lodge (Private)
 


 

SC

 

SC

 


 




Clubhouse (Accessory to a Residential Development)
 


 


 


 


 

SC



Drive-In Theater
 


 


 


 


 




Fairgrounds
 


 


 


 


 




Gallery and/or Museum
 


 


 


 


 




Hotel or Motel
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Indoor Cinema or Theater
 


 

P

 


 


 




Meeting or Party Hall
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Stadium or Arena
 


 


 


 


 




MISCELLANEOUS USES


Cemetery
 


 


 


 


 




Parking Garage
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 




TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION USES


Airport
 


 


 


 


 




Bus or Rail Passenger Terminal
 


 


 


 


 




Helipad or Heliport
 


 


 


 

P

 




Marina
 


 


 


 


 




Parking as a Primary Use (Private or Public)
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Wireless Telecommunication Service Facility
 


 


 


 


 




SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS


Adult Cabaret
 


 


 


 


 




Adult Media Store
 


 


 


 


 




Adult Motion Picture Theater
 


 


 


 


 




Lingerie Modeling Studio
 


 


 


 


 




Massage Studio
 


 


 


 


 




Nude Model Studio
 


 


 


 


 




Sex Shop
 


 


 


 


 




Video Viewing or Arcade Booth
 


 


 


 


 




RECREATIONAL USES


Amusements (Outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 




Commercial Recreation (Indoor)
 


 

SC

 

SC

 


 




Commercial Recreation (Outdoor)
 

SC

 


 


 


 




Golf Courses including Disc Golf
 


 


 


 


 




Health/Fitness Facility
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Public Parks and Playgrounds
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P



Sports Parks (Outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 




Shooting Gallery (Indoor)
 


 


 


 


 




COMMERCIAL/RETAIL/SERVICE USES


Animal Hospitals & Veterinarian Offices (With Commercial Kennel)
 


 


 


 


 




Animal Hospitals & Veterinarian Offices (Without Commercial Kennel)
 


 


 


 


 




Ambulance Service
 


 


 


 

P

 




Automated Teller Machine (ATM)
(Stand Alone Structure)
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Fuel Station
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Rental
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Repair/Body Shop
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Sales including service and storage
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Service and Repair (Indoor)
 


 


 


 


 




Bar, Tavern, Lounge, Night Club or Brewpub
 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Car Washes
 


 


 


 


 




Commercial Kennel
 


 


 


 


 




Drinking Place
 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Financial, Insurance & Real Estate Services
 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Laundry/Dry Cleaners With On-Site Plant
 


 


 


 


 




Laundry/Dry Cleaners Without On-Site Plant
 


 


 


 


 




Manufactured Home/Recreational Vehicle/Mobile Home Sales
 


 


 


 


 




Marine Craft Sales, Repair, and Service
 


 


 


 


 




Mortuary or Funeral Home
 


 


 


 


 




Offices
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Offices & Clinics of Physicians, Dentists, or other Health Care Practitioners
 


 

P

 

P

 

P

 




Outdoor Sales and/or Display
 


 


 


 


 




Personal Care Establishment
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Professional and Technical Services
 


 

P

 

P

 


 




Restaurant (With Drive-Thru)
 


 


 


 


 




Restaurant (Without Drive-Thru)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 


 




Restaurant Drive-In or Drive Thru (As a Primary Use)
 


 


 


 


 




Retail Nursery or Greenhouse
 


 


 


 


 




Retail Sales
 

P

 

P

 


 


 




INDUSTRIAL USES


Assembly of Finished Goods
 


 


 


 


 




Automobile Impound Lot
 


 


 


 


 




Beverage Bottling
 


 


 


 


 




Borrow Pit/Top Soil Removal and Storage
 


 


 


 


 




Chemical Processing
 


 


 


 


 




Confined Feeding Operation
 


 


 


 


 




Contractor's Office with Outdoor Equipment and Material Storage
 


 


 


 


 




Distribution Facility
 


 


 


 


 




Equipment Repair and Service (Indoor)
 


 


 


 


 




Food Production, Except Animal Processing
 


 


 


 


 




Grain Elevator
 


 


 


 


 




Junk and/or Salvage Yard
 


 


 


 


 




Laboratory
 


 


 


 


 




Machinery and Equipment Repair
 


 


 


 


 




Manufacturing (General)
 


 


 


 


 




Manufacturing (Light)
 


 


 


 


 




Mineral/Sand/Gravel Extraction
 


 


 


 


 




Nursery/Greenhouse for Production Purposes ONLY
 


 


 


 


 




Packaging of Finished Goods
 


 


 


 


 




Petrochemical Facilities
 


 


 


 


 




Printing and Publishing
 


 


 


 


 




Recycling Center
 


 


 


 


 




Research Facility
 


 


 


 


 




Sanitary Landfill
 


 


 


 


 




Stone Processing Activities
 


 


 


 


 




Supply Yard
 


 


 


 


 




Towing and Recovery Yard
 


 


 


 


 




Training Facility
 


 


 


 


 




Truck Terminal
 


 


 


 


 




Warehousing
 


 


 


 


 




Warehousing, Mini-Storage
 


 


 


 


 




Wholesale Trade (Indoor)
 


 


 


 


 




Wholesale Trade (Outdoor)
 


 


 


 


 




AGRICULTURAL USES
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P





 



(Ord. 20-7-11, passed 8-9-11; Am. Ord. 20-03-15, passed 4-14-15; Am. Ord.
25-04-15, passed 5-12-15; Am. Ord. 46-07-16, passed 8-9-6; Am. Ord. 12-04-17,
passed 4-25-17)



APPENDIX D: PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATION



Adobe Reader is required to view appendix.



[Click here to view appendix]



APPENDIX E: FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS AND WATER SUPPLY  AND FIRE HYDRANT
SPECIFICATIONS



Section



   1.   Fire Department access and water supply



   2.   Fire hydrant specifications



§ 1.  FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS AND WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Fire Apparatus Access.  Plans for fire apparatus access roads
shall be submitted to the fire department for review.



   (B)   Fire Hydrant Systems.  Plans and specifications for fire
hydrant systems shall be submitted to the fire department for review.



   (C)   Timing of Installation.  Required fire hydrants and temporary
surfaced access roads within the site shall be installed and made serviceable
prior to construction of a building or structure and such hydrants and roads
shall be maintained during construction.



   (D)   Required Access.  Fire apparatus access roads shall be
provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter
constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction when any portion of the
facility or any portion of an exterior wall of the first story of the
building is located more than 150 feet from fire apparatus access as measured
by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. 
EXCEPTION:  Buildings protected throughout by a supervised automatic fire
sprinkler system and not used for high-piled combustible storage in excess of
12,000-SF.



   (E)   Dimensions.  Fire apparatus access roads shall have an
unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet and an unobstructed vertical
clearance of not less than 13 feet and six inches.  The required width of a
fire apparatus access road shall not be obstructed in any manner including
parking of vehicles.



   (F)   Surface.  Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and
constructed to support the imposed live loads of the heaviest piece of fire
department apparatus available to the servicing fire department and shall be
provided with a surface so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities.



   (G)   Turning Radius.  The turning radius of a fire apparatus
access road shall be determined after construction with the servicing fire
department and shall be at least equal to the minimum required radius for the
fire apparatus.  The roads shall be designed and constructed to permit
turning of the longest piece of fire apparatus available to the servicing
fire department.



   (H)   Dead-Ends.  Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of
150 feet in length shall be designed and constructed so as to allow the
turning around of the longest piece of fire apparatus available to the
servicing department.



   (I)   Bridges.  When a bridge is required to be used as part of a
fire apparatus access road, it shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with nationally recognized standards.



   (J)   Key Boxes.  Whenever the servicing Fire Department has
instituted a key box emergency access system, a key box compatible with that
system shall be installed in an accessible location if:



      (1)   The building is protected with an automatic sprinkler
system equipped with a local or transmitted water-flow alarm; or



      (2)   The building is provided with any fire alarm system
equipped with an outside audible/visual signaling device.



      (3)   The building is provided with any fire system where the
alarm is transmitted to an off-site location or to the fire alarm center for
the servicing Fire Department.



   (K)   Responsibility for Key Box.  Key boxes are to be provided by
the building owner and shall contain the keys necessary to access all
protected areas of the building.



   (L)   Required Water Supply for Fire Protection.  A water supply
capable of supplying the required fire flow for firefighting purposes as
determined by local ordinance.



(Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03)



§ 2.  FIRE HYDRANT SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The location of fire hydrants within the city shall be
reviewed and approved by the Fire Inspector for the Noblesville Fire
Department before the start of construction.  Blueprints with fire hydrant
placement must be reviewed and approved by the Fire Inspector.



   (B)   The installation of fire hydrants shall be the following
specifications:



      (1)   Mechanical joint connection for 6 inch service pipe.



      (2)   A minimum of 5-1/4 inch diameter main valve opening.



      (3)   Two 2-1/2 inch hose nozzles with threads being National
Standard.



      (4)   A streamer nozzle of four threads per inch, a pitch of
4.946, a major diameter of 5.110-IN and a minor diameter of 4.751-IN.



      (5)   A main valve seat provided with bronze to bronze threads.



      (6)   All nozzles shall have a cap covering the opening.



      (7)   A "break-a-way" hydrant that allows the barrel to break
with a minimum of water escaping.



      (8)   Four drain holes in the bottom to prevent freezing.



      (9)   The base should be surrounded by at least six cubic feet
of coarse gravel or crushed rock for draining.



      (10)   All hydrants shall be painted with two coats of paint
in the color "traffic yellow".



   (C)   In 1978, an ordinance was adopted to enforce the National Fire
Codes.  NFPA 24 is the standard for fire hydrant placement, installation and
maintenance.  The number, size arrangement of outlets, the size of the main
valve opening and the size of the barrel shall be suitable for the protection
to be provided and shall be approved by the Noblesville Fire Department.



(Ord. 55-12-02, passed 1-14-03)



APPENDIX F: NOBLESVILLE STANDARDS



Section



   1.   Noblesville Standards



§ 1.  NOBLESVILLE STANDARDS.



[To view a PDF of the following images, click here.]







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 







 



(Ord. 03-02-1 2, passed 2-28-12)



APPENDIX G:  CENTRAL CORE MAP







Ord. 48-6-05, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 25-07-17, passed 8-15-17)



APPENDIX H:  CITY OF NOBLESVILLE STORMWATER TECHNICAL STANDARDS MANUAL



   The “City of Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards Manual” is
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at
length.



(Ord. 22-06-13, passed 7-9-13)



APPENDIX I:  HISTORIC DEMOLITION AREA







(Ord. 76-9-05, passed 10-11-05)



APPENDIX J:  FORMER COUNTY ZONING SITES



















(Ord. 56-11-07, passed 12-11-07)



APPENDIX K:  PERVIOUS CONCRETE PAVEMENT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS



Sections



   1.0   Overview



   2.0   Design



   3.0   Subgrade



   4.0   Mix Design



   5.0   Pavement Design



   6.0   Drainage and Detention Design



   7.0   Site Design



   8.0   Construction



1.0   Overview



   Pervious or porous concrete pavements permit the percolation of water
through voids in the pavement structure to the sub-grade which may reduce
storm water runoff and pollutants carried during its transportation and
dispersion.



   In an attempt to provide a cost effective alternative to conventional
storm water detention methods while reducing the impact caused by additional
development, the City of Noblesville has developed minimum standard
requirements for pervious concrete pavement. The premise of these standards
is to:



   1.   Establish minimum performance criteria for the pavement
structure, in a manner consistent with other pavements that are currently
permitted by City Standards



   2.   Establish reasonable compliance with the City's Stormwater
Ordinance, while observing traditional engineering practice, the City of
Noblesville's Ordinances; and,



   3.   To utilize design and quality control measures recommended by
the concrete industry for pervious concrete



   The following requirements and standards shall be considered as a
supplement to the City of Noblesville Stormwater Technical Standards Manual,
which are incorporated by reference herein. These standards shall also
reference and incorporate the subject matter in the City of Noblesville's
Unified Development Code that involve projects which propose to utilize this
design standard.



   These standards shall be observed, applied, and demonstrated to obtain
final approval for an Improvement Location Permit and the use of pervious
concrete pavement. The purpose of using pervious concrete pavements shall not
be to circumvent the requirement of detention or the need to save design
costs. The concrete industry recognizes that pervious pavements are sensitive
to in-situ conditions and require unique design consideration and expertise
in their use. These standards were developed from several resources and
incorporate their findings and recommendations. The placement of pervious
concrete pavement and its use in a manner similar to conventional paving
materials is not acceptable as it does not perform in a similar manner.



2.0   Design



   Design and approval of any pavements utilizing pervious concrete shall
follow the requirements of these standards and be subject to the City of
Noblesville's Stormwater Technical Standards Manual, the City of
Noblesville's Construction Standards, and the Unified Development Code,
latest editions.



   Pervious concrete is NOT a traditional pavement structure and may not
be readily and simply substituted for regularly used hot-mixed asphalt (HMA)
or customary INDOT standard concrete mixture without addressing the City of
Noblesville's stormwater detention requirements.



   The structure of pervious concrete pavement is designed to function as
both an outlet for stormwater runoff and a surface to transport and store
vehicular traffic.



   The design standards outlined for pervious concrete pavements outlined
herein were developed using information, theory, methodology, and guidelines
established and published by the Portland Cement Association, the National
Concrete Pavement Technology Center, the National Ready-Mixed Concrete
Association, the North Carolina State University's Department of Biological
and Agricultural Engineering, and Iowa State University's Center for
Transportation Research and Education.



3.0   Subgrade



   The subgrade for proposed pervious concrete pavement serves two
purposes. It must be pervious to permit the percolation of water into the
earth so it may dissipate an acceptable release rate without adversely
affecting surrounding off-site areas, while addressing the City's design
criteria for the storage of runoff. The subgrade must also be stable enough
to adequately support the load from the pavement and applied traffic.



   Percolation tests shall be procured by the developer through the
designer to determine the suitability of the soil to percolate runoff from
the pavement course. The number of tests for the site shall be determined by
its overall size, with tests at two evenly-spaced location sites of 10,000 sf
or less. Sites exceeding 10,000 sf in size shall submit a percolation plan
and report for subsurface soils according to the following table:



 

Site Area (SF)
 
Number of Percolation Test Locations


10,000
 
2


10,000 to 15,000
 
3


Every 5,000 sf Increment

Exceeding 15,000 SF
 
1 per 5,000 sf of

additional area



 



   A sampling plan shall be provided to the City of Noblesville for
approval prior to the completion of the test. In general, test locations
shall be evenly spaced and near the middle half or third of the proposed
pavement area. The City of Noblesville reserves the opportunity to request
any modifications or additions to any proposed sampling plan based on the
conditions, shape, size and use of the lot. This is not to infer that
sampling plans will be expanded, it is conceivable that fewer test spots
could be needed, depending on the case and situation.



   Using the results of the percolation test, the designer shall determine
the average Infiltration Rate in inches per hour (in/hr) for the site.
Calculations and the results of the field investigation for the determination
of the average infiltration rate shall be submitted with the proposed site
plan for review.



[1]



4.0   Mix Design



   For each project, a mix design shall be submitted for approval with the
project plans and specifications. The following section provides material
specifications and requirements for the pervious concrete mix. The seven day
compressive strength of pervious concrete pavement mixtures shall range from
3,300 to 2,900 psi.



   4.1   Cementitious Materials



   Portland cements meeting the criteria of ASTM C 150 and C 1157 may be
used as well as blended cements meeting the standards of ASTM C 595 and C
1157. Fly ash and pozzolans meeting the requirements of ASTM C 618 may also
be used in the proposed mix. Due to problems with odors and discoloration of
any runoff which may occur offsite, blast slag may not be used. Mix
proportions for cementitious materials in the proposed mix shall be from 550
to 700 lbs/yd3.



   4.2   Aggregate



      4.2.1   Aggregate



      Aggregate for the pervious concrete batch mix shall be 2000 to
2500 lbs/yd3. The aggregate to cement ratio shall be 4 to 4.5:1. The
proportions of course and fine aggregates are presented in the following
sections.



      4.2.2   Coarse Aggregate



      The content of coarse aggregate in the batch mixture shall be
narrowly graded and consist of aggregate meeting the requirements of course
aggregate conforming to ASTM C 33 No. 67 or No. 8.



      4.2.3   Fine Aggregate



      The content of fine aggregate to coarse aggregate ratio in the
pervious concrete batch mixture shall be limited to range of 0 to 1:1 by mass.



   4.3   Water Cement Ratio



   The water to cement (w/c) ratio for the project mix shall be 0.27 to
0.30. Water used in the manufacture of the batch shall comply with Section
913.01 of the Indiana Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications,
latest edition.



   4.4   Admixtures



   The use and purpose for admixtures, such as retarding agents, shall be
clearly indicated in the mix design submitted for the project. All admixtures
shall conform to ASTM C 494.



5.0   Pavement Design



   5.1   Aggregate Base



   Aggregate base for pavement shall be evaluated by the designer for each
individual site to determine whether the minimum required standard depth of
aggregate base is suitable for the traffic loads proposed for the site. The
standard minimum aggregate base for all pervious concrete pavements shall be
8 inches of INDOT Gradation No. 2 Course Aggregate. The volume of void space
for the proposed aggregate base compacted in place should be obtained from
the supplier for use in determining the storage capacity of pavement base.
The void ratio by volume for the aggregate base layer shall be 35% ± 5%.



   5.2   Pavement



   The minimum thickness of pervious concrete pavement used for commercial
or institutional use shall be 8 inches. Locations subject to higher amounts
of truck traffic shall be evaluated using traditional rigid pavement design
techniques and increasing the depth of the rigid pavement by a factor of
1.25. The void ratio in the mixture shall be determined and range between 15%
and 20% by volume.



6.0   Drainage and Detention Design



   The completion of runoff and storage computations for analyzing the
water storage available in pervious [2] pavements is a "5 part process". The
methodology for the selection of the site's hydrologic design criteria and
storage and runoff computations shall be documented in the design
calculations for the project and submitted for review with the site plan for
TAC Review. The process to determine storage and runoff is as follows.



   6.1   Section of Design Storm



   The selection of the parameters for the design storm and the
pre-developed runoff condition for all sites shall be determined in
accordance with the City of Noblesville's Stormwater Technical Standards
Manual.



   The runoff coefficient used to determine the runoff from pervious
concrete pavement for the required design storm shall be 0.95.



   6.2   Determine the Water Storage Capacity of the Pavement



   The storage capacity of the pervious concrete and aggregate base
courses of the pavement shall be determined using the individual void ratios
for each section.



   The volume of voids in the pavement structure shall be computed as
follows:



      vT=(Aa x da x va) + (Ap x dp x vp)



      Where:



      vT   =   Total Volume of Voids for Pavement Structure



      Aa   =   Total Area of Aggregate Base



      da   =   Depth of Aggregate Base



      va   =   Percent of Voids by Volume in Compacted Aggregate
Base



      Ap   =   Total Area of Pervious Concrete Pavement



      dp   =   Depth/Thickness of Pervious Concrete Pavement
Course



      vp   =   Percent of Voids by Volume in Pervious Concrete
Pavement



   6.3   Determination of Storage Volume and Release Rate



   The analysis and design of pervious concrete pavements shall follow the
methodology of the Hydraulic Design of Permeable Pavements, July 14, 2000,
North Carolina State University's Department of Biological and Agricultural
Engineering College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. This publication
provides a logical step-by-step method for determining the storage capability
for pervious concrete pavements.



   An additional acceptable method of analysis and design can be obtained
from the Portland Cement Association, the National Concrete Pavement
Technology Center, and the National Ready-Mixed Concrete Association. These
groups have combined to create an interactive CD that contains an Excel-based
design and analysis program.



   No site plan utilizing pervious pavement shall be approved through The
City of Noblesville's Technical Advisory Committee Review without drainage
computations in a format compatible with or similar to the two aforementioned
procedures certified by a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of
Indiana.



7.0   Site Design



   All other applicable City design standards and ordinances shall be
observed during the design of parking lots utilizing pervious concrete.



   In areas where the proposed pavement is on grade or is adjacent to a
concrete approach that exits onto City right-of-way, the designer and
constructor shall use and install an impervious membrane, such as visquene,
to separate the aggregate base courses to prevent subsurface drainage from
flowing to areas other than the subgrade directly under the area of pervious
concrete. This type of separation is discussed in the publications referenced
in these standards.



   Curbs shall be provided as per the Unified Development Ordinance. The
presence of curbs provides lateral support for the pavement structure and to
control parking drainage and traffic patterns.



   All pervious pavements shall be constructed with a six inch diameter
underdrain that has a positive outlet to an existing public drainage
facility. The underdrain for the proposed pavement shall be designed in a
manner consistent with the City of Noblesville's typical details for street
underdrains.



   Pervious concrete pavements shall be designed to store a maximum depth
of six inches of ponded water on-site in the event of failure or frozen
conditions. The depressed area may be designed to permit the discharge of
water off-site when six inches of runoff is stored in the parking area. This
provision shall be observed to provide the owner to maintain or rehabilitate
pervious pavement detention systems that fail or do not operate as intended.



   The City of Noblesville may develop standard drawings to supplement or
clarify the criteria outlined in these written standards.



8.0   Construction



   Pervious pavements shall be constructed in compliance with the plans
and specifications for the project. These standards have been approved and
adopted by the City of Noblesville's Board of Public Works and Safety and
shall hereby incorporated into the City of Noblesville's Stormwater Standards
Technical Manual. Authority is hereby given to the City of Noblesville's
Wastewater Utility to develop and promulgate standards to address and
mitigate stormwater quality issues associated with the installation,
construction, and maintenance of pervious concrete pavements.



[1]



   Material used in this section developed from "Pervious Concrete
Pavements" by Tennis, Leming, and Akers for the Portland Cement Association
and the National Ready Mixed Concrete Association.



[2]



   Hydraulic Design of Permeable Pavements, July 14, 2000, North Carolina
State University's Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.



(Ord. 71-12-07, passed 1-15-08)


