
Plainfield, IN Code of Ordinances


TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Construction of code



   10.05   Rules of interpretation; definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices; name designations



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Reasonable time



   10.11   Repeal or modification of code section



   10.12   Limitation periods



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Section histories; statutory references



   10.16   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.17   Code application



   10.18   Effective date of ordinances



   10.19   Town seal



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the town, as
revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Plainfield Town Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”,
“codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title,
chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-1)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CONSTRUCTION OF CODE.



   (A)   This code is a codification of previously existing laws,
amendments thereto, and newly enacted laws. Any previously existing law or
amendment thereto reenacted by this code shall continue in operation and
effect, as if it had not been repealed by this code. All rules and
regulations adopted under laws reenacted in this code shall remain in full
force and effect unless repealed or amended subsequent to the enactment of
this code.



   (B)   Any appropriation repealed and reenacted by this code is
continued only for the period designated in the original enactment of that
appropriation.



   (C)   The numerical order and position of sections in this code does
not resolve a conflict between two or more sections.



   (D)   Any irreconcilable conflict between sections shall be resolved
by reference to the dates that the sections were originally enacted. The
section most recently enacted supersedes any conflicting section or division.



   (E)   All references within a section of this code to any section of
previously existing laws refer to the numbers in the original enactment.



   (F)   (1)   The numerical designations and descriptive headings
assigned to the various titles, chapters, subchapters or sections of this
code, as originally enacted or as added by amendment, are not law, and may be
altered by the compilers of this or any subsequent codification, in any
official publication, to more clearly indicate its content. These descriptive
headings are for organizational purposes only and do not affect the meaning,
application or construction of the law they precede.



      (2)   Each note following a section of this code is for
reference purposes only and is not a part of the section.



   (G)   All references to any section of this code refer to all
subsequent amendments to that section, unless otherwise provided.



(I.C. 1-1-1-5)



§ 10.05  RULES OF INTERPRETATION; DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Rules of interpretation. This code shall be construed by the
following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
legislative intent or context of the provision.



      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. Technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



      (2)   Words imputing joint authority to three or more persons
shall be construed as imputing authority to a majority of the persons, unless
otherwise declared in the section giving the authority.



      (3)   Where a section requires an act to be done which, by
law, an agent or deputy may perform in addition to the principal, the
performance of the act by an authorized deputy or agent is valid.



      (4)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to
include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include
the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a
verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      CLERK-TREASURER. The Clerk and Fiscal Officer of the Town of
Plainfield.



      CODE. The Plainfield Town Code.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done,
as herein provided, and shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last. If the last day be Sunday it shall be excluded.



      COUNCIL. The Town Council, formerly known as the Board of
Trustees.



      COUNTY. The County of Hendricks, State of Indiana.



      ET SEQ. The Latin phrase meaning “and the following”.



      GENDER. Words used in the masculine gender shall include feminine
and neuter.



      HIGHWAY. Includes bridges, roads and streets, unless otherwise
expressly provided.



      I.C. Refers to state law found in the Indiana Code.



      MAY. Is permissive.



      MONTH. One calendar month.



      MUST and SHALL. Are each mandatory.



      OATH. Includes an affirmation of declaration in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such
cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and
AFFIRMED.



      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of such building or land.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, receiver and bodies politic.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or
agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every kind of property except real
property.



      PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. When referring to sections or divisions
in this code, refer to the sections or divisions next following or next
preceding that in which the words occur, unless some other section is
designated.



      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.



      PUBLIC PLACE. Any street or highway, sidewalk, park cemetery,
school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream.



      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      REASONABLE TIME. In all cases where any provision shall require
any act to be done in a REASONABLE TIME or REASONABLE NOTICE to be given any
person, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only
as may be necessary in the prompt execution of such duty or compliance with
such notice.



      SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Indiana.



      STREET. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, lanes,
courts, squares, roads, alleys, viaducts or other public ways in the town
which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use.



      SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST. Any right in real property that
may be affected in a substantial way by actions authorized by planning and
development laws of the state, including a fee interest, a life estate, a
future interest, a present possessory interest or an equitable interest of a
contract purchaser.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applies to a building or land and shall
include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupied the
whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others.



      TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, Indiana, or the area within the
territorial limits of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana, and such territory, if
any, outside of the town over which the town has jurisdiction or control by
virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.



      TOWN COUNCIL. Means and includes all former references to the
Board of Trustees.



      TOWNSHIP. Guilford, Liberty and Washington Townships.



      WRITTEN and IN WRITING. Include printing, lithographing or other
modes of representing words and letters. Where the written signature of a
person is required, the terms mean the proper handwriting of the person, or
the person’s mark.



      YEAR. One calendar year, unless otherwise expressly provided.



(I.C. 1-1-4-5(a))



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any section of this code now enacted or subsequently
amended or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the invalidity does not affect other sections that can be given effect
without the invalid section or application.



   (B)   Except in the case of a section or amendment to this code
containing a nonseverability provision, each division or part of every
section is severable. If any portion or application of a section is held
invalid, the invalidity does not affect the remainder of the section unless:



      (1)   The remainder is so essentially and inseparably
connected with and so dependent upon the invalid provision or application
that it cannot be presumed that the remainder would have been enacted without
the invalid provision or application; or



      (2)   The remainder is incomplete and incapable of being
executed in accordance with the legislative intent without the invalid
provision or application.



   (C)   This section applies to every section of this code regardless
of whether a section was enacted before or after the passage of this code.



   (D)   The repeal of a statute stating that the provisions of an act
are severable as provided in division (B) above does not affect the operation
of division (B) above with respect to that act.



(I.C. 1-1-1-8)



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-8)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES; NAME DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   Reference to offices. Reference to a public office or officer
shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this
municipality exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the
provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the
official title of the functionary.



   (B)   Name designations. Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the
Council refers to any board, bureau, commission, division, department,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality of any government, and that
name designation is incorrectly stated; on the effective date of that
ordinance or following the effective date, the rights, powers, duties or
liabilities placed with that entity are or were transferred to a different
entity; then the named board, bureau, commission, department, division,
officer, agency, authority or instrumentality, whether correctly named in the
ordinance at its effective date or not, means that correctly named entity, or
the entity to which the duties, liabilities, powers and rights were
transferred.



(I.C. 1-1-6-1)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday or a state holiday, it shall be
excluded.



§ 10.11  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF CODE SECTION.



   When a section of this code is repealed which repealed a former section
or law adopted prior to the enactment of this code, the former section or law
is not revived unless it so expressly provides. The repeal of any section
shall not extinguish or release any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred
under the section, unless the repealing section so expressly provides. The
section shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purposes of
sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of the
penalty, forfeiture or liability.



(I.C. 1-1-5-1)  (1991 Draft Code, § 1-6)



§ 10.12  LIMITATION PERIODS.



   The running of any period of limitations or any requirement of notice
contained in any law, whether applicable to civil causes or proceedings, or
to the prosecution of offenses, or for the recovery of penalties and
forfeitures, contained in a law repealed and reenacted by this code, shall
not be affected by the repeal and reenactment; but all suits, proceedings and
prosecutions for causes arising or acts committed prior to the effective date
of this code may be commenced and prosecuted with the same effect as if this
code had not been enacted.



Statutory reference:



   Periods of limitation, see I.C. 1-1-1-7



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to an
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example:



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example:



(I.C. 36-5-2-2)



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



            This municipality shall make available to any person
for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by
state law.



         Statutory reference:



            Inspection of public records, see I.C. 5-14-3-1 et
seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city and subsequently amended, the previous code section
number shall be indicated in the history by “(1991 Draft Code, §    
)”.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.16  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.17  CODE APPLICATION.



   This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within
the territorial limits of the town and to that territory outside this town,
if any, over which the town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any
constitutional provision or law.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.18  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   Unless otherwise expressly provided, an ordinance shall take effect
when passed according to I.C. 36-4-6-14.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.19  TOWN SEAL.



   The Clerk-Treasurer shall be the custodian of the town’s seal and
affix it to such documents and instruments as required.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-10)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the following:



      (1)   A fine not exceeding $2,500 for the first violation; and



      (2)   A fine not exceeding $7,500 for second and subsequent
violations, except for violations of ordinances regulating traffic and
parking.



   (B)   A separate violation shall be deemed committed upon each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 1-9)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(a)(10)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   TOWN COUNCIL



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   JUDICIAL BRANCH



      34.   FINANCES AND REVENUE



      35.   ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



      36.   TOWN POLICIES



      37.   PERSONNEL POLICY



      38.   FEE SCHEDULE



CHAPTER 30:  TOWN COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Five member Council



   30.02   Legislative wards



   30.03   President of the Town Council



   30.04   Powers of the Town Council



   30.05   Town Council meetings



   30.06   Order of business at Town Council meetings



   30.07   Rules and procedures at Town Council meetings



   30.08   Passage of ordinances and resolutions



   30.09   Voting



   30.10   Compensation of Town Council



   30.11   Ordinances which amend the town code



§ 30.01  FIVE MEMBER COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Town Council is the town legislative body.



   (B)   The Council consists of five members whose terms of office are
four years, beginning at noon on January 1 after election and continuing
until successors are elected and qualified.



   (C)   The Town Council shall provide by ordinance that its members
are elected by the district or ward in which they reside or are elected
at-large by the voters of the whole town.



   (D)   (1)   Two of the five Town Council Member positions for the
municipal election to be conducted in November 2011 will be elected to terms
of three years beginning at noon on January 1, 2012. 



      (2)   The remaining three Town Council member positions for
the municipal election to be conducted in November 2011 will be elected to
terms of four years beginning at noon on January 1, 2012.



      (3)   Thereafter, the two Town Council Member positions
elected to terms of three years during the November 2011 election will be
re-filled at the general election conducted in November 2014 to terms of four
years, and the three Town Council Member positions elected to terms of four
years during the November 2012 election will be re-filled at the municipal
election in November 2015 to terms of four years.



      (4)   The positions currently occupied by Town Council members
representing District Two and District Three have been designated by the Town
Council as the positions that will be filled to terms of three years at the
November 2011 municipal election.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. 11-2010, passed 8-27-2010)



Statutory reference:



   Legislative districts, I.C. 36-5-2-5



   Term of office of Council members, see I.C. 36-5-2-3



   Town Council, see I.C. 36-5-2-2



   Town legislative body and executive, see I.C. 36-5-2-1 through I.C.
36-5-2-11



§ 30.02  LEGISLATIVE WARDS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Plainfield.



      TOWN. The Town of Plainfield.



   (B)   The Council shall consist of five members.



   (C)   The members of the Council shall be elected at large by the
voters of the whole town, in accordance with I.C. 36-5-2-5.



   (D)   The Council divides the town into five districts for the
purpose of conducting elections of Town Council members as follows:



      (1)   District 1. Beginning at the centerline of East Main
Street (State Road 40) at the intersection of the centerline of North Carr
Road; then northeasterly along the centerline of East Main Street to the
Guilford-Washington Township boundary line; then east along the
Guilford-Washington Township boundary line to the town boundary; then north
and west following along the town boundary to the intersection of the town
boundary and the centerline of North Carr Road; then south along the
centerline of North Carr Road to the point of beginning;



      (2)   District 2. Beginning at the centerline of East Main
Street (State Road 40) at the intersection of the centerline of Avon Avenue;
then north along the centerline of Avon Avenue to the town boundary; then
west and south following along the town boundary to its intersection with Old
National Road (State Road 40) on the southwest corner of the town; then
northeasterly along the centerline of State Road 40 to the point of beginning;



      (3)   District 3. Beginning at the centerline of East Hadley
Road at the intersection of the east line of Section 2, Township 14 North,
Range 1 East (just west of Hunters Ridge Drive); then north along the east
line of Section 2, Township 14 North, Range 1 East, to the centerline of
Reeves Road; then west along the centerline of Reeves Road to the centerline
of South Center Street; then north and northwesterly along the centerline of
South Center Street to the centerline of South County Road 700 East; then
southwesterly to the centerline of White Lick Creek; then following the
centerline of White Lick Creek northwesterly to the centerline of West Main
Street (State Road 40) then southwesterly along the centerline of Main Street
to the western town border; then south and east along the town border to the
centerline of South Center Street at its intersection with East Hadley Road
(East County Road 600 South); then east along the centerline of East Hadley
Road to the point of beginning;



      (4)   District 4. Beginning at the centerline of East Main
Street (State Road 40) at the intersection of the centerline of Clarks Creek
Road; then northeasterly along the centerline of East Main Street to the
Guilford-Washington Township boundary line; then east along the
Guilford-Washington Township boundary line to the town boundary; then south
and west following along the town boundary to the centerline of East Hadley
Road (East County Road 600 South) at its intersection with the centerline of
South Center Street; then east along the centerline of East Hadley Road to
its intersection with the east line of Section 2, Township 14 North, Range 1
East (just west of Hunters Ridge Drive); then north along the east line of
Section 2, Township 14 North, Range 1 East, to the centerline of Reeves Road;
then west along the centerline of Reeves Road to the centerline of South
Center Street; then north along the centerline of South Center Street to the
centerline of Stanley Road; then east along the centerline of Stanley Road to
the centerline of Pierce Drive; then north and east along the centerline of
Pierce Drive to the centerline of Brookside Lane; then north along the
centerline of Brookside Lane to the centerline of West Oliver Avenue; then
east along the centerline of West Oliver Avenue to the centerline of Elm
Drive; then southerly along the centerline of Elm Drive to the centerline of
Stafford Road; then east along the centerline of Stafford Road to the
centerline of Clarks Creek Road; then north along the centerline of Clarks
Creek Road to the point of beginning; and



      (5)   District 5. Beginning at the centerline of East Main
Street (State Road 40) at the intersection of the centerline of North Carr
Road; then northeasterly along the centerline of East Main Street to the
centerline of Clarks Creek Road; then south along the centerline of Clarks
Creek Road to the centerline of Stafford Road; then west along the centerline
of Stafford Road to the centerline of Elm Drive; then northerly along the
centerline of Elm Drive to the centerline of West Oliver Avenue; then west
along the centerline of West Oliver Avenue to the centerline of Brookside
Lane; then south along the centerline of Brookside Lane to the centerline of
Pierce Drive; then west and south along the centerline of Pierce Drive to the
centerline of Stanley Road; then west along the centerline of Stanley Road to
the centerline of South Center Street; then northwesterly along the
centerline of South Center Street to the centerline of South County Road 700
East; then southwesterly along the centerline of South County Road 700 East
to the centerline of White Lick Creek; then following the centerline of White
Lick Creek northwesterly to the centerline of West Main Street (State Road
40); then northeasterly along the centerline of Main Street to the centerline
of Avon Avenue; then north along the centerline of Avon Avenue to the town
boundary; then following the town boundary to the north and east to the
centerline of North Carr Road; then south along the centerline of North Carr
Road to the point of beginning.



   (E)   If any part of the town is not included in one of the
districts established by this section, that territory is included within the
district that:



      (1)   Is contiguous to that territory; and



      (2)   Contains the least population (as determined by the most
recent census) of all districts that are contiguous to that territory.



   (F)   If any part of the town is included in more than one of the
districts established by this section, that territory is included within the
district that:



      (1)   Is one of the districts in which the territory is
described in this section;



      (2)   Is contiguous to that territory; and



      (3)   Contains the least population (as determined by the most
recent census) of all districts that are contiguous to that territory.



   (G)   The Council adopts a map depicting the districts established
under this section, and incorporates the map attached hereto as Exhibit A by
reference into this section. Two copies of this map are on file in the office
of the Clerk-Treasurer for public inspection as required by I.C. 36-1-5-4. If
a conflict exists between the districts as depicted on the map and as
described in this section, the description in this section prevails.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-2)  (Ord. 7-82, passed 12-27-1982; Ord. 19-2002,
passed 11-7-2002; Res. 2012-21, passed 9- -2012; Ord. 20-2012, passed
11-26-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Composition of districts, see I.C. 36-5-1-10.1



   Division of towns into districts, see I.C. 36-5-2-4.1



§ 30.03  PRESIDENT OF THE TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   A president of the Council shall be elected at the last Board
meeting of the year. His or her term shall begin on January 1, and extend
until December 31.



   (B)   The President is the Town Executive.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-3)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Selection of a President, see I.C. 36-5-2-7



   Town Executive, see I.C. 36-5-2-2



§ 30.04  POWERS OF THE TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Council may:



   (A)   Adopt ordinances and resolutions for the performance of
functions of the town;



   (B)   Purchase, hold and convey any interest in property, for the
use of the town;



   (C)   Adopt and use a common seal; and



   (D)   Exercise all powers that are needed for the effective
operation of local governmental affairs.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-4)



Statutory reference:



   Home Rule powers of municipalities, see I.C. 36-1-3-1 through I.C.
36-1-3-9



   Powers of the legislative body, see I.C. 36-5-2-9



§ 30.05  TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Notice of the time and place of regular meetings must be
posted in the Town Hall, and sent once a year to all news media who have
filed a written request for such notice.



   (B)   Notice of special meetings must be given in the same manner at
least 48 hours in advance unless an emergency exists.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-5)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Public meetings, see I.C. 5-14-1.5



§ 30.06  ORDER OF BUSINESS AT TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The following order of business shall be followed at Town Council
meetings:



   (A)   Call to order;



   (B)   Roll-call by Clerk-Treasurer;



   (C)   Review of minutes and approval;



   (D)   Petitions and comments from the floor;



   (E)   Reports for committees, boards and commission;



   (F)   Unfinished business, including ordinances or resolutions
already introduced;



   (G)   New business, introduction of ordinances and resolutions;



   (H)   Miscellaneous business; and



   (I)   Adjournment.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-6)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



§ 30.07  RULES AND PROCEDURES AT TOWN COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Anyone desiring to address the Council shall identify
themselves, giving their name and address.



   (B)   No person shall use violent or contemptuous language, behave
in a disorderly manner, or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer
in the meeting.



   (C)   The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order.



   (D)   From any decision of the presiding officer any member may
appeal to the Council. The appeal shall be by motion duly made and seconded.
A majority vote as defined in I.C. 36-5-2-9.4 is necessary to overrule the
chair.



   (E)   The order of business may be suspended by a two-thirds vote of
the members of the Council.



   (F)   Abstention from voting may be permitted at the discretion of
the presiding officer after the member wishing to abstain states the reason
for the abstention.



   (G)   Voting by proxy is prohibited.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



§ 30.08  PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   All ordinances shall be regularly filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer at least three days before a meeting, and posted in the Town
Hall.



   (B)   All ordinances shall be read two times before being passed,
and no ordinance shall pass on the same day on which it is introduced unless
the provisions of I.C. 36-4-6-13 are complied with.



   (C)   Resolutions may be introduced and passed at the same meeting.



   (D)   Divisions (A) and (B) above may be suspended by a two-thirds
vote of the members of the Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



§ 30.09  VOTING.



   (A)   (1)   A quorum of the Council must be present to take
official action.



      (2)   A QUORUM is defined as a majority of the elected members
of the Council.



   (B)   (1)   Official action requires a majority vote.



      (2)   A majority vote is a majority of all elected members,
not a majority of the quorum.



   (C)   (1)   The Clerk-Treasurer becomes an ex officio member of
the Council only when there is a tie vote.



      (2)   The Clerk-Treasurer may vote to break a tie.



   (D)   On passage or adoption of any ordinance or resolution the yeas
and nays shall be taken and entered in the record.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-9)  (Ord. 6-81, passed 12-14-1981)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum of the Council, see I.C. 36-5-2-9.2



§ 30.10  COMPENSATION OF TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Town Council shall, by ordinance, fix the compensation of
its own members.



   (B)   The compensation of an elected town officer may not be changed
in the year below the amount fixed for the year 1980.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-10)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation for members of the Council, town officers and employees,
see I.C. 36-5-3-2



§ 30.11  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND THE TOWN CODE.



   All ordinances which are of a general and permanent nature, and which
would amend the Town Code, shall be in the following form:







 



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-11)



Statutory reference:



   Publication of ordinances in a town code, see I.C. 36-4-6-14



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




Town Clerk-Treasurer




   31.01   Term of office of Clerk-Treasurer



   31.02   Powers and duties



   31.03   Compensation of Clerk-Treasurer



   31.04   Deputies and employees



   31.05   Blanket bonds



   31.06   Acceptance of credit cards for the payment of fines, fees
and services




Town Manager




   31.20   Town Manager established



   31.21   Duties and responsibilities of Town Manager



TOWN CLERK-TREASURER



§ 31.01  TERM OF OFFICE OF CLERK-TREASURER.



   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer is an elected position whose term of
office is for four years, beginning at noon on January 1 after his or her
election and continuing until a successor is elected and qualified.



   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be elected by the voters of the
whole town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-1)



Statutory reference:



   Clerk-Treasurer’s term of office, see I.C. 36-5-6-3



   Election of the Clerk-Treasurer, see I.C. 36-5-6-4



§ 31.02  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer may administer oaths, take
depositions and take acknowledgments of instruments as required by law.



   (B)   The Town Clerk-Treasurer may perform all duties prescribed by
law, which include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Receive and care for all town monies, and pay them out
upon order of the Town Council;



      (2)   Keep accounts of all town monies;



      (3)   File monthly reports with the Town Council showing all
receipts and disbursements of the town treasury for the preceding month;



      (4)   Maintain records which are open for inspection by the
Town Council;



      (5)   Collect fines resulting from ordinance violations;



      (6)   Issue all licenses; and



      (7)   Attend all Town Council meetings and maintain a
recording of its proceedings.



   (C)   The Clerk-Treasurer is both the Town Clerk and Town Fiscal
Officer pursuant to I.C. 36-5-6-2.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the Clerk-Treasurer to administer oaths and related powers,
see I.C. 36-5-6-5



   Clerk-Treasurer’s role to the legislative body (Town Council), see
I.C. 36-5-2-8



   Powers and duties of the Town Clerk-Treasurer, see I.C. 36-5-6-6



§ 31.03  COMPENSATION OF CLERK-TREASURER.



   The compensation for the services of the person holding the office of
Clerk-Treasurer shall be fixed by the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-3)



Statutory reference:



   Compensation for the Town Clerk-Treasurer, see I.C. 36-5-3-2



§ 31.04  DEPUTIES AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer may appoint the number of deputies and
employees authorized by the Town Council.



   (B)   Deputies and employees so hired serve at the pleasure of the
Clerk-Treasurer.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-4)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the Clerk-Treasurer to appoint deputies and employees, see
I.C. 36-5-6-7



§ 31.05  BLANKET BONDS.



   Pursuant to I.C. 5-4-1-18, the Clerk-Treasurer is hereby authorized to
purchase a blanket bond to cover the faithful performance of all employees,
commission members and persons acting on the town’s behalf, including the
Town Judge, the Town Clerk-Treasurer and any employees directed to file an
individual bond by the Town Council in an amount equal to $15,000 for each
$1,000,000 of receipts of the officer’s office during the last complete
fiscal year before the purchase of the bond, provided, however, that said
amount may not be less than $15,000 nor more than $300,000.



(Ord. 04-2009, passed - -2009)



§ 31.06  ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARDS FOR THE PAYMENT OF FINES, FEES AND
SERVICES.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to establish accounts at,
enter into agreements with, and pay fees to Approval Payment Solutions, Inc.,
for the purpose of enabling the town, to accept Visa and MasterCard credit
cards, check cards and debit cards during the course of normal monetary
transactions.



   (B)   The aforementioned authorization shall expire at the
discretion of the Town Council.



   (C)   The Town Council reserves the right to establish at a future
date a handling fee in the amount of 2% of the transaction amount. Said fee
will be collected and retained by the town for each monetary transaction paid
in part or in whole through the use of a credit card, check card or debit
card.



(Ord. 11-2007, passed 4-23-2007)



TOWN MANAGER



§ 31.20  TOWN MANAGER ESTABLISHED.



   The position of Town Manager for the town is established pursuant to
I.C. 1971 18-3-1.5-1 (now I.C. 36-5-5-1).



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-23)  (Ord. 1-75, passed 3-10-1975)



Statutory reference:



   Town Manager, see I.C. 36-5-5-1 through I.C. 36-5-5-8



§ 31.21  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF TOWN MANAGER.



   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, and unless directed
otherwise by the Town Council, the Town Manager:



   (A)   Shall attend meetings of the Town Council, Board of Zoning
Appeals, Plan Commission, and other such meetings as requested by the Town
Council; shall advise the Town Council of all events, proposals, or inquiries
that may have an impact on the town; shall receive complaints and assemble
available facts and information to aid the Town Council in responding to
significant complaints and issues; and shall recommend actions he deems
necessary or desirable;



   (B)   Shall serve as Secretary of the Plainfield Plan Commission and
Board of Zoning Appeals;



   (C)   Shall hire town employees, other than those in the Town Police
Department, Town Court, and Clerk-Treasurer’s office, to fill positions
authorized by the Town Council in accordance with pay schedules and standards
fixed by the Town Council or applicable law;



   (D)   Shall assist in the management of all town departments, and
shall receive reports from department heads with respect to day-to-day
operations and administrative matters;



   (E)   Shall supervise all town personnel, may impose discipline,
and, subject to the approval of a majority of members of the Town Council,
may discharge or remove town employees, except for members of the Plainfield
Police Department, Town Court, and Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   (F)   Shall administer the execution and enforcement of all
resolutions, orders, and ordinances of the Town Council and shall see that
all state laws required to be administered by the Town Council, or other town
officer subject to the control of the Town Council, are faithfully
administered;



   (G)   Shall assist in the preparation and presentation of the town
budget and shall keep the Town Council apprised of all budgetary expenditures
and requirements as they occur;



   (H)   May, subject to all applicable state laws and town ordinances,
policies, and procedures, execute contracts and make purchases on behalf of
the town;



   (I)   May delegate any of his or her powers to employees responsible
to him or her;



   (J)   May receive service of summons on behalf of the town; and



   (K)   Perform such other legally permissible and appropriate duties
and functions as may be required by the Town Council from time to time.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. 1-75, passed 3-10-1975; Ord. 14-2017,
passed 7-24-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of the Town Manager, see I.C. 36-5-5-1 through I.C. 36-5-5-8



CHAPTER 32:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Departments Established




   32.001   Town departments



   32.002   Organizational chart




Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners




   32.015   Establishment of Metropolitan Police Commissioners



   32.016   Membership of Board



   32.017   Abolishment of office of Town Marshal



   32.018   Operation and functions




Economic Development Commission




   32.030   Establishment of Plainfield Economic Development Commission



   32.031   Members



   32.032   Appointments



   32.033   Commission officers



   32.034   Meetings



   32.035   Removal procedures



   32.036   Pecuniary interests prohibited



   32.037   Powers and duties




Plainfield Area Industrial Development Commission




   32.050   Establishment and purposes of Commission



   32.051   Membership



   32.052   Meetings



   32.053   Election of officers and duties



   32.054   Appropriations



   32.055   Limitation of authority




Town Plan Commission




   32.070   Establishment of Commission



   32.071   Membership




Recreational Advisory Committee




   32.085   Establishment and membership



   32.086   Meetings



   32.087   Powers and duties




Emergency Management Agency




   32.100   Establishment



   32.101   Plan



Department of Redevelopment and
Redevelopment Commission



   32.110   Establishment of Department of Redevelopment



   32.111   Authority of Redevelopment Commission



   32.112   Establishment of Redevelopment Commission



   32.113   Qualifications of commissioners



DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED



§ 32.001  TOWN DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   The following departments are recognized:



      (1)   Fire Department;



      (2)   Park Department;



      (3)   Police Department;



      (4)   Public Works Department;



      (5)   Sanitation Department;



      (6)   Sewer Department;



      (7)   Street Department; and



      (8)   Water Department.



   (B)   Each department shall carry out such duties assigned to it by
applicable state law and duties assigned to it by the Town Council to
effectively carry out the needs and services of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-17)



§ 32.002  ORGANIZATIONAL CHART.



   The organizational chart below depicts the various divisions of the
town.







 



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-18)



Statutory reference:



   Power of units for the effective operation of government as to local
affairs, see I.C. 36-1-3-2



BOARD OF METROPOLITAN POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.015  ESTABLISHMENT OF METROPOLITAN POLICE COMMISSIONERS.



   There is established a Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners for
the town, effective January 1, 1955.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-8)  (Ord. 7, passed 12-13-1954)



Statutory reference:



   Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners, see I.C. 36-8-9-1 through
I.C. 36-8-9-6



§ 32.016  MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD.



   (A)   The Board of Metropolitan Police Commissioners shall consist
of three commissioners appointed by the Town Council.



   (B)   The commissioners must be of good moral character and legal
residents of the town.



   (C)   Not more than two of the commissioners should be of the same
political party, and no police officer currently employed by the town may
serve on the Board.



   (D)   One, but not more than one, member of the Town Council shall
be appointed to serve as an ex officio member of the Board, which member
shall serve on the Board until the earliest to occur of: (1) s/he is no
longer a member of the Town Council; (2) the expiration of his/her Board
term; or (3) s/he is removed from the Board by the Town Council and a
replacement is appointed.



   (E)   Except as necessary to establish staggered terms,
commissioners shall be appointed to serve three-year terms, which expire on
January 1 of the third year after the commissioner’s appointment. The term
of one board member must expire each year.



   (F)   Each commissioner is subject to removal by the Town Council
for any cause that the Town Council considers sufficient or for no cause.



   (G)   All provisions provided by state law concerning the oath,
bond, and compensation of commissioners are incorporated herein by reference.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-9)  (Ord. 7, passed 12-13-1954; Ord. 17-2017, passed
8-14-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Qualifications, terms, removal, oaths, bonds and compensation, see I.C.
36-8-9-3



§ 32.017  ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF TOWN MARSHAL.



   (A)   The enactment of this subchapter is in accordance with the
will and mandate of the legal voters and citizens of the town, pursuant to an
election held on Tuesday, November 2, 1954, at which said election a majority
of the legal voters so voting did vote in favor of the abolishment of the
office of Town Marshal and the establishing of a Board of Metropolitan Police
Commissioners.



   (B)   The said election aforesaid was held pursuant to the statutes
of the state.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-10)  (Ord. 7, passed 12-13-1954)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of the Board, see I.C. 36-8-9-2



§ 32.018  OPERATION AND FUNCTIONS.



   In addition to having the powers and duties set forth in I.C. 36-8-9-4,
and the statutory disciplinary powers set forth in I.C. 36-8-3-4 and
36-8-4-4.1, all of which are incorporated herein by reference, the Board
shall:



   (A)   Keep records and make reports concerning the activity of the
department as may be required by the Town Council or applicable law;



   (B)   Consult with the Town Manager, prior to making general and
special rules for the government and discipline of the department and prior
to making general and special orders to the department, concerning any issue
other than disciplinary charges against a member of the department;



   (C)   Cause the Police Chief to consult with the Town Manager on a
monthly or more frequent basis, as may be required by the Town Council,
concerning day-to-day operations, fiscal matters, and other administrative
issues affecting the department; and



   (D)   Have all other powers and duties as provided by applicable
law, policy, or procedure.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-11)  (Ord. 7, passed 12-13-1954; Ord. 18-2017, passed
8-14-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties of the Board as well as residency, see I.C. 36-8-9-4



ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 32.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAINFIELD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   There is created the Plainfield Economic Development Commission, which
said Commission shall be the Department of Development of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.031  MEMBERS.



   This Commission shall have three members, all to be appointed in the
manner provided in the following section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-28)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.032  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The members of the Plainfield Economic Development Commission
shall be appointed by the President of the Town Council in the following
manner.



   (B)   (1)   One of the members so appointed shall be selected by
the President of the Town Council; one of the members shall be nominated by
the County Council of the county, and one shall be nominated by the Town
Council.



      (2)   The Commissioners shall take office upon their
appointment and their terms shall run the following number of years from
February following such original appointment:



         (a)   The Commissioner selected by the President of the
Town Council, three years;



         (b)   The Commissioner nominated by the Town Council,
two years; and



         (c)   The Commissioner nominated by the County Council,
one year.



      (3)   At the expiration of the respective terms of each of the
Commissioners, their respective terms of each of the Commissioners, their
respective successors shall be selected and nominated in the same manner as
the original appointees, each of which nominees shall be appointed by the
President of the Town Council within ten days after receiving the nomination,
and each succeeding member after the original appointees, shall serve for a
term of four years. In the event any person appointed shall fail to qualify
within ten days after the mailing to him or her of notice of his or her
appointment, or if any member after qualifying shall die, resign or vacate
said office, or be removed, a new member shall be chosen and appointed to
fill the vacancy in the same manner as provided for the member in respect to
whom such vacancy occurs and the member so chosen and appointed shall serve
for the remainder of the vacated term.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-29)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.033  COMMISSION OFFICERS.



   (A)   No person shall be appointed as a Commissioner, who is not
either a resident of the town, employed in the town or owner of a business in
the town. If any Commissioner shall cease to qualify in one of the above
categories, his or her appointment on said Board shall thereby terminate and
his or her office shall become vacant.



   (B)   Each Commissioner before entering upon his or her duties,
shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the usual form, to be endorsed
upon the certificate of his or her appointment, which shall be promptly filed
with the Clerk-Treasurer.



   (C)   The Commission originally appointed shall meet within 30 days
after appointment at a time and place designated by the President of the Town
Council for the purpose of organization, and shall meet to reorganize in
February of each succeeding year.



   (D)   The Commission shall elect one of its members as President,
one as Vice-President and one as Secretary, each of which officers shall
serve from the day of his or her election until January 31 next following his
or her election and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-30)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.034  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall adopt such by-laws, rules and regulations as it
may deem necessary for the proper conduct of its proceedings. Regular or
special meetings shall be held at such time as the Commission may determine
and upon such notice as it may fix, and a majority of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum and concurrence of a majority shall be necessary to
authorize any action.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.035  REMOVAL PROCEDURES.



   Any Commissioner may be removed from office for neglect of duty,
incompetency, disability to perform his or her duties, or any other good
cause, by the officer or board which nominated him or her. A Commissioner so
removed may obtain judicial review of such removal by filing a complaint in
the Circuit Court of the county, but the burden of proof shall be upon the
officer or board which removed the Commissioner. The cause shall be placed on
the advanced calendar and be tried as other civil cases are tried by the
Court without the intervention of a jury. An appeal from such judgment may be
taken as in other civil cases.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-32)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.036  PECUNIARY INTERESTS PROHIBITED.



   No Commissioner shall have any pecuniary interest in any contract,
employment, leases, purchase or sale made under the provisions of this act,
and any such transaction made in which any Commissioner has a pecuniary
interest shall be void ab initio; provided, however, that any property
required for the purposes of this act in which a Commissioner has a pecuniary
interest may be acquired but only by gift or condemnation.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-33)  (Ord. 3-1981, passed 8-10-1981)



§ 32.037  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plainfield Economic Development Commission is hereby granted all
the powers and duties set out in the Municipal Economic Development Act of
1965, the same being the I.C. Title 18-6-4.5 (now I.C. 36-7-12-1 et seq.)



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-34)



PLAINFIELD AREA INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 32.050  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSES OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission is created, to be known as the Plainfield Area
Industrial Development Commission, (hereinafter referred to as the
“Commission”) whose purpose or purposes shall be:



      (1)   Encouraging, promoting and assisting in the industrial
and commercial development of the town and surrounding territory in whatever
way and by such means as will improve normal growth, employment
opportunities, stability of employment in existing industry, advancement of
the industrial and commercial life of the community and will strengthen the
general economy of the area;



      (2)   Developing and/or participating in programs further in
the foregoing purposes and correcting or eliminating conditions detrimental
to such purposes, and assisting or giving effect to such programs of the Town
Plan Commission, the Town Council, Guilford Township, the county and the
state;



      (3)   Assisting on projects or undertakings concerned with the
foregoing purposes; and



      (4)   Utilizing and working cooperatively with industrial
development representatives of existing industries in the area furthering
such purposes.



   (B)   The Plainfield Area Industrial Development Commission shall
carry on all activities and do any and all things which may be necessary or
incidental to the purposes stated above as agents or representatives of the
community and not in furtherance of the benefits or gain of private
individuals or groups not representative of the community as a whole.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-37)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



Statutory reference:



   Industrial development, see I.C. 36-7-13-1 through I.C. 36-7-13-9



§ 32.051  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The membership of the Commission shall be residents of the
town or Guilford Township and shall be qualified by knowledge and experience
in matters pertaining to the commercial and industrial development of the
area.



   (B)   The Commission shall consist of nine members. Three members
shall be official members whose terms shall not extend beyond their elected
or appointed terms, as follows:



      (1)   One member selected by the Town Council from its
membership;



      (2)   One member selected by the Plan Commission from its
membership;



      (3)   The Guilford Township Trustee; and



      (4)   Six members shall be appointed by the Plainfield Town
Council for the following terms:



         (a)   Two for a term of one year;



         (b)   Two for a term of two years; and



         (c)   Two for a term of three years.



   (C)   Their terms shall expire on January 1 on the first, second and
third years, respectively, following their appointment. Thereafter, as the
terms expire, each new appointment shall be for a term of three years. If
vacancies occur among such members of the Commission, the Town Council shall
appoint a member for the unexpired term. The members of the Commission shall
receive no salary for service on such Commission.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-38)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



Statutory reference:



   Five-member Commission, see I.C. 36-7-13-5



§ 32.052  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall fix the time for holding regular meetings, but it
shall meet at least once, beginning in January, in alternate months of the
year. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson who shall notify all
the members, at least one week in advance of such meeting, of the time and
place of the special meeting.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-39)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



§ 32.053  ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   At the first meeting of each year, the Commission shall elect,
for a term of one year, and until their successors are elected, a
Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson and a Secretary and Treasurer, and shall
immediately inform the Town Council of the results of such election. The
“official” members of the Commission shall not serve as officers of such
Commission.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to preside at all
meetings and in general to perform all the duties usually incident to such
efforts or which may be recommended by the Town Council.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chairperson to perform all
the duties of the Chairperson, in case of the latter’s absence or
disability and such duties as may be assigned by the Town Council or the
Chairperson.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Secretary and Treasurer to keep
accurate minutes and records of the meetings and proceedings of the
Commission and to perform all the duties usually pertaining to such office.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-40)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



§ 32.054  APPROPRIATIONS.



   The Town Council may appropriate funds to carry out the purposes of the
Commission and shall be responsible for expending such funds on
recommendation of the Commission and under regular town procedure.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-41)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



§ 32.055  LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Commission shall not enter into contracts or instruments
or agreements of obligation on behalf of the town with public authorities,
private persons, firms or corporations or make any agreements written or
otherwise which might be considered (or construed) obligatory or binding on
the town, its utilities or commissions.



   (B)   Voluntary gifts, donations and contributions may be accepted
by the Commission, to enable it to carry out its purposes. The Commission
shall keep accurate records of such gifts, donations and contributions and
the use and disposition thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-42)  (Res. passed 12-30-1963)



TOWN PLAN COMMISSION



§ 32.070  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   There is established a Town Plan Commission under the authority
provided in Chapter 174 of the Acts of 1947 of the Indiana General Assembly,
being I.C. 36-7-1 et seq.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. 2-1955, passed - -)



§ 32.071  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The membership be as provided by said statute, and shall be
composed of three persons in the town government, to be appointed by the Town
Council, and four citizen members to be appointed by the President of the
Town Council, not more than two of whom shall be members of the same
political party.



   (B)   Initial terms of citizen members shall be:



      (1)   Two for a term of three years;



      (2)   Two for a term of four years; and



      (3)   Citizen members shall hold no other office in the town
government and shall be residents of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-46)  (Ord. 2-1955, passed - -)



RECREATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 32.085  ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP.



   The Town Council establishes a Recreational Advisory Committee for the
town. The Committee shall be composed of five members, all residents of the
town, three to be appointed by the Town Council, one by the Guilford Township
School Board and one by the Guilford Township Library Board. Of the original
five members, three shall be appointed to serve four-, three- and two-year
terms by the Town Council, one shall be appointed to serve a two-year term by
the School Board and one shall be appointed to serve a one-year term by the
Library Board. Thereafter, re-appointments shall be for four- year term, all
terms to expire on the first Monday in January, and the fractional portion of
1971 to be considered a full one-year period, and the proper Board shall
appoint a member to complete an unexpired term if such should occur.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-48)  (Res. passed 7-26-1971)



§ 32.086  MEETINGS.



   (A) At the first regular meeting of each year, the Recreational
Advisory Committee shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a
Secretary from within its own membership.



   (B)   The Town Council may attend all meetings of the said
Recreational Advisory Committee, if said Town Board desires, and the said
Recreational Advisory Committee shall fix a time and place for its meeting,
and shall meet at least quarterly, or more frequently, if determined
necessary, three members shall constitute a quorum, and said Committee shall
keep minutes of its proceedings.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-49)  (Res. passed 7-26-1971)



§ 32.087  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Recreational Advisory Committee shall function under the direction
of the Town Council and shall:



   (A)   Submit an annual report to the Town Council;



   (B)   Submit recommendations for the enlargement of recreational
programs and facilities;



   (C)   Recommend regulations and rules governing the use of the park
and recreation facilities by the public;



   (D)   Prepare and recommend an annual budget for nonexisting
recreational activities to the Town Council for approval;



   (E)   Administer programs as directed by the Town Council; and



   (F)   Perform such other function as the Town Council may direct.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-50)  (Res. passed 7-26-1971)



EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY



§ 32.100  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is established an Emergency Management Agency (hereafter referred
to as the “Agency”) for the purpose of responding to disasters and other
emergencies. The Agency shall adopt a Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan
(hereafter referred to as the “Plan”) for the purpose of coordinated
response to such disasters and emergencies.



(Ord. 19-2004, passed 9-27-2004)



§ 32.101  PLAN.



   (A)   The Plan establishes the basis for providing emergency
management response to areas within the town that have been impacted by a
disaster or emergency. The Plan also covers emergencies requiring county,
state and possibly federal assistance, assuming that a disaster or emergency
overwhelms the capability of town officials.



   (B)   The Plan covers all four phase of emergency management:
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. The Plan is in a format that
requires all agencies to develop and implement standard operating procedures
and guides.



   (C)   The Plan uses the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
emergency support functions concept. The emergency support functions groups
like type department into the same group. Each department is grouped into one
or more emergency support function. In addition, each emergency support
function has a department assigned as the primary coordinating agency with
other departments as support coordinating agency.



(Ord. 19-2004, passed 9-27-2004)



DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT AND
REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 32.110  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT.



   There is hereby created the Department of Redevelopment of the Town of
Plainfield, Indiana, which shall be entitled to exercise and have all the
rights, powers, privileges and immunities accorded to such department by the
Act (I.C. 36-7-14).



(Ord. 03-1992, passed 3-9-1992)



§ 32.111  AUTHORITY OF REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   Such Department of Redevelopment of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana,
shall be under the control of a Board of five members to be known as the
Plainfield Redevelopment Commission.



(Ord. 03-1992, passed 3-9-1992)



§ 32.112  ESTABLISHMENT OF REDEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board to be known as the
Plainfield    Redevelopment    Commission. Three of said Commissioners
shall be appointed by the President of the Town Council of the Town of
Plainfield, Indiana and two members of said Commission shall be appointed by
the Town Council of the Town of Plainfield. Each Redevelopment Commissioner
shall serve for one year from the first day of January after his or her
appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified,
except that the original Commissioners shall serve from the date of their
appointment until the first day of January in the second year after their
appointment. If a vacancy occurs, a successor shall be appointed in the same
manner as the original Commissioner, and the successor shall serve for the
remainder of the vacated term.



   (B)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or her
duties, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in the form prescribed by
law, to be endorsed on the certificate of his or her appointment, which shall
be promptly filed with the Clerk-Treasurer of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana.



   (C)   Each Redevelopment Commissioner, before beginning his or her
duties, shall execute a bond payable to the state, with surety to be approved
by the President of the Town Council of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana. The
bond must be in a penal sum of $15,000 and must be conditioned on the
faithful performance of the duties of his or her office and the accounting
for all monies and property that may come into his or her hands or under his
or her control. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the Redevelopment
District.



   (D)   The Redevelopment Commission shall organize itself as a body,
adopt rules and bylaws necessary for the proper conduct of their proceedings
and the carrying out of their duties as provided by the Act.



   (E)   The President of the Town Council or the Town Council member
that appointed a Redevelopment Commissioner may summarily remove that
Commissioner from office at any time.



(Ord. 03-1992, passed 3-9-1992)



§ 32.113  QUALIFICATIONS OF COMMISSIONERS.



   Such Commissioners shall have the qualifications prescribed by the laws
of the State of Indiana as from time to time amended and shall qualify as
therein provided; and shall exercise and enjoy the rights and powers and
assume the duties and obligations conferred and imposed by said Act,
including but not limited to the following qualifications:



   (A)   A Redevelopment Commissioner must be at least 18 years of age
and must be a resident of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana. If a Commissioner
ceases to be qualified under this section, he or she forfeits his or her
office.



   (B)   No Redevelopment Commissioner of the Town of Plainfield shall
receive a salary; but such Redevelopment Commissioners are entitled to
reimbursement for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their
duties.



   (C)   A Redevelopment Commissioner may not have a pecuniary interest
in any contract, employment, purchase or sale made under the provisions of
this subchapter and the Act. However, any property required for redevelopment
purposes in which a Commissioner has a pecuniary interest may be acquired,
but only by gift or condemnation. A transaction made in violation of this
section of this subchapter is void.



(Ord. 03-1992, passed 3-9-1992)



CHAPTER 33:  JUDICIAL BRANCH



Section



   33.01   Town Court established



   33.02   Town Court opening date



   33.03   Town Judge



   33.04   Employees and salaries



   33.05   Town Judge salary



   33.06   Statutory powers and authority



   33.07   Powers, duties and responsibilities



§ 33.01  TOWN COURT ESTABLISHED.



   There is created for the town a Town Court and it shall be known as the
“Town Court of Plainfield, Indiana”.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-19)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of a Town Court election and the election of its Judge,
see I.C. 33-10.1-1-3 et seq.



§ 33.02  TOWN COURT OPENING DATE.



   The Town Court shall be opened and operational as soon as practical
after July 1, 1989, at the discretion of the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-20)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



§ 33.03  TOWN JUDGE.



   The Town Judge, upon the effective date of this chapter, declares a
vacancy exists for the office of Town Judge, and directs that said vacancy be
filled in accordance with I.C. 3-13-9-2, said term of said Town Judge to
continue until said office is placed on the ballot for the municipal election
to be held November 5,1992, unless said appointed Town Judge is removed
before said election.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-21)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



§ 33.04  EMPLOYEES AND SALARIES.



   Said Town Judge may employ such persons to work for the Town Court as
are approved in advance by the Town Council, and funds appropriated to pay
their salaries and any applicable benefits.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-22)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



§ 33.05  TOWN JUDGE SALARY.



   The Town Judge, upon appointment as provided for herein, and any
successor, shall receive an annual salary to be established by the Town
Council, payable in 12 equal monthly payments. Said salary shall not commence
until the Town Court is functional and operating and may be changed by the
Town Council at its discretion, but no more frequently than annually.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-23)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



§ 33.06  STATUTORY POWERS AND AUTHORITY.



   The Town Court shall be operated and conducted pursuant to and in
accordance with the statutory powers and authority granted by the laws of the
state.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-24)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



§ 33.07  POWERS, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Town Judge shall be vested with the powers, duties and
responsibilities provided by the laws of the state to Town Courts and shall
be bound by all applicable codes and ethics of judicial conduct and
administration.



(1991 Draft Code, § 3-25)  (Ord. 1989-15, passed 6-26-1989)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCES AND REVENUE



Section




General Provisions




   34.001   Bad debt/uncollectible account receivable write-off policy
and procedure



   34.002   Purchasing agency and purchasing agents




Tax Abatement Procedures




   34.015   General provisions



   34.016   Definitions



   34.017   Financial incentives



   34.018   Office development real property tax abatement



   34.019   Mixed use development real property tax abatement



   34.020   Institutional development real property tax abatement



   34.021   Industrial development real property tax abatement



   34.022   Warehouse development real property tax abatement



   34.023   Council’s authority to enlarge real property tax
abatement general standards



   34.024   Personal property tax abatement



   34.025   Agreement for tax abatement



   34.026   Corporate citizenship



   34.027   Information required of applicants seeking tax abatement
designation; application required



   34.028   Statement of benefits, declaratory and confirmatory
resolutions required



   34.029   Review by the Tax Abatement Committee



   34.030   Design Review Committee



   34.031   Town Council’s review of declaratory resolution



   34.032   Confirmatory resolutions



   34.033   Annual review of petitions by the Council



   34.034   Failure of petitioner to comply may result in revocation of
tax abatement by Town Council



   34.035   Review of tax abatement procedures by the Town Council




Excise Surtax and Wheel Tax




   34.050   Distribution of increase




Excise Food and Beverage Tax




   34.060   Imposition of tax



   34.061   Percentage of tax



   34.062   Manner of payment



   34.063   Amounts



   34.064   Establishment of fund



   34.065   Application




Funds




   34.080   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund



   34.081   Firemen’s Pension Fund



   34.082   Motor Vehicle Highway Fund (MVH)



   34.083   Accident Report Account



   34.084   Local Road and Street Fund (LRS)



   34.085   Police Pension Fund



   34.086   2012 Storm Damage Repair Fund (#122)



   34.087   Clerk-Treasurer Employee Recognition Fund (121)



   34.088   Police Department Explorer Program Operating Fund



   34.089   County Communication Center Non-Reverting Equipment
Replacement Fund



   34.090   Town Police Department Drug Buy and Covert Investigations
Cash Fund



   34.091   Fire Territory Equipment Replacement Fund



   34.092   Parks and Recreation Department Special Non-Reverting
Operating Fund



   34.093   County Communications Center Fund (#258)



   34.094   Levy Excess Fund



   34.095   Parks and Recreation Beneficent Fund



   34.096   Rainy Day Fund



   34.097   Fire Department Beneficent Fund



   34.098   Metropolis Construction Non-Reverting Fund



   34.099   HCCC Staff Incentive Fund



   34.100   LOIT Special Distribution Fund



   34.101   Cumulative Capital Development Fund



   34.102   Bicentennial Park Special Non-Reverting Construction Fund



   34.103   Miscellaneous funds continued



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see Ch. 38



   Town policies, see Ch. 36



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.001  BAD DEBT/UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNT RECEIVABLE WRITE-OFF POLICY AND
PROCEDURE.



   The following shall constitute the bad debt/uncollectible account
receivable write-off policies and procedures for the town.



   (A)   In the event that accounts receivable under this section, as
amended from time to time, are not paid within the time fixed by the town or
a town agency or department, the same shall be deemed delinquent. A penalty
of 10% of the amount of the account receivable may be attached as delinquent
fees.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      UNCOLLECTABLE ACCOUNT. A delinquent account receivable for which
the town or town agency or department has reasonably and diligently attempted
collection, but in which such collection remains unsuccessful.



   (C)   The town or town agency or department shall prepare a
semi-annual schedule of uncollectible accounts. The semi-annual schedule
shall consist of accounts the town or town agency or department has
determined to be uncollectible.



   (D)   The town or town agency or department shall generate a
statement setting forth the efforts that have been made to collect the
account and a statement that such efforts have been unsuccessful.



   (E)   The town or town agency or department shall produce a
statement, including the reasons therefore, that the town or town agency or
department believes it is not economically feasible to pursue collection
efforts on the specified uncollectible account.



   (F)   A schedule of uncollectible accounts shall be submitted to the
Town Council for action by the Town Council to declare said accounts listed
as collectible or uncollectible and may authorize the town or town agency or
department to cease further collection procedures and expense the amounts
outstanding on the accounts declared uncollectible as bad debts.



   (G)   The town or the town agency or department may attempt to
recover the amount of the bad debt in a civil action against the debtor.



   (H)   Accounts in which state and/or federal law mandates an amount
is to be written off shall be written off as bad debts upon the approval of
the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



(Ord. 12-2007, passed 5-14-2007)



§ 34.002  PURCHASING AGENCY AND PURCHASING AGENTS.



   (A)   Designation of purchasing agency. The Town Council is hereby
designated as the purchasing agency for the town with all of the powers and
duties authorized under I.C. 5-22 et seq.



   (B)   Designation of purchasing agent. The Town Council hereby
designates the Town Manager as purchasing agent for the town. The Town
Council may change this designation or designate additional purchasing agents
as it deems necessary.



   (C)   Authority of purchasing agent.



      (1)   The purchasing agent is authorized to make purchases on
behalf of the town as directed by the Town Council or as set forth herein.
All purchases by the purchasing agent shall be in conformance with I.C. 5-22
et seq., all other applicable laws, and all town ordinances, policies, and
procedures.



      (2)   The purchasing agent may make a purchase with an
estimated cost of less than $25,000, without additional approval of the Town
Council, on the open market without inviting or receiving quotes or bids.
Purchases may not be artificially divided so as to bring any individual
purchase within the limit set forth in this section.



      (3)   Except as otherwise authorized by I.C. 5-22, purchases
with an estimated cost between $25,000 and $50,000 shall require the advance
approval of the Town Council. The purchasing agent shall provide information
to the Council regarding specifications for the purchase, comparative costs
or prices, and qualifications of known vendors or suppliers. The Council may,
at its discretion, modify the specifications for the purchase, mandate the
use of a specific vendor or supplier, or require the purchasing agent to
formally solicit quotes or go through a formal bidding process.



      (4)   The purchasing agent shall follow the procedure set
forth in I.C. 5-22-8-3, or other applicable provision of I.C. 5-22, for all
purchases that have an estimated cost between $50,000 and $ 150,000. As such,
I.C. 5-22-8-3 is hereby incorporated by reference.



      (5)   For purchases with an expected cost of more than
$150,000, the competitive public bidding procedures set forth in I.C. 5-22-7,
or other applicable provisions I.C. 5-22, shall be followed. As such, I.C.
5-22-7 is hereby incorporated by reference.



(Ord. 15-2017, passed 7-24-2017)



TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURES



§ 34.015  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Legislative findings, in accordance with I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2 are hereby
made by the Town Council as follows.



   (A)   The Council hereby finds that there is a need to develop tax
abatement procedures which set forth the philosophy, regulations, procedures
and general standards, which the town believes are necessary to encourage
economic development within the town limits.



   (B)   The Council therefore declares that the following tax
abatement procedures and general standards shall govern tax abatement
requests filed for consideration with the town.



   (C)   The following tax abatement procedures and general standards
are promulgated pursuant to the Home Rule powers vested in the town pursuant
to I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq. and the property tax abatement statutes as set forth
in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1 et seq. All persons, who desire to seek real or personal
property tax abatement consideration, have the duty to comply with the
applicable provisions set forth in this subchapter, as well as all state law
requirements. However, those persons who petition pursuant to § 34.027, must
only comply with the applicable slate law provisions, and the requirements of
annual review provided for herein in § 34.033.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.016  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DESIGNATING BODY. The Town Council.



      ECONOMIC REVITALIZATIAN AREA (ERA). An area which is within the
corporate limits of the town which has become undesirable or impossible for,
normal development and occupancy because of a lack of development, cessation
of growth, deterioration of improvements or character of occupancy, age,
obsolescence, substandard buildings or other factors which have impaired
values or prevent a normal development of property or use of property. The
term ECONOMIC REVITALIZATION AREA (ERA) shall also include: any area, where a
facility or a group of facilities that are technologically, economically or
energy obsolete are located and where the obsolescence may lead to a decline
in employment and tax revenues.



      HARD DOLLAR COSTS. Expenses directly related to the proposed new
construction or rehabilitation excluding costs of financing, architect,
engineering and attorneys’ fees.



      INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. Includes those definitions set forth in
major groups 20 through 39 of the Standards Industrial Classification Manual
(SIC), published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, which
manual is hereby incorporated by reference, with copies being maintained in
the office of the Town Manager.



      INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT. The development of any day care or
educational facilities.



      MIXED USE. Any mix of two or more of the following uses only:
office, retail, institutional or industrial.



      NEW MANUFACTURING EQUIPMENT. Tangible personal property which was:



         (a)   Installed during the period beginning March 1,
1983, and ending December 31, 1993, in an area that is declared an economic
revitalization area after February 28, 1983, in which a deduction for
tangible personal property is allowed;



         (b)   Is used in the direct production, manufacture,
fabrication, assembly, extraction, mining, processing, refining or finishing
of other tangible personal property; and



         (c)   Was acquired by its owner for use as described in
division (b) above and was never before used by its owner for any purpose in
the state.



      PROPERTY. A building or structure, but shall not include land.



      REDEVELOPMENT. The construction of new structures, in economic
revitalization areas, either:



         (a)   On unimproved real estate; or



         (b)   On real estate upon which a prior existing
structure is demolished to allow for a new construction.



      REHABILITATION. The remodeling, repair or betterment of property
in any manner or any enlargement of extension of property.



      TAX ABATEMENT COMMITTEE.



         (a)   The Committee established pursuant to this
subchapter to review petitions for tax abatement consisting of three members
as follows:



            1.   The Town Manager;



            2.   A member of the Town Plan Commission
designated by the Plan Commission; and



            3.   A member of the Town Redevelopment Commission
designated by the Town Plan Commission.



         (b)   The two members designated by the Plan Commission
shall serve on such Committee until they resign or are replaced with a
successor designated by the Plan Commission.



      WAREHOUSE DEVELOPMENT. And include those definitions set forth in
major groups 42, 50, and 51 of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
(SIC), published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, which
manual is hereby incorporated by reference with copies being maintained in
the Office of the Town Manager.



   (B)   Any terms not specifically defined in this section shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.017  FINANCIAL INCENTIVES.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town not to offer financial incentives
for economic development projects that involve the relocation of a business
from another state jurisdiction to the town.



   (B)   The town’s decision to offer financial incentives to
relocate an economic development project from another state jurisdiction to
the town will be based on the following:



      (1)   A letter or other written documentation from the
jurisdiction where the business is currently located that it has exhausted
all resources available to keep the business in such jurisdiction;



      (2)   The business has exhausted its efforts to reach an
agreement with the jurisdiction in which it is located; and



      (3)   The business has provided the town with a written
financial incentive package from another state to relocate to another state
and such relocation of said business would be detrimental to the Indianapolis
Metropolitan Region and state in terms of the lost of capital investment
and/or jobs.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.018  OFFICE DEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following tax
abatement general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives of office developments within the town, and would warrant tax
abatement consideration as set forth herein.



   (B)   Three-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed office developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 15,000 square feet may be
considered for three-year real property tax abatement.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town for office development, and which propose
not less than 5,000 square feet to be rehabilitated, may be considered for
three-year real property tax abatement.



   (C)   Six-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed office developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 30,000 square feet may be
considered for six-year real property tax abatement.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town for office development, and which propose
that not less than 10,000 square feet to be rehabilitated, may be considered
for six-year real property tax abatement.



   (D)   Ten-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed office developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 50,000 square feet may be
considered for ten-year real property tax abatement.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town and which propose not less than 20,000
square feet to be rehabilitated, may be considered for ten-year real property
tax abatement.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.019  MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following tax
abatement general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives of mixed use developments within the town, and would warrant tax
abatement consideration as set forth herein.



   (B) Three-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed mixed use developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 15,000 square feet may be
considered for three-year real property tax abatement.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town and which propose not less than 5,000
square feet to be rehabilitated, may be considered for six-year real property
tax abatement.



   (C)   Six-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed mixed use developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 30,000 square feet may be
considered for six-year real property tax abatements.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town for mixed use development, and which
propose that not less than 10,000 square feet to be rehabilitated, may be
considered for six-year real property tax abatement.



   (D)   Ten-year general standards.



      (1)   New construction. Proposed mixed use developments which
incorporate new construction of not less than 50,000 square feet may be
considered for ten-year real property tax abatement.



      (2)   Rehabilitation. Proposed rehabilitation of existing
structures located within the town, and which propose rehabilitation of not
less than 20,000 square feet, may be considered for a ten-year real property
tax abatement.



   (E)   Compliance with state law. All applicants seeking real
property tax abatement consideration under this section must also comply with
all applicable regulations set forth in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.020  INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following
general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives for institutional development within the town, and would warrant
tax abatement consideration as set forth herein.



   (B)   Three-year general standards. New construction only: proposed
new construction of institutional developments which are to be located within
the town may be considered for three-year real property tax abatement.



   (C)   Compliance with state law. All applicants seeking real
property tax abatement consideration under this section must also comply with
all applicable regulations set forth in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2 et seq.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.021  INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following
general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives for industrial development town-wide, and would warrant tax
abatement consideration as set forth herein.



   (B)   Three-year general standards. New construction: proposed
industrial developments which incorporate new construction of not less than
10,000 square feet, may be considered tor three-year real property tax
abatement.



   (C)   Six-year general standards. New construction: proposed
industrial developments which incorporate new construction of not less than
20,000 square feet, may be considered for six-year real property tax
abatement.



   (D)   Ten-year general standards. New construction: proposed
industrial developments which incorporate new construction of not less than
30,000 square feet, may be considered for ten-year real property tax
abatement.



   (E)   Compliance with state law. All applicants seeking real
property tax abatement consideration under this section must also comply with
all applicable regulations set forth in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq.



   (F)   Compliance with state law. All applicants seeking real
property tax abatement consideration under this section must also comply with
all applicable regulations set forth in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.022  WAREHOUSE DEVELOPMENT REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following
general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives for warehouse development within the town, and would warrant tax
abatement consideration as set forth herein.



   (B)   Three-year general standards. New construction and
rehabilitation: proposed warehouse development of new construction or
rehabilitation of not less than 25,000 square feet per project may be
considered for three-year real property tax abatement.



   (C)   Six-year general standards. New construction and
rehabilitation: proposed warehouse development of new construction or
rehabilitation of not less than 50,000 square feet per project may be
considered for six-year real property tax abatement



   (D)   Ten-year general standards. New construction: proposed
warehouse development of new construction or rehabilitation of not less than
100,000 square feet per project shall be considered for six-year real
property tax abatement.



   (E)   Compliance with state law. All applicants seeking real
property tax abatement consideration under this section must also comply with
all applicable regulations set forth in I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.023  COUNCIL’S AUTHORITY TO ENLARGE REAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT
GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   The Town Council believes that pursuant to its Home Rule
authority set forth in I.C. 36-1-3-1 et seq., and the authority granted to it
under I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-1 et seq., and it has the authority to declare areas
within the town, economic revitalization areas (ERA) which do net meet the
general standards for real property tax abatement set forth in §§ 34.018
through 34.020.



   (B)   The Council therefore declares that individuals who desire to
petition for real property tax abatement which do not meet the general
standards set forth herein but nevertheless have a business or business
development that is unique in the total number of jobs created, salary levels
of jobs, total investment in building and equipment or similar
characteristics, may do so by filing proper petitions and forms of
declaratory and confirmatory resolutions with the office of the Town Manager.
Such forms shall set forth in detail the reasons why they believe their
circumstances create a unique opportunity for the town and that they should
be granted such abatement and declared an ERA.



   (C)   The Tax Abatement Committee, as the preliminary review body
shall review such petitions, and declaratory and confirmatory resolutions on
a project by project basis and make its report to the Town Council which
shall have the sole and absolute authority as the designating body to declare
the area to be an economic revitalization area for tax abatement purposes.



   (D)   The Tax Abatement Committee in its report and the Council in
its decision shall make specific findings supporting their conclusion that
there is or is not a rational basis for the determination that the area
should be declared an economic revitalization area.



   (E)   Real property tax abatement granted under this section shall
be limited to the specific amount of years determined by the Council to be
appropriate under the circumstances. The Town Council shall have the sole and
absolute discretion to determine the specific amount of years of tax
abatement.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.024  PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Generally. The Town Council believes that the following
general standards have a reasonable relationship to the development
objectives of promoting the installation of new manufacturing equipment
within the town, and would warrant tax abatement consideration as set forth
herein.



   (B)   Five- and ten-year general standards.



      (1)   An applicant seeking a five or ten year personal
property tax abatement must comply with all provisions of I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5
and the provisions of §§ 34.025 and 34.027 that are applicable.



      (2)   The Town Council may grant a five or ten year personal
property tax abatement based on, but not limited to, the following factors:



         (a)   Useful life of machinery;



         (b)   Assessed value of machinery being replaced;



         (c)   Impact of abatement on existing tax increment
financing district;



         (d)   Aggregate capital investment in buildings and
machinery; and



         (e)   Number of jobs created.



   (C)   Verification. Applicants seeking personal property tax
abatement must verify that the new manufacturing equipment will be used in
conjunction with uses within major groups 20 through 39 or 42 of the
Standards Industrial Classification Manual, published by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.025  AGREEMENT FOR TAX ABATEMENT.



   The Town Council shall require that all applicants for economic
revitalization area designation enter into an agreement with the town
following adoption of a declaratory resolution and prior to the public
hearing on the economic revitalization area designation request. The
memorandum of agreement shall contain the investment levels, job creation
and/or retention levels and wage rates the applicant has committed to the
town in order to receive consideration for economic revitalization area
designation. A final public hearing on the economic revitalization area
designation request shall not be held unless the memorandum of agreement has
been completed.  A$250 application fee must be submitted at the time of
application for tax abatement.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.026  CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP.



   Applicants receiving tax abatements from the town are encouraged to
contribute to the development of the Plainfield community through
participation in professional, volunteer, service and not-for-profit
organizations.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.027  INFORMATION REQUIRED OF APPLICANTS SEEKING TAX ABATEMENT
DESIGNATION; APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Owners must file. Owners of real property or new manufacturing
equipment located within the town may petition the Town Council on forms
provided by the Town Manager for real or personal property tax abatement
consideration. All information and attachments required by the designation
application must be completed and filed with the Town Manager together with a
filing fee of $250 to cover processing and administrative costs.



   (B)   Petition information. Property owners petitioning for tax
abatement shall provide the following information on the petition to enable
the Council to consider their request:



      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of the real property
owner(s) (and personal properly owner(s), in case of the request for personal
property tax abatement), and any other person(s) leasing, intending to lease
or having an option to purchase such property, and a brief description of the
business;



      (2)   If the business organization is publicly held, the name
of the corporate parent and the name under which the corporation is filed
with the Securities Exchange Commission;



      (3)   The legal description and commonly known address of the
real property for which real property tax abatement is being petitioned; or
the legal description and commonly known address of the facility at which the
new manufacturing equipment for which tangible personal property tax
abatement is being petitioned will be located;



      (4)   A map and/or plat describing the area where tax
abatement is being requested;



      (5)   The current assessed valuation of the real property
improvement before rehabilitation, redevelopment, economic revitalization or
improvement; or the current assessed valuation of the tangible personal
property to be replaced by new manufacturing equipment;



      (6)   A description of the proposed project (whether
rehabilitation, new construction or installation of new manufacturing
equipment), including information about physical improvements to be made or
the new manufacturing equipment to be installed, an estimate of the cost of
the project, the amount of land to be used, the proposed use of the
improvements, and a general statement as to the value of the project to the
business;



      (7)   An estimate of the number of new permanent jobs to be
created by the project within one year, a statement of the current number of
permanent and part-time jobs at the location and the impact on those current
jobs to be caused by the project, and the projected annual salaries for each
such position to be created;



      (8)   Verification that no building permit has been issued for
construction on the property for the improvement proposed or verification
that the new manufacturing equipment has not been installed;



      (9)   The Standard Industrial Classification Manual major
group within which the proposed project would be classified, by number and
description;



      (10)   The Internal Revenue Service Code of principal business
activity by which the proposed project would be classified, by number and
description;



      (11)   A description of actual or anticipated public financing
for the project;



      (12)   For real property tax abatement, a description of how
the property in question has become undesirable for or impossible of normal
development and occupancy because of lack of development, cessation of
growth, deterioration of improvements, or character of occupancy, age,
obsolescence, substandard buildings or other factors which have impaired
values and prevent a normal development of the property or property use;



      (13)   For personal property tax abatement, a description of
why the facility or group of facilities to be replaced are technologically,
economically or energy obsolete, whereby the obsolescence may lead to a
decline in employment and tax revenues; together with a verification that the
new manufacturing equipment will be used in the direct production,
manufacture, fabrication, assembly, extraction, mining, processing, refining
or refinishing of other tangible personal property and that the new
manufacturing equipment was never before used by its owner for any purpose in
the state;



      (14)   The name, address and telephone number of the person to
contact regarding notice of Council meetings and public hearings concerning
the petition;



      (15)   The real and personal property taxes paid at the
location during the previous five years, whether paid by the current owner or
a previous owner; and



      (16)   An estimate of the after-rehabilitation market value of
the real property or an estimate of the market value of the new manufacturing
equipment after installation.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.028  STATEMENT OF BENEFITS, DECLARATORY AND CONFIRMATORY RESOLUTIONS
REQUIRED.



   (A)   In addition to the completed petition, filing fee and related
documents required by this section, the owners of real property or new
manufacturing equipment must file a completed statement of benefits form at
the time of filing the petition.



   (B)   Proposed forms of declaratory and confirmatory resolutions are
also required of the owner at time of filing said petition.



   (C)   The provisions of I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3 shall be followed by the
designating body when reviewing such documents required by this section.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.029  REVIEW BY THE TAX ABATEMENT COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed tax abatement petition,
including all attachments, filing fee, statement of benefits form, and the
declaratory and confirmatory resolutions by the owner, the Town Manager shall
review said documents and make a determination that the application is
complete or not complete. If the application or information is incomplete,
the Town Manager shall contact the applicant and advise the applicant of the
deficiencies in the application, if the application and information is
complete, the application shall be submitted to the Tax Abatement Committee
for review. Said review shall be for informational purposes only, and shall
not be binding on the designating body.



   (B)   The Tax Abatement Committee shall review the petition,
statement of benefits and all attachments thereto. It shall also have the
authority to request additional information from the petitioner which is
relevant to the petition and statement of benefits.



   (C)   No later than 15 working days from the receipt of said
documents from the Town Manager, the Tax Abatement Committee shall prepare a
written report setting forth its advisory findings. Said report shall be
provided to the Town Council’s members, Redevelopment Commission, the Town
Manager and the petitioner.



   (D)   Said report shall address, but not be limited to addressing,
the following:



      (1)   Whether all required information was originally
submitted by the petitioner, in the event that additional information was
requested of the petitioner, the report shall address such requests and the
response received from the petitioner;



      (2)   Whether the information contained in the petition and
statement of benefits indicates that the requirements of this subchapter are
met by the project as described in the petition;



      (3)   Whether zoning requirements have been met, and, if not,
the zoning issues to be resolved.



      (4)   Whether the project is located in a tax allocation area,
as defined in I.C. 36-7-14-39, and if so, whether the Redevelopment
Commission has adopted a resolution approving that application. A copy of
such a resolution if required shall be attached to the report;



      (5)   If additional terms of tax abatement have been proposed
a copy of the proposed agreement shall be attached to the report;



      (6)   Whether, in the Tax Abatement Committee’s opinion, a
deduction should be allowed based on the following:



         (a)   Whether the estimate of the value of the
redevelopment or rehabilitation is reasonable for projects of that nature;



         (b)   Whether the estimate of the number of individuals
who will be employed or whose employment will be retained can be reasonably
expected to result from the proposed described redevelopment or
rehabilitation;



         (c)   Whether the estimate of the annual salaries of
those individuals who will be employed or whose employment will be retained
can be reasonably expected to result from the proposed described
redevelopment or rehabilitation; and



         (d)   Whether any other benefits about which information
was requested are benefits that can be reasonably expected to result from the
proposed described redevelopment or rehabilitation.



   (E)   The Committee’s report shall also have attached to it a copy
of the petition and statement of benefits form and all attachments thereto.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.030  DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   Prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit, projects
receiving economic revitalization area designation shall meet and confer with
the Design Review Committee. Projects shall receive a positive recommendation
from the Design Review Committee before an improvement location permit is
issued by the town. Full compliance with recommendations of the Design Review
Committee is required before a project will be issued a certificate of
occupancy by the town.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.031  TOWN COUNCIL’S REVIEW OF DECLARATORY RESOLUTION.



   (A)   The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the
petitioner’s declaratory resolution pursuant to I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2.5.



   (B)   The petitioner and/or, its representative shall be required to
attend the public hearing and present evidence to the Council as to why it
believes it qualifies for the requested abatement.



   (C)   If it finds that the property qualifies as an economic
revitalization area under the terms of this subchapter and I.C.
6-1.1-12.1-1(1), the Town Council may adopt a resolution declaring the
property as an economic revitalization area for purposes of tax abatement.
Said resolution shall specify whether the abatement is for real property tax
deduction or for personal property tax deduction, the length of time during
which the area shall be so designated, and the general boundaries of the area
by describing its location in relation to public ways. If the abatement is
for real property taxes, the Council shall specify whether the abatement is
for three, six or ten years. Upon the adoption of the declaratory resolution,
the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall file the resolution with the County Assessor,
together with supporting data required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2.5.



   (D)   If the area is located within an allocation area as defined in
I.C. 36-7-14-39, as declared by the Redevelopment Commission, the Council
shall not adopt a declaratory resolution declaring an area to be an economic
revitalization area tor purposes of either real property tax deduction or
personal property tax deduction if the Commission has not adopted a
resolution approving the petition.



   (E)   Upon adoption of the declaratory resolution, the Town Manager
shall cause notice of the adoption to be published pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1,
and shall include in the notice information about the adoption of the
declaratory resolution, the substance of the resolution, that a description
of the affected area is available and can be inspected in the County
Assessor’s office, the date when the Town Council will receive and hear all
remonstrances and objections from interested persons; and any other
information required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2.5.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.032  CONFIRMATORY RESOLUTIONS.



   (A)   Following the legal publication and on the date published in
the legal notice, a public hearing on the confirmatory resolution shall be
held by the Town Council. The petitioner and/or its representative shall be
present and shall be required to present evidence why it believes the tax
abatement requested should be granted; at which time the Council shall
receive and hear all remonstrances and objections from interested persons
pertaining to the petition. At the public hearing, the Council shall
determine whether the petition complies with this subchapter and with I.C.
6-1.1-12.1 et seq. and shall consider all pertinent requirements for economic
revitalization areas prior to taking final action determining whether the
petition meets qualifications for an economic revitalization area and
confirming, modifying and confirming or rescinding the declaratory
resolution. The determination of the Town Council is final except that an
appeal may be taken and heard as provided by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-2.5(d) and (e).



   (B)   The Town Council must make a determination as to whether the
deductions shall be allowed and make specific findings pursuant to I.C.
6-1.1-12.1-3. The Council must further comply with I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5 and
make specific finding thereto when considering personal property tax
abatement requests.



   (C)   (1)   In declaring an area an economic revitalization area,
(ERA), the designating body may:



         (a)   Limit the time period to a certain number of
calendar years during which the area shall be so designated;



         (b)   Limit the type of deductions that will be allowed
within the economic revitalization area to either the deduction allowed under
I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-3 or the deduction allowed under I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-4.5;



         (c)   Limit the dollar amount of the deduction that will
be allowed with respect to new manufacturing equipment if a deduction had not
been filed before July 1, 1987 for that equipment;



         (d)   Limit the dollar amount of the deduction that will
be allowed with respect to redevelopment and rehabilitation occurring in
areas that are designated as economic revitalization areas on or after
September 1, 1989; or



         (e)   Impose reasonable conditions related to the
purpose of state law or to the general standards adopted herein for allowing
the deduction for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of the property or the
installation of the new manufacturing equipment.



      (2)   To exercise one or more of the above described powers,
the Town Council must include this fact in the resolutions adopted.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.033  ANNUAL REVIEW OF PETITIONS BY THE COUNCIL.



   (A)   All property owners who receive approval of their real and/or
personal property tax abatement requests as a result of the Town Council’s
action under this section, shall be required to appear before the Town
Council. Such appearances shall take place at a Council meeting following the
petitioner’s filing of the first certified declaration application with the
County Auditor, required by the State Board of Tax Commissioners pursuant to
I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-5.



   (B)   Additionally, the petitioner shall file with the Town Council
an annual report that shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:



      (1)   Completed compliance with statement of benefits form;



      (2)   The name and address of the person(s) filing the report;



      (3)   The amount of real and/or personal property taxes paid
for the property during the year before the property was declared as an
economic revitalization area and during the most recent tax year; and



      (4)   The current number of part-time and full-time jobs,
specifying whether permanent or temporary, and the number of such jobs as of
the end of the year immediately prior to receiving tax abatement.



   (C)   The Town Council shall review the material presented by the
petitioner in comparison to the information published by the County Auditor
as required by I.C. 6-1.1-12.1-8.



   (D)   The Town Council shall specifically advise each property owner
in writing as to whether subsequent appearances before the Town Council shall
be necessary. If such additional appearances are not required, the property
owner shall be duly advised that their future annual reports may be mailed.
Failure to mail such completed reports may result in revocation of the tax
abatement by the Town Council.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.034  FAILURE OF PETITIONER TO COMPLY MAY RESULT IN REVOCATION OF TAX
ABATEMENT BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   The town believes that the granting of a request for real
and/or personal property tax abatement under the terms and conditions of this
subchapter results in a contractual arrangement between the town and the
property owner granted abatement.



   (b)   Therefore a petitioner who fails to achieve the estimates set
forth in its original petition for tax abatement consideration and its
statement of benefits may have its tax abatement revoked by the Town Council.



   (C)   A petitioner who fails to file its annual report and meet with
the Town Council as required herein may have the tax abatement revoked by the
Town Council.



   (D)   Petitioners who comply with the annual report and meeting
requirements, but fail to provide evidence as to why they have not achieved
the estimates set forth in their documents used by the Council when granting
the abatement, may have the tax abatement revoked by the Town Council.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



§ 34.035  REVIEW OF TAX ABATEMENT PROCEDURES BY THE TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   In calendar years ending with an odd number, the Town Council
shaft be required to review its tax abatement procedures set forth in this
subchapter.



   (B)   Nothing in this section prohibits a more frequent review of
such procedures.



(Ord. 5-97, passed 3-24-1997)



EXCISE SURTAX AND WHEEL TAX



§ 34.050  DISTRIBUTION OF INCREASE.



   (A)   The town supports the Hendricks County Council in increasing
the annual excise surtax to $25 and the annual wheel tax to $40 to be paid
with the registration of said motor vehicle.



   (B)   The town pledges to deposit the proceeds from the increase of
annual excise surtax and annual wheel tax distribution into a fund
exclusively to pay for the completion of the Ronald Reagan Parkway after the
funds are distributed under I.C. 8-14-2-4(c)(1) through I.C. 8-14-2-4(c)(3).



(Res. 2008-28, passed 10-13-2008)



EXCISE FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX



§ 34.060  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted to the Town Council by the
General Assembly of the state, pursuant to I.C. 6-9-27-1 through I.C.
6-9-27-10, as amended, there is hereby adopted a town food and beverage tax
to be imposed, except as provided in division (C) below, upon any transaction
in which food or beverage is furnished, prepared or served:



      (1)   For consumption at a location, or on equipment provided
by a retail merchant;



      (2)   In the town in which the tax is imposed; and



      (3)   By a retail merchant for consideration.



   (B)   Transactions described in division (A)(1) above include
transactions in which food or beverage is:



      (1)   Served by a retail merchant off the merchant’s
premises;



      (2)   Sold by a retail merchant that ordinarily bags, wraps or
packages the food or beverage for immediate consumption on or near the retail
merchant’s premises, including food or beverage sold on a “take out” or
“to go” basis; or



      (3)   Sold by a street vendor.



   (C)   The town food and beverage tax does not apply to the
furnishing, preparing or serving of a food or beverage in a transaction that
is exempt, or to the extent the transaction is exempt, from the state gross
retail tax imposed by I.C. 6-2.5.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



§ 34.061  PERCENTAGE OF TAX.



   The town food and beverage tax imposed on a food or beverage
transaction described in § 34.060 equals 1% of the gross retail income
received by the merchant from the transaction. For purposes of this
subchapter, the gross retail income received by the retail merchant from a
transaction does not include the amount of tax imposed on the transaction
under I.C. 6-2.5 et seq.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



§ 34.062  MANNER OF PAYMENT.



   The tax imposed under this subchapter shall be imposed, paid and
collected in the same manner that the state gross retail tax is imposed, paid
and collected under I.C. 6-2.5 et seq. However, the return to be filed with
the payment of the tax imposed under this subchapter may be made on a
separate return or may be combined with the return filed for the payment of
the state gross retail tax, as prescribed by the Department of State Revenue.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



§ 34.063  AMOUNTS.



   The amounts received from the tax imposed under this subchapter shall
be paid monthly by the Treasurer of the state to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town upon warrants issued by the Auditor of the state.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



§ 34.064  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall establish a Food and
Beverage Receipts Fund (the “Fund”).



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall deposit in this Fund all
amounts received under this subchapter.



   (C)   Any money earned from investment of money in the Fund becomes
a part of the Fund.



   (D)   Except as set forth in division (E) below, the Clerk-Treasurer
of the town shall apply the monies held in the Fund, as directed by the Town
Council, for the financing, construction, operation or maintenance of the
following:



      (1)   Sanitary sewers or wastewater treatment facilities;



      (2)   Park or recreational facilities;



      (3)   Drainage or flood control facilities; and



      (4)   Water treatment, storage or distribution facilities.



   (E)   The Town Council may pledge money in the Fund to pay bonds
issued, loans obtained and lease payments or other obligations incurred by or
on behalf of the town or a special taxing district in the town to provide the
facilities described in division (D) above. This division (E) applies only to
bonds, loans, lease payments or obligations that are issued, obtained or
incurred after the date on which the tax is imposed under § 34.061. A pledge
of the money in the Fund for the financing, construction, operation or
maintenance of any of the facilities is an enforceable pledge under I.C.
5-1-14-4.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



§ 34.065  APPLICATION.



   The tax imposed by this subchapter applies to transactions that occur
after the last day of the month that succeeds the month in which this
subchapter is adopted.



(Ord. 4-95, passed 7-24-1995)



FUNDS



§ 34.080  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.



   It is desired and deemed necessary to proceed with the proposed plan to
establish a Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund for the following purpose or
purposes:



   (A)   To purchase, build, construct and erect, equip, furnish and
maintain buildings for municipal purposes;



   (B)   To acquire land and improvements thereon, if any, for
building, constructing and erecting municipal buildings thereon; provided,
that the provisions of this division (B) shall also apply to the providing of
funds for the purpose of razing or demolishing any improvements on land to be
acquired, and further for the leveling, grading and preparing said land for
building, constructing and erecting a municipal building or buildings thereon;



   (C)   To acquire land or right-of-way to be used as street, road,
sidewalk or means of ingress or egress to the land acquired for the purpose
of building, constructing and erecting a municipal building thereon; and also
to provide funds for the improvements or construction of any street, road,
sidewalk or means of ingress or egress to any property upon which a municipal
building is to built, constructed and erected;



   (D)   To acquire land or right-of-way to be used for street, roads,
alleys, sidewalks or thoroughfares and to construct such streets, roads,
alleys, sidewalks or thoroughfares and to maintain the same;



   (E)   To acquire land or right-of-way within which to construct
sanitary or storm sewers, or both sanitary and storm sewers, and to construct
such sanitary or storm sewers or sanitary and storm sewers therein and to
maintain the same;



   (F)   To acquire by purchase or lease or to pay all or a portion of
the purchase price of a utility or utilities which the city or town may be
authorized to acquire or operate by the statutes of the state;



   (G)   To acquire by purchase or lease, land, buildings or
right-of-way for the use of any utility which may be operated or may be
acquired by the city or town pursuant to the provisions of the statutes of
the state;



   (H)   To purchase or acquire land, with or without buildings
thereon, for park or recreation purposes;



   (I)   To purchase or to lease to pay all or a part of the purchase
price of motor vehicles for the use of the Police and Fire Departments, or
either of them, including, but not limited to, ambulances and firefighting
vehicles with the necessary equipment, ladders and hose therein and thereon;



   (J)   To retire in whole or in part any general obligation bonds of
said city or town issued for the purpose of acquiring or construction
improvements or properties which would qualify for the use of cumulative
capital improvement funds; and



   (K)   The levying of an additional tax at the rate of $0.15 on each
$100 of taxable real and personal property within the taxing district to
provide monies for said fund, said tax to be first levied in 1983, payable in
1984, as provided in I.C. 18-6-2-4 and each year thereafter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-140)  (Res. passed 7-25-1983)



Editor’s note:



   The State Board of Tax Commissioners issued Order No. 4426 on September
13, 1983, approving the creation of the Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund.



Statutory reference:



   Cumulative Funds and Cumulative Capital Improvement Funds, see I.C.
36-9-16-1 through I.C. 36-9-16-6



§ 34.081  FIREMEN’S PENSION FUND.



   (A)   There is established and created a Fireman’s Pension Fund
and a Board of Trustees of such Fireman’s Pension Fund in and for the town.



   (B)   The Fireman’s Pension Fund of the town shall be governed and
managed by a Board of Trustees which shall contain seven members, two of whom
shall be ex officio and five of whom shall elected. The two ex officio
members of such Board shall be the President or Chairperson of the Town
Council and the Chief of the Fire Department of said town. One of the members
shall be a retired member of the Fire Department of said town and the
remaining four members shall be active members of the Fire Department of said
town. The first election of the retired member of the Board of Trustees of
the Fireman’s Pension Fund shall be held on the second Monday in September,
1968 and an election shall be held on the second Monday in February, 1970 and
biannually thereafter. The active members of said Board shall be elected at a
meeting of the members of the Fire Department of said town, which election
shall be held on the second Monday in September, 1968 and said election shall
be held on the second Monday in February, 1969 and annually thereafter. At
the first election of the active members said election shall be for staggered
terms expiring on the second Monday in February of 1969, the second Monday in
February of 1970, the second Monday in February of 1971 and the second Monday
in February of 1972. After the initial election, one member shall be elected
the second Monday of February of each year, commencing the second Monday of
February of 1969 and annually thereafter for a term of four years.



   (C)   After the election of the members of such Board, said Board
shall adopt such rules and by-laws as shall be necessary for the
accomplishment of the purpose of said Board as set out by the acts
establishing same being I.C. 36-8-7, and such Fireman’s Pension Fund shall
be deemed to be fully established and created and shall possess such powers
and exercise such rights and duties as are prescribed by the laws of the
state relating to Fireman’s Pension Fund.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-141)  (Ord. 7-68, passed 7-22-1968)



Statutory reference:



   1937 Firefighters Pension Fund, see I.C. 36-8-7-1 et seq.



   1977 Firefighters Pension and Disability Fund, see I.C. 36-8-8-1 et seq.



§ 34.082  MOTOR VEHICLE HIGHWAY FUND (MVH).



   The Motor Vehicle Highway Fund is established for the purposes of
receiving applicable state funds and for the expenditures permitted by
statute. (I.C. 8-14-1-1 et seq.)



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-142)



§ 34.083  ACCIDENT REPORT ACCOUNT.



   (A)   There is created an Accident Report Account for the Town
Police Department. A fee of $5 per incident shall be charged for reports.



   (B)   The source of funds which are to be deposited into said fund
are the fees received for accident reports and information under I.C. 9-3-1-3.



   (C)   This Fund may be expended at the discretion into said fund are
the fees received for accident reports and information under I.C. 9-3-1-3.



   (D)   The rules for proper accounting and expenditure of monies
collected and deposited into said fund shall be those established by the
State Board of Accounts. (See also § 38.01 of this code.)



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-143)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing a Police Department to charge a fee fixed by ordinance in
an amount of not less than $3 for each written report, see I.C. 9-3-1-3



§ 34.084  LOCAL ROAD AND STREET FUND (LRS).



   The Local Road and Street Fund (LRS) is established for the purpose of
receiving applicable state funds and for expenditures permitted by statute
(I.C. 8-14-2-1 et seq.).



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-146)



§ 34.085  POLICE PENSION FUND.



   The Police Pension Fund is continued for purposes permitted under I.C.
36-8-6-1 et seq., as to the 1925 Fund, and I.C. 36-8-8-1 et seq., as to the
1977 Fund.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-148)



§ 34.086  2012 STORM DAMAGE REPAIR FUND (#122).



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22; the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific non-reverting fund to be known as the,
2012 Storm Damage Repair Fund, into which all monies and proceeds in the form
of proceeds from insurance claims shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the 2012 Storm Damage
Repair Fund is to allow for repairs to buildings, roofs, air conditioning
units and other outdoor structures as listed in the attached Exhibit A, which
is incorporated by reference in this division (B).



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in such account and shall
keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of their receipt, any
disbursements and a current balance in such Fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt of any insurance claim
proceeds, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately deposit into the 2012
Storm Damage Repair Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed to
only disburse funds from 2012 Storm Damage Repair created hereunder upon
receipt of a claim allowed and signed as outlined in the town’s purchasing
policy by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the 2012
Storm Damage Repair Fund may not be withdrawn except for the purposes for
which the Fund was created. This Fund shall be considered as a non-reverting
fund and all proceeds are hereby considered to be separate and exclusive from
any other funds supported by taxpayer dollars.



(Ord. 24-2013, passed 9-9-2013)



§ 34.087  CLERK-TREASURER EMPLOYEE RECOGNITION FUND (121).



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22; the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the Clerk-Treasurer
Employee Recognition Fund into which all monies and proceeds in the form of
sponsor contributions and donations to the Employee Recognition Program Fund
shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the Clerk-Treasurer
Employee Recognition Program Operating Fund is to allow for the use of
donations and sponsorship contributions to operate the employee recognition
program.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in such account and shall
keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of their receipt, any
disbursements and a current balance in such Fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt of any sponsorship
contribution, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately deposit all
donations and sponsor contributions into the Clerk-Treasurer Employee
Recognition Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed to
only disburse funds from the Clerk-Treasurer Employee Recognition Fund
created hereunder upon receipt of a claim allowed and signed as outlined in
the towns’ purchasing policy by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the
Clerk-Treasurer Employee Recognition Fund may not be withdrawn except for the
purposes for which the Fund was created. This Fund shall be considered as a
non-reverting fund and all proceeds are hereby considered to be separate and
exclusive from any other funds supported by taxpayer dollars.



(Ord. 07-2013, passed 4-8-2013)



§ 34.088  POLICE DEPARTMENT EXPLORER PROGRAM OPERATING FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22, the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the Police Department
Explorer Program Operating Fund into which all monies and proceeds in the
form of sponsor contributions and donations to the Town Police Department
Explorer Fund shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the Police Department
Explorer Program Operating Fund is to allow for the use of donations and
sponsorship contributions to operate the Explorer Program.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in such account and shall
keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of their receipt, any
disbursements and a current balance in such fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt of any sponsorship
contribution, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately deposit all
donations and sponsor contributions into the Police Department Explorer
Program Operating Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed to
only disburse funds from the Police Department Explorer Program Operating
Fund created hereunder upon receipt of a claim allowed and signed as outlined
in the towns’ purchasing policy by the Town Police Department.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the
Police Department Explorer Program Non-Reverting Fund may not be withdrawn
except for the purposes for which the Fund was created.



(Ord. 15-2012, passed 11-12-2012)



§ 34.089  COUNTY COMMUNICATION CENTER NON-REVERTING EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT
FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-1-3-6, the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the County
Communication Center Non-Reverting Equipment Replacement Fund, into which an
amount not to exceed 10% of the Center’s annual operating budget shall be
deposited on an annual basis. The Fund will remain in existence until such
time as the town ceases to be the governing body of the Center. At which
time, should there be monies in the Fund, all monies will be returned to the
Center Operating Fund.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The purpose of the County Communication
Center Non-Reverting Equipment Replacement Fund is to allow for the
replacement and purchase of operating supplies and capital equipment to be
used specifically for the day-to-day operations of the Center. Said supplies
and/or equipment will be used strictly for the operational needs and purposes
of the Center. These funds and the supplies and capital equipment purchased
with these funds are for the specific use of the Center and not for the use
by any entity being served by the Center.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. As detailed in the agreement, the
Town Clerk-Treasurer shall be responsible for receiving and recording all
funds to be deposited in such account and shall keep records as to the
amounts received, the manner of their receipt, any disbursements and a
current balance in such fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon the recommendation of the Board and the
approval by the Council, the Town Clerk–Treasurer shall immediately
transfer the recommended and approved amount from the Center’s Operating
Fund into the County Communication Center Non-Reverting Equipment Replacement
Fund. Any monies in the Fund will stay in the Fund until such time as the
fund ceases to exist.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Town Clerk–Treasurer is directed
to only disburse funds from the County Communication Center Non-Reverting
Equipment Replacement Fund hereunder upon receipt of a claim allowed and
signed by the Executive Director of the County Communications Center as
outlined in the town’s purchasing policy.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the
special non-reverting operating fund may not be withdrawn except for the
purposes for which the Fund was created.



(Ord. 21-2010, passed 1-24-2011)



§ 34.090  TOWN POLICE DEPARTMENT DRUG BUY AND COVERT INVESTIGATIONS CASH
FUND.



   (A)   There is established in the town a special non-reverting fund,
to be known as the Town Police Department Drug Buy and Covert Investigations
Cash Fund, into which shall be deposited $1,000. This amount shall be
maintained throughout the period of the Fund’s existence.



   (B)   The Town Police Department Drug Buy and Covert Investigations
Cash Fund will exist until terminated by ordinance of the Town Council.



(Ord. 05-2009, passed 4-13-2009)



§ 34.091  FIRE TERRITORY EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the
Fire Territory Equipment Replacement Fund for the town.



   (B)   Any property taxes received by the town as part of the
aforementioned certified levy shall be deposited and held in the Fire
Territory Equipment Replacement Fund.



   (C)   The Fire Territory Equipment Replacement Fund shall be
maintained and operated in accordance with the requirements of I.C.
36-8-19-8.5.



(Ord. 03-2009, passed - -2009; Res. 2009-05, passed 3-9-2009)



§ 34.092  PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT SPECIAL NON-REVERTING OPERATING
FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22, the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the Parks and
Recreation Department Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund, into which all
monies and proceeds in the form of program fees and sponsor contributions to
the Town Parks and Recreation Department shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the Parks and
Recreation Department Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund is to allow for
the use of program fees and sponsorship donations to operate park programs
and provide for staff incentives as outlined in the Town Parks Department
program guide and the Parks Department staff incentive policy.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Director of the Town Parks and
Recreation Department shall be responsible for receiving all funds to be
deposited in such account and shall keep records as to the amounts received,
the manner of their receipt, any disbursements and a current balance in such
fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt from the Director of the Town
Parks and Recreation Department, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately
deposit all program fees and sponsor donations into the Parks and Recreation
Department Special Non-Reverting Operating Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Town Clerk-Treasurer is directed to
only disburse funds from the special non-reverting operating fund created
hereunder upon receipt of a claim allowed and signed as outlined in the
town’s purchasing policy by the Director of the Town Parks and Recreation
Department.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the
special non-reverting operating fund may not be withdrawn except for the
purposes for which the Fund was created.



(Ord. 31-2008, passed 12- -2008)



§ 34.093  COUNTY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER FUND (#258).



   (A)   The Town Council hereby authorizes the repurposing and
renaming of the 911 Emergency Dispatch Fund to the County Communications
Center Fund.



   (B)   Any funds currently in the 911 Emergency Dispatch Fund will
revert to the County Communications Center Fund.



   (C)   The funds in the County Communications Center Fund shall be
expended only for the purpose of paying the costs of County Communications
Center.



   (D)   The County Communications Center Fund will remain in effect
until such time as the governing body of the County Communications Center and
the Town Council agree to liquidate and dissolve the fund.



   (E)   The town shall keep proper books of record and account, in
which complete entries shall be made showing all monies received and
deposited in said Fund, all disbursements made therefrom and all other
financial transactions relating to said fund, including the cash balance in
the Fund as of the close of the preceding fiscal year.



   (F)   All actions taken by the Town Council with respect to the
settlement proceeds and the County Communications Center Fund prior to the
date hereof are hereby ratified and approved.



(Ord. 01-2007, passed 2-12-2007)



§ 34.094  LEVY EXCESS FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the
Levy Excess Fund for the town.



   (B)   Any property taxes in excess of the certified levy received by
the town shall be transferred and held in the Levy Excess Fund.



   (C)   The Levy Excess Fund shall be maintained and operated in
accordance with the requirements of I.C. 6-1.1-18.5-17.



(Ord. 21-2006, passed 6-26-2006)



§ 34.095  PARKS AND RECREATION BENEFICENT FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby created and established a
specific fund to be known as the Parks and Recreation Department Beneficent
Fund into which all monies and proceeds in the form of gifts and
contributions, donations, and bequests to the Town Parks and Recreation
Department shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the Town Parks and
Recreation Department Beneficent Fund is to provide financial assistance to
qualified residents of the town that are in need of financial assistance to
enable them to participate in recreational activities of the Town Parks and
Recreation Department.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Director of the Plainfield Parks
and Recreation Department shall be responsible for receiving all funds to be
deposited in such account and shall keep records as to the amounts received,
the manner of their receipt, any disbursements and a current balance in such
fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt from the Director of the Town
Parks and Recreation Department, the Town Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately
deposit all gifts, contributions, donations and bequests into the Town Parks
and Recreation Department Beneficent Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. Any use of any portion of said funds
shall be initiated through the Director of the Town Parks and Recreation
Department who shall make a recommendation to the Town Council. The Town
Council shall then, in its sole discretion, either approve or not approve a
disbursement of the funds for the purpose requested, and further, if the Town
Council approves the disbursement it shall determine the amount of funds to
be distributed by the Director of the Town Parks and Recreation Department.



   (F)   Use of funds. The use of such funds may be for any lawful
purpose related to the parks and recreation at the sole discretion of the
Town Council.



(Ord. 02-2005, passed 3-14-2005)



§ 34.096  RAINY DAY FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Rainy Day Fund. There is hereby established a
Rainy Day Fund to receive transfers of unused and unencumbered funds raised
by a general or special tax levy on taxable property within the town whenever
the purpose of such tax levy has been fulfilled and an unused and
unencumbered balance remains.



   (B)   Purposes of the Fund. The funds on deposit in the Rainy Day
Fund may be used for the operation of the town and its various departments,
when the town does not have sufficient levies or funds to pay such costs,
including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, costs of services,
supplies, equipment, capital improvements, repairs and similar expenditures.



   (C)   Transfer to Fund. On or before December 31 of each year, the
Town Council shall determine the amount, if any, of any unused and
unencumbered funds available to be transferred to the Rainy Day Fund, which
transfer may not exceed more than 10% of the town’s total budget for that
fiscal year.



   (D)   Special or supplemental distributions. In accordance with I.C.
35-1-8-5.1, as amended by Pub. L. No. 90-2002, § 461 and as further amended
by Pub. L. No. 267-2003, § 15, the town will deposit, in its Rainy Day Fund
established by the adoption of this section, any special or supplemental
distributions received from transfers of unused and unencumbered funds under:



      (1)   I.C. 36-1-8-5.1(5);



      (2)   I.C. 6-3.5-1.1-21.1;



      (3)   I.C. 6-3.5-6-17.3; and



      (4)   I.C. 6-3.5-7-17.3.



   (E)   Appropriations. The Town Council may authorize the expenditure
of funds from the Rainy Day Fund by appropriations made in the same manner as
other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon making a finding
that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the intent of the Fund.



(Ord. 02-2004, passed 3-8-2004)



§ 34.097  FIRE DEPARTMENT BENEFICENT FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby created and established a
specific fund to be known as the Fire Department Beneficent Fund into which
all monies and proceeds received in the form of gifts, contributions,
donations and bequests to the Town Fire Department shall be deposited.



   (B)   Responsibility for Fund. The Fire Chief of the Town Fire
Department shall be responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in
such account and shall keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of
their receipt, any disbursements and a current balance in such Fund at all
times.



   (C)   Disbursement of funds. Any use of any portion of said funds
shall be initiated by a request through the Fire Chief of the Town Fire
Department who shall then make a recommendation either to approve or not
approve such a request to the Town Council. The Town Council shall then, in
its sole discretion, either approve or not approve a disbursement of the
funds for the purpose requested, and further, if the Town Council approves
the disbursement it shall determine the amount of funds to be distributed by
the Fire Chief.



   (D)   Use of funds. The purposes for the use of such funds and the
amount authorized shall be for any lawful purpose at the sole discretion of
the Town Fire Chief and Town Council.



(Ord. 21-99, passed 10-11-1999)



§ 34.098  METROPOLIS CONSTRUCTION NON-REVERTING FUND.



   (A)   There is hereby established a special fund to be known as the
Metropolis Construction Non- Reverting Fund for the town.



   (B)   The Fund shall be utilized to receive and hold the incentive
payment by the town that is made in accordance with the agreement.



   (C)   Payments out of the Fund shall be made in accordance with the
terms of the agreement.



   (D)   The Fund shall continue in existence during the period
required to complete the obligations of the town in accordance with the
agreement and, thereafter, the Fund shall terminate and cease to exist.



(Ord. 08-2015, passed 4-13-2015)



§ 34.099  HCCC STAFF INCENTIVE FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22, the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the HCCC Staff
Incentive Fund, into which all monies and proceeds in the form of sponsor
contributions and donations to the Staff Incentive Program Fund shall be
deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the HCCC Staff
Incentive Program Operating Fund is to allow for the use of donations and
sponsorship contributions to operate the Staff Incentive Program.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in such account and shall
keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of their receipt, any
disbursements and a current balance in such Fund at all times.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt of any sponsorship
contribution, the Clerk-Treasurer shall immediately deposit all donations and
sponsor contributions into the HCCC Staff Incentive Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to only
disburse funds from the HCCC Staff Incentive Fund created hereunder upon
receipt of a claim allowed and signed as outlined in the town’s purchasing
policy by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the HCCC
Staff Incentive Fund may not be withdrawn except for the purposes for which
the Fund was created. This Fund shall be considered as a non-reverting fund
and all proceeds are hereby considered to be separate and exclusive from any
other funds supported by taxpayer dollars.



(Ord. 06-2016, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 34.100  LOIT SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION FUND.



   (A)   Creation of LOIT Special Distribution Fund. There is hereby
established a LOIT Special Distribution Fund to receive a one-time special
distribution required under SEA 67 from a county’s trust account maintained
by the state.



   (B)   Purposes of the Fund. The funds on deposit in the LOIT Special
Distribution Fund may be used for counties, cities and towns on the use of at
least 75% of the special distribution received for infrastructure as found
under I.C. 6-3.6-9-17(h)(1)(A). The remaining part may be used for any of the
purposes of the county, city or town.



   (C)   Appropriations. The Town Council may authorize the expenditure
of funds from the LOIT Special Distribution Fund by appropriations made in
the same manner as other funds are appropriated that receive tax monies, upon
making a finding that the proposed use of the funds is consistent with the
intent of the Fund.



(Ord. 11-2016, passed 6-13-2016)



§ 34.101  CUMULATIVE CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FUND.



   There is hereby established the Cumulative Capital Development Fund for
the purposes of all uses as set out in I.C. 36-9-15.5.



(Ord. 13-2016, passed 6-13-2016)



§ 34.102  BICENTENNIAL PARK SPECIAL NON-REVERTING CONSTRUCTION FUND.



   (A)   Creation of Fund. Pursuant to I.C. 36-10-3-22, the town hereby
creates and establishes a specific fund to be known as the Bicentennial Park
Special Non-Reverting Construction Fund, into which all monies and proceeds
in the form of donations to the Bicentennial Park Special Non-Reverting
Construction Fund, shall be deposited.



   (B)   Purpose of Fund. The primary purpose of the Bicentennial Park
Special Non-Reverting Construction Fund is to allow for donations to be used
for the creation and construction of a Bicentennial Park, within the Parks
and Recreation Department.



   (C)   Responsibility for Fund. The Clerk-Treasurer shall be
responsible for receiving all funds to be deposited in such Fund and shall at
all times keep records as to the amounts received, the manner of their
receipt, any disbursements and a current balance in such Fund.



   (D)   Deposit of funds. Upon receipt the Clerk-Treasurer shall
immediately deposit all donations into the Parks and Recreation Department
Bicentennial Park Special Non-Reverting Construction Fund.



   (E)   Disbursement of funds. The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to only
disburse funds from the Bicentennial Park Special Non-Reverting Construction
Fund created hereunder as directed by the Town Council, in the form of an
approved budget adopted in a fashion consistent with the budget process in
place at the time of the appropriation request.



   (F)   Limitations on the use of funds. Any funds placed in the
Bicentennial Park Special Non-Reverting Construction Fund may not be
withdrawn except for the purpose for which the Fund was created.



(Ord. 21-2016, passed 9-22-2016)



§ 34.103  MISCELLANEOUS FUNDS CONTINUED.



   The following funds are continued in effect. Each shall be funded and
operated in accordance with all statutory requirements:



   (A)   Excess Levy Fund;



   (B)   Special Park Fund;



   (C)   Cumulative Capital Improvement Fund (Cigarette Taxes - I.C.
36-9-16-1 et seq.);



   (D)   Payroll;



   (E)   General Fund;



   (F)   Park Fund;



   (G)   Sewer Operation;



   (H)   Sewer Bond and Interest;



   (I)   Sewer Depreciation;



   (J)   Sewer Deposits;



   (K)   Water Operation;



   (L)   Water Bond and Interest;



   (M)   Water Depreciation; and



   (N)   Water Deposits.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-150)



CHAPTER 35:  ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU



Section



   35.01   Bureau established



   35.02   Bureau Clerk



   35.03   Responsibilities of Bureau Clerk



   35.04   Schedule of ordinances and civil penalties



   35.05   Procedures for violations



   35.06   Civil penalties and fines



§ 35.01  BUREAU ESTABLISHED.



   The town hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau
(“Bureau”) as authorized under the laws of the state.



(Ord. 05-2005, passed 4-11-2005)



§ 35.02  BUREAU CLERK.



   The town hereby establishes the position of Ordinance Violations Bureau
Clerk (“Bureau Clerk”) to serve as administrator of the Bureau, as
authorized under of the laws of the state.



(Ord. 05-2005, passed 4-11-2005)



§ 35.03  RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUREAU CLERK.



   (A)   The town hereby establishes that the Bureau Clerk shall have
the authority to receive, on behalf of the town: written appearances, waivers
of trial, admissions of ordinance violations and payment of civil penalties
assessed for ordinance violations.



   (B)   The town further establishes that the Bureau Clerk, subject to
the approval of the Town Council, may adopt rules and regulations necessary
to the operation of the Bureau and may appoint qualified town employees
necessary to the administration of the Bureau. All personnel of the Bureau
shall be employees of the town.



(Ord. 05-2005, passed 4-11-2005)



§ 35.04  SCHEDULE OF ORDINANCES AND CIVIL PENALTIES.



   The town hereby designates the following schedule of ordinances that
are subject to the admission of violation before the Bureau Clerk and the
amount of civil penalty to be assessed to a violator who elects to admit
violation.



 


Ordinance #

 

Code Section

 

Offense Description

 

Fine Amount






01-1970

 

131.01

 
Disorderly conduct
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1970

 

131.02

 
Unlawful congregating
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1970

 

131.03

 
Disturbing place of worship
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1970

 

131.04

 
Minor curfew
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1970

 

131.05

 
Interference with officials
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1970

 

131.06

 
Civil emergencies
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1985

 

111.035—
111. 043

 
Registration and regulation of canvassers
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



03-1985

 

111.055—
111. 066

 
Licensing and regulation of direct sellers
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



01-1989

 
95.030—
95.032
 
Burning regulations
 
In sum up to $100



02-1990

 
95.060—
95.071
 
Fire prevention
 
Not less than $25, nor more than $2,500 for each offense



09-1990

 
95.045—
95.049
 
Smoke detectors
 
$50—first offense; $100—each subsequent offense



28-1996

 

71.08

 
Snow emergency conditions and routes
 
$50—first offense; $100—2nd offense; court appearance required for
additional offenses



13-2005

 

71.04

 
Parking regulations
 
$40 for each offense



14-2005

 

71.05

 
Emergency vehicle parking
 
$40 for each offense



15-2005

 

71.06

 
handicap parking
 
$75 for each offense



17-2005

 

71.07

 
Parallel parking and motorcycle parking
 
$40 for each offense



19-2007

 

95.015—
95.016

 
Regulation of fireworks
 
Not less than $50, nor more than $300 for each offense



02-2010

 

150.008

 
Starting work without the required permit
 
Twice the normal permit fee



02-2010

 

150.013

 
Missed inspection
 
$150 each occurrence



02-2010

 

150.017

 
Occupying a structure or building without a certificate of occupancy
 
$1/sq. ft. or up to $2,500 per day



10-2013

 

97.052

 
Section 3—park hours
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.053

 
Section 4—vehicles in parks after closing hours
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.054

 
Section 5—disposal of rubbish, refuse and garbage
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.055

 
Section 6—altering or removing signs, structures, fixtures or improvements
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.056

 
Section 7—disturbing, injuring or removing wildlife and vegetation
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.057

 
Section 8—swimming prohibited
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.058

 
Section 9—pet supervision
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.059

 
Section 10—camping prohibited
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.060

 
Section 11—fires and fireworks prohibited
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.061

 
Section 12—solicitations, commercial sales and commercial photography
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.064

 
Section 15—prohibited activities
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



10-2013

 

97.070

 
Section 21 – prohibited activities at Friendship Gardens Park
 
$25—first offense; $50—each subsequent offense



***

 

***

 
Failure to implement a required fire watch
 
$350 per day per shift



***

 

***

 
Faulty/false alarm response (within a consecutive 12 month period)
 
1 – 3  no fine

4 – 5  $50 per occurrence

6 – 7  $150 per occurrence

8 – 9  $300 per occurrence

10+  $500 per occurrence



***

 

***

 
Fine for tampering with a life safety system
 
$500 per occurrence




 



(Ord. 06-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 36-2017, passed 1-8-2018)



§ 35.05  PROCEDURES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A person charged with an ordinance violation, and said
ordinance is included within the schedule set forth in § 35.04, is entitled
to a trial before a court as provided by law, unless the person waives the
right to trial and enters and admission of the violation with the Bureau
Clerk. Upon receipt of an admission, the Bureau Clerk shall assess and
receive from the violator the amount prescribed by the schedule of civil
penalties enumerated in § 35.04.



   (B)   If a person, charged with a violation of an ordinance included
the schedule set forth in § 35.04, wants to exercise the right to a trial,
the person shall appear before the Bureau Clerk and enter a written denial.



   (C)   (1)   The Clerk shall report to the Town Attorney having
the responsibility to prosecute ordinance violation cases on behalf of the
town, if a person:



         (a)   Denies an ordinance violation under these
provisions;



         (b)   Fails to satisfy a civil penalty assessed by the
Bureau Clerk after having entered an admission of violation; or



         (c)   Fails to deny or admit the violation under these
provisions.



      (2)   Court proceedings against the person will then be
initiated for the alleged ordinance violation. An action to enforce an
ordinance shall be brought in accordance Indiana law



(Ord. 06-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 36-2017, passed 1-8-2018)



§ 35.06  CIVIL PENALTIES AND FINES.



   All sums collected by the Bureau Clerk as civil penalties for ordinance
violations shall be accounted for and paid to the Clerk-Treasurer for the
town.



(Ord. 06-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 36-2017, passed 1-8-2018)



CHAPTER 36:  TOWN POLICIES



Section




Town Records Policies




   36.001   Purpose



   36.002   Offices or positions affected



   36.003   Financial record requirements




Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)




   36.015   Adopted




Identity Theft Prevention Program (For the Utility Billing Department)




   36.030   Purpose of the program



   36.031   Definitions



   36.032   Type of accounts and access to accounts



   36.033   Identification of red flags



   36.034   Detecting red flags



   36.035   Responding to red flags



   36.036   Program evaluation and revisions



   36.037   Administration and oversight of the program




Anti-Nepotism and Conflict of Interest Policy




   36.050   Adopted



   36.051   Conflict of interest policy




Reverse Auction Procedures




   36.065   Use of third party to conduct reverse auctions



   36.066   Transmission of notices, solicitations and specifications



   36.067   Pre-qualification of bidders



   36.068   Contents of invitation to bid



   36.069   Receiving offers



   36.070   Reverse auction bidding period



   36.071   Opening offers



   36.072   Contract award



   36.073   Purchase orders and payments



   36.074   Documentation



   36.075   Form




Internal Control Standards Policy




   36.085   Adoption of internal control standards policy



 



   36.999   Penalty



TOWN RECORDS POLICIES



§ 36.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish the location of certain
public records of the town, to establish certain requirements for the
preparation of records relating to financial information of the town and
provide for penalties for the violation of this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-158)  Penalty, see § 36.999



§ 36.002  OFFICES OR POSITIONS AFFECTED.



   The Clerk-Treasurer, Clerk of the Town Court, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Superintendent of Public Works, Administrative Head of the Sewer Department,
Administrative Head of the Sanitation Department, Administrative Head of the
Water Department, Administrative Head of the Street Department and Town
Manager shall keep in their offices, or in the building in which their
offices are located, at all times, all records that they are required to
create and prepare as public officials or employees and agents of the town
and shall deliver them to their successors.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-159)  (Ord. 14-90, passed 9-10-1990)  Penalty, see
§ 36.999



§ 36.003  FINANCIAL RECORD REQUIREMENTS.



   All official records of the town in any way relating to financial
transactions of the town or funds of any kind received or spent by the town
or any of its departments prepared in longhand and required to be kept by any
person named in § 36.002 shall be prepared and maintained by the use of
permanent jet-black, nonfading ink.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-160)  (Ord. 14-90, passed 9-10-1990)



AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA)



§ 36.015  ADOPTED.



   The Town Council hereby adopts the 2010 Americans with Disabilities
(ADA) Standards for Accessible Design and 2011 Guidelines for Pedestrian
Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way.



(Res. 2011-19, passed 12-12-2011; Res. 2011-20, passed 12-12-2011)



IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
(FOR THE UTILITY BILLING DEPARTMENT)



§ 36.030  PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM.



   Under the red flag rules, every financial institution and creditor is
required to establish an identity theft prevention program tailored to its
size, complexity and the nature of its operation. This program is adopted to
comply with the red flags rule, in order to identity relevant red flags (as
defined below), to detect red flags, to respond appropriately to red flags
and to require the program to be periodically updated.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.031  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCOUNT. A continuing relationship established by a person with a
creditor to obtain a product or service for personal, family, household or
business purposes.



   COVERED ACCOUNT.



      (1)   Any account the department offers or maintains primarily
for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments
or transactions; and



      (2)   Any other account the Department offers or maintains for
which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety
and soundness of the department from identity theft.



   CREDITOR. The same meaning as defined in § 702 of the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1691a, and includes a person or entity that
arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit, including the
Department.   



   CUSTOMER. A person or business entity that has a covered account with
the Department.



   DEPARTMENT. The Utility Billing Department of the town.



   IDENTIFYING INFORMATION. Any name or number that may be used, alone or
in conjunction with any other information, to identity a specific person,
including name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, date of
birth, government issued driver’s license or identification number, alien
registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer
identification number or unique electronic identification number.



   IDENTITY THEFT. Fraud committed using the identifying information of
another person.



   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft.



   SERVICE PROVIDER. A person or business entity that provides a service
directly to the town relating to or connection with a covered account.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.032  TYPE OF ACCOUNTS AND ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Type of accounts. The Department currently offers and
maintains the following type(s) of covered accounts: utility service account.



   (B)   Access to accounts. Customer account information may be
accessed in the following ways:



      (1)   In person;



      (2)   By phone;



      (3)   By mail; and



      (4)   By e-mail.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.033  IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.



   (A)   The Department endeavors to identity relevant red flags as
they relate to possible risk of identity theft in connection with the
Department’s covered accounts. Inconsistent documents, information or
activity encountered when dealing with customer accounts and financial
transactions may signal identity theft. In order to identify relevant red
flags, the Department shall initially and annually review and consider the
types of covered accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it
provides to open covered accounts, the methods it provides to access its
covered accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft.



   (B)   The town identifies the following relevant red flags at
present, which it will consider in detecting identity theft.



      (1)   Suspicious documents.



         (a)   Documents provided for identification that appear
to be forged or altered;



         (b)   Documents provided for identification on which a
person’s photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the person
presenting the document;



         (c)   Other document with information that is not
consistent with existing customer information (for example, a person’s
signature on a check appears forged);



         (d)   Application for services or account setup that
appears to have been altered or forged; and



         (e)   Social Security numbers that are always invalid:



            1.   The first three digits are in the 772—800
or the 900 range;



            2.   The first three digits are 666; or



            3.   The first three digits are 000, or the fourth
and fifth digits are 00, or the last four digits are 0000.



      (2)   Suspicious personal identifying information.



         (a)   Identifying information presented that is
inconsistent with other information the customer provides, or information
that is on file for that customer (such as inconsistent birth dates);



         (b)   Identifying information presented that is
inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, an address not
matching an address on a driver’s license, or signatures that do not appear
to match other documents);



         (c)   Identifying information presented that is the same
as information that is included on applications that are known to be
fraudulent (such as a name or Social Security number that has been identified
as being fraudulent on other prior applications received for various
applicants);



         (d)   Identifying information presented that is
consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or
fictitious billing address);



         (e)   Identifying information presented, such as a
Social Security number, phone number or address that is the same as one given
by another customer; and



         (f)   Failing to provide complete personal identifying
information on an application when reminded to do so.



      (3)   Unusual use or suspicious activity of covered account.



         (a)   Change of billing address for an account followed
by a request to change the account holder’s name or add other authorized
user(s) on the account;



         (b)   Payments stop on an otherwise consistently
up-to-date account;



         (c)   Account used in a way that is not consistent with
prior use (such as very high activity);



         (d)   Change of payment method where payment is charged
to an individual not listed on the account;



         (e)   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly
returned as undeliverable;



         (f)   Notice to the Department that a customer is not
receiving mail sent by the Department;



         (g)   Notice to the Department that an account has
unauthorized activity;



         (h)   Breach in the Department computer system security;
and



         (i)   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account
information.



      (4)   Alerts from others or past history in incidents of
identity theft.



         (a)   Notice to the Department from a customer, a victim
of identity theft, a law enforcement authority or other person that it has
opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in
identity theft;



         (b)   Checks returned for insufficient funds or credit
card payments or EFTs that are declined, especially when a pattern is noticed
or following a change in method of payment; and



         (c)   Past experiences the Department has had regarding
incidents of identity theft, when similar patterns or events are noticed by
the town.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.034  DETECTING RED FLAGS.



   The Department hereby establishes the following procedures to assist in
detecting red flags in connection with the opening of covered accounts and
existing covered accounts.



   (A)   New accounts. New accounts may be opened in person, by fax or
by mail or phone. In all cases, a potential customer must submit all of the
following information:



      (1)   Full legal name;



      (2)   Telephone number;



      (3)   Mailing address;



      (4)   Social Security number; and



      (5)   Must be on the lease if a rental property.



   (B)   Existing accounts. When handling a transaction regarding an
existing account, the Department staff will take the following steps to
monitor transactions with an account in order to detect possible red flags as
listed above:



      (1)   Verify the identification of customers if they request
information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile or via e-mail);



      (2)   Verify the validity of requests to change billing
addresses: and



      (3)   Verify changes in banking and credit card information
given for billing and payment purposes.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.035  RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS.



   In the event a town employee detects any identified red flags, the
employee shall respond by taking one or more of the following steps to
investigate, prevent and mitigate possible identity theft, depending on the
degree of risk posed by the red flag.



   (A)   Investigate, prevent and mitigate identity theft.



      (1)   Upon detecting a red flag, employees must take the
following action:



         (a)   Gather relevant documentation regarding the
suspect covered account;



         (b)   Report the identified red flag to the Program
Administrator;



         (c)   Contact the customer with the covered account; and



         (d)   Assist Program Administrator in investigating the
red flag issue.



      (2)   After receiving a red flag report, the Program
Administrator may take one or more of the following actions as warranted
under the particular circumstances in the discretion of the Program
Administrator:



         (a)   Monitor a covered account for evidence of identity
theft;



         (b)   Change any passwords or other security codes and
devices that permit access to a covered account;



         (c)   Close the existing covered account;



         (d)   Open a new covered account with a new number;



         (e)   Put a hold on attempting to collect payment on a
covered account; and/or



         (f)   Notify the Town Police Department.



   (B)   Ongoing protection of customer identifying information. The
Department shall take the following steps with respect to its internal
operating procedures in order to take an active role in the ongoing
protection of customer identifying information from identity theft.



      (1)   Paper documents.



         (a)   Storage. Documents containing customer identifying
information must be stored in locked file cabinets contained within a locked
room except when an employee is working on the file. Only specially
identified employees with a legitimate need shall have keys or swipe card to
the file cabinets and storage room.



         (b)   Use of documents. Department employees must not
leave documents containing customer identifying information out on their
desks when they are away from their workstations. Department employees must
store documents containing customer identifying information in locked areas
when leaving their work areas.



      (2)   Computers and electronic media.



         (a)   Passwords. All computers must be set to require
passwords. Each employee must have a unique username and password, which must
be different from each other, and shall not be posted at his or her
workstation. When new software is installed, the default passwords must be
changed. Department employees must log off their computers when leaving their
workstations, and computer screens must be set to lock after a set period of
time.



         (b)   Firewalls and anti-virus. The town’s website and
network systems must be secured with adequate firewalls and regularly updated
anti-virus and anti-theft software. Anti-virus and anti-spyware programs must
be run on the server daily. The town’s website must provide clear notice to
customers that the website is not a “secure” website.



      (3)   Destruction of documents and other media,



         (a)   Paper records. All paper records containing
customer identifying information that are designated for disposal must be
shredded before being placed into a trash bin. A paper shredder or shredding
bin provided by a shredding company must be located in each department
containing customer identifying information.



         (b)   Other media. Any other data storage media
containing customer identifying information that are designated for disposal
must be destroyed by shredding, hole punching or incineration.



      (4)   Visitors and access.



         (a)   Access. Department employees must lock office
doors when leaving their work areas. Access to any offsite facilities is
limited to Department employees with a legitimate business need.



         (b)   Visitors. Visitors who enter any area where
records containing customer identifying information are kept must be escorted
by an authorized Department employee. No visitor shall be given any entry
code, key or swipe card, or allowed unescorted access to any such area.



      (5)   Employment practices.



         (a)   New hires. Before hiring any new employee who will
have access to customer identifying information, the Human Resource
Department must first complete a reference and background check of such
potential employee. All employees must also sign an agreement to follow the
town’s confidentiality and security standards for handling customer
identifying information.



         (b)   Exit requirements. If an employee leaves the
Department’s employ or is reassigned duties that no longer require access
to customer identifying information, the employee must return all keys and
swipe cards to the Program Administrator. Immediately upon the employee’s
departure or reassignment, the Program Administrator shall ensure that all of
such employee’s passwords allowing access to customer identifying
information are changed.



         (c)   Policy violations. Any employee who violates this
identity theft prevention program and any security policy or procedure
adopted hereunder will be subject to immediate discipline, which may include
dismissal.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.036  PROGRAM EVALUATION AND REVISIONS.



   The Program Administrator, and the Town Council will at least annually
evaluate and revise the program to reflect changes in risks to covered
accounts and to the safety and soundness of the town from identity theft. The
annual program review and evaluation process shall consider the town’s
experiences with identity theft, changes in identity theft detection and
prevention methods, changes in types of account that the town maintains and
changes in the town’s business arrangements with other entities and service
providers. Following the review and consideration of those factors, the
Program Administrator shall revise the program as necessary. If warranted,
the Program Administrator shall update and implement the revised program and
obtain Town Council approval of such changes.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



§ 36.037  ADMINISTRATION AND OVERSIGHT OF THE PROGRAM.



   (A)   Oversight. The Program Administrator shall be responsible for
the program administration, for staff training on the program as appropriate,
for reviewing any reports regarding the detection of red flags, for
determining and instituting the necessary steps to prevent and mitigate
identity theft when red flags are detected, and for periodically reviewing
and revising the program. The Program Administrator shall maintain, for a
reasonable amount of time and as appropriate and necessary, reports and
documentation regarding incidents of detected red flags.



   (B)   Staff training and reports. The town employees that are
responsible for implementing the program shall be trained wither by or under
the direction of the Program Administrator in the detection of red flags, and
the steps to be taken in responding to red flags. Such staff shall be trained
on how to report detected red flags.



   (C)   Service provider arrangements. In the event the town engages a
service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more
covered accounts, the town shall take the following steps to require that the
service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies
and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity
theft:



      (1)   Require, by contract, that service provider acknowledges
receipt and review of the program and agrees to perform its activities with
respect to the town’s covered accounts in compliance with the terms and
conditions of the program and with all instructions and directives issued by
the Program Administrator relative to the program; or



      (2)   Require, by contract, that service provider acknowledges
receipt and review of the program and agrees to perform its activities with
respect to the town’s covered accounts in compliance with the terms and
conditions of the service provider’s identity theft prevention program and
will take appropriate action to prevent and mitigate identity theft; and that
the service provider agrees to report promptly to the town in writing if the
service provider in connection with a town covered account detects an
incident of actual or attempted identity theft or is unable to resolve one or
more red flags that the service provider detects in connection with a covered
account.



   (D)   Customer identifying information and public disclosure. The
identifying information of the Department’s customers with covered accounts
shall be kept confidential and shall be exempt from public disclosure to the
maximum extent authorized by law, including I.C. 5-14-3-4. The Town Council
also finds and determines that public disclosure of the town’s specific
practices to identity, detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft may
compromise the effectiveness of such practices and hereby directs that, under
the program, knowledge of such specific practices shall be limited to the
Program Administrator and those town employees and service providers who need
to be aware of such practices for the purpose of preventing identity theft.



(Res. 2011-04, passed 3-14-2011)



ANTI-NEPOTISM AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY



§ 36.050  ADOPTED.



   (A)   The town finds that it is necessary and desirous to adopt a
policy of conduct with regard to nepotism regarding employment with the town
and in contracting with the town in order to continue to be able to provide
local government services to its residents and to comply with the new laws
effective July 1, 2012 known as I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, respectively.



   (B)   On July 1, 2012 the town shall have a nepotism and a
contracting with a unit policy that complies with the minimum requirements of
I.C. 36-1-20.2 (hereinafter “nepotism policy”) and I.C. 36-1-21
(hereinafter “contracting with a unit by a relative policy”) and
implementation will begin.



   (C)   The town nepotism policy is hereby established effective July
1, 2012 by adopting the minimum requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-20.2,
and including all future supplements and amendments thereto which become law
from time to time, and making them a part hereof as if fully set out herein.
A copy of I.C. 36-1-20.2 Nepotism in effect on July 1 is attached hereto and
made a part hereof by reference.



   (D)   The town contracting with a unit by a relative policy is
hereby established effective July 1, 2012 by adopting the minimum
requirements provisions of I.C. 36-1-21, and including all future supplements
and amendments thereto which become law from time to time, and making them a
part hereof as if fully set out herein. A copy of the I.C. 36-1-21 Nepotism
in effect on July 1 is attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.



   (E)   The town finds that both I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21
specifically allow a unit to adopt requirements that are “more stringent or
detailed”.



   (F)   The town further finds that a single member of the legislative
body cannot act for the body regarding work assignments, compensation,
grievances, advancement or a performance evaluation without prior authority
of a majority of the body and therefore without such authority by the
majority such member will not be in the direct line of supervision.



   (G)   The town finds that a single member of governing bodies with
authority over employees in the town cannot act for the governing body
regarding work assignments, compensation, grievances, advancement or a
performance evaluation without prior authority of a majority of the body,
when a statute provides that a majority is needed to act, and therefore,
without such authority by the majority the single member will not be in the
direct line of supervision.



   (H)   All elected and appointed officials and employees of the town
are hereby directed to cooperate fully in the implementation of the policies
created by this section and demonstrate compliance with these same policies.



   (I)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the nepotism policy is a
violation and may result in the discipline, including termination, of an
employee or a transfer from the direct line of supervision or other curative
action. An elected or appointed official of the town who fails to abide by or
cooperate with the implementation, with the compliance and with mandated
certifications of either the nepotism policy or contracting with a unit by a
relative policy may be subject to action allowed by law.



   (J)   Failure to abide by or cooperate with the implementation,
compliance and certifications connected with the contracting with unit by a
relative policy is a violation and may result in the discipline, including
termination, of an employee or a curative action. An elected or appointed
official of the town who fails to abide by or cooperate with the
implementation, with the compliance and with mandated certifications of
either the nepotism policy or the contracting with unit by a relative policy
may be subject to action allowed by law.



   (K)   (1)   The polices created by this section are hereby
directed to be implemented by any of the following actions:



         (a)   Posting a copy of this section in its entirety in
at least one of the locations in the town where it posts employer posters or
other notices to its employees;



         (b)   Providing a copy of this section to its employees
and elected and appointed officials;



         (c)   Providing or posting a notice of the adoption of
this section; or



         (d)   Any such other action or actions that would
communicate the polices established by this section to its employees and
elected and appointed officials.



      (2)   Upon taking any of these actions these policies are
deemed implemented by the town.



   (L)   Two copies of I.C. 36-1-20.2 and I.C. 36-1-21, and as
supplemented or amended, are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer for
the town for public inspection as may be required by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Ord. 08-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 36.051  CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY.



   (A)   Officers or employees of the town shall neither solicit nor
accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from consultants,
potential consultants, vendors, professionals or parties to subagreements,
unless in accordance with this conflict of interest policy. The
aforementioned prohibition does not include gratuities, favors, or anything
of monetary value under $300 per day. Any financial interest under $300 per
day shall be considered not substantial in accordance with the Code of
Federal Regulations.



   (B)   This policy conforms to the standards set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations and by the Indiana Department of Transportation. A
CONSULTANT is defined as an individual or firm providing engineering and
design related services as a party to a contract with a recipient or
subrecipient of federal assistance.



(Ord. 32-2017, passed 11-27-2017)



REVERSE AUCTION PROCEDURES



§ 36.065  USE OF THIRD PARTY TO CONDUCT REVERSE AUCTIONS.



   (A)   The purchasing agency is authorized to use a third party to
conduct reverse auction on behalf of the town for the purchase of supplies.
The purchasing agent is authorized to select the third party that will
conduct the reverse auction, who must have prior experience in conducting
reverse auctions on behalf of local governments.



   (B)   The purchasing agent shall obtain a copy of the procedures
established by the third party to conduct the reverse auction on behalf of
the town and present those procedures to the Council for adoption and
inclusion in its applicable procedures prior to participating in a reverse
auction conducted by the third party.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.066  TRANSMISSION OF NOTICES, SOLICITATIONS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Notices.



      (1)   The Council shall give notice of a reverse auction by:



         (a)   Publishing notice of the invitation to bid two
times, at least one week apart, with the second publication at least seven
days before the commencement of the reverse auction in accordance with I.C.
5-22-7-5, and I.C. 5-22-18 and I.C. 5-3-1;



         (b)   Posting the invitation to bid on the town’s
website; and



         (c)   Of a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agency, by posting, or permitting to have posted,
the invitation to bid on the third party’s website.



      (2)   Note: The Council may also give notice of a reverse
auction by electronic mail or faxes.



   (B)   Solicitations and specifications.



      (1)   The Council shall transmit solicitations and
specifications by:



         (a)   In accordance with the invitation to bid,
identifying a designated location where, during regular business hours, the
invitation to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained;



         (b)   Making them available on the town’s website or
providing information on the website identifying a designated location where,
during regular business hours, the invitation to bid may be inspected and
copied or copies may be obtained; and



         (c)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction
on behalf of the purchasing agency, making them available on the third
party’s website.



      (2)   Note: posting the invitation to bid on a website
requires compliance with I.C. 5-22-3-4.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.067  PRE-QUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS.



   (A)   All bidders desiring to participate in a reverse auction must
be pre-qualified by submitting materials to ensure that they meet the
specifications identified by the buyer as to the types of supplies to be
offered for purchase no later than 24 hours prior to the time for the
commencement of the reverse auction, as provided in the invitation to bid.



   (B)   The pre-qualification process shall be used to determine
whether the bidder is responsible and responsive, as provided in the Act
(I.C. 5-22-7.5), whether there is any bidding or purchasing preference or
preferences applicable to a particular bidder, and whether the bidder has
submitted evidence of financial responsibility, as required by the purchasing
agency. In order to assist the Council in pre-qualifying bidders, the bidder
must submit, in accordance with the invitation to bid, all documentation and
other information relating to the supplies being offered for purchase, except
for price, and any other information that may assist the Council in making
its determination. Such documentation will include evidence of financial
responsibility or a certified check, as specified in the invitation to bid.



   (C)   In determining whether a bidder is responsible, the purchasing
agent may consider the following factors:



      (1)   The ability and capacity of the bidder to provide the
supplies;



      (2)   The integrity, character and reputation of the bidder;
and



      (3)   The competency and experience of the bidder.



   (D)   In determining whether a bidder is responsive, a purchasing
agent may consider the following factors:



      (1)   Whether the bidder has submitted information
demonstrating that his or her offer for supplies conforms in all material
respects to the specifications;



      (2)   Whether the bidder has submitted documentation that
complies specifically with the solicitation and the instructions to bidders;
and



      (3)   Whether the bidder has complied with all applicable
statutes, ordinances, resolutions or rules pertaining to the award of a
public contract.



   (E)   The determination that a bidder is not responsive or not
responsible must be made in writing.



   (F)   Pre-qualification of bidders must be done by the purchasing
agent or an authorized representative of the purchasing agency in the
presence of one or more witnesses and must be completed no later than 24
hours prior to the commencement of the reverse auction bidding period.



   (G)   The Council shall notify any bidder determined to be not
pre-qualified in writing, by facsimile, or electronic mail (as requested by
the bidder) and shall exclude the bidder so notified from participation in
the reverse auction.



   (H)   The Council’s determination that a bidder is not
pre-qualified is limited to the reverse auction for which the request for
pre-qualification was received.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.068  CONTENTS OF INVITATION TO BID.



   The invitation to bid must include all of the following:



   (A)   A purchase description;



   (B)   A statement that bids will be accepted by means of a reverse
auction process;



   (C)   A description of all contractual terms and conditions that
apply to the purchase, including the requirement of a noncollusion
affirmation by the successful bidder;



   (D)   The criteria that will be used by the purchasing agency to
pre-qualify bidders to determine whether a bidder is responsive and
responsible;



   (E)   The information and other documentation required to be
submitted for pre-qualification, including a certified check or other
evidence of financial responsibility;



   (F)   The location and manner in which bidders must submit
information for pre-qualification, the deadline for submission of such
information, and the deadline by which the Council will determine whether a
bidder is pre-qualified;



   (G)   The location, including any websites, at which the invitation
to bid may be inspected and copied or copies may be obtained, including, if a
third party is conduction the reverse auction, the procedures to be used by
the third party to conduction the reverse auction;



   (H)   A statement as to whether a third party is conducting the
reverse auction on behalf of the town;



   (I)   A statement that offers submitted by pre-qualified bidders
will only be received through the town’s secure website; or if a third
party is conducting the reverse auction on behalf of the town, through the
third party’s secure website;



   (J)   The date and time at which the reverse auction bidding period
will commence and the approximate length of time for which the reverse
auction will be conducted, allowing automatic extensions based upon resulting
competitive activity;



   (K)   The deadline by which pre-qualified bidders must submit an
initial price to a secure website for the purposes of establishing a
bidder’s participation and initial ranking at the commencement of the
reverse auction bidding period;



   (L)   A statement explaining that the bidding period during which
the reverse auction is conducted may be extended based upon competitive
activity, at pre-determined periods determined by the purchasing agency;



   (M)   A statement identifying the circumstances under which the
reverse auction may be postponed, paused, rescheduled or cancelled;



   (N)   The place and approximate time at which, following the close
of the bidding period, offers will be reviewed publicly by an authorized
representative of the purchasing agency in the presence of one or more
witnesses;



   (O)   A statement that the third party conducting the auction on
behalf of the town, will collect a service charge from the successful bidder
for its participation in the reverse auction;



   (P)   The name, address and telephone number of a representative of
the purchasing agency who can provide additional information related to the
reverse auction;



   (Q)   If a third party is conducting the auction on behalf of the
town, the name, address and telephone number of a representative of the third
party who can provide additional information related to the reverse auction,
including the mandatory training required of all pre-qualified bidders as a
condition of participating in the reverse auction; and



   (R)   The conditions under which the invitation to bid may be
cancelled or postponed in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-1.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.069  RECEIVING OFFERS.



   (A)   The Council shall receive offers only from bidders who have
been pre-qualified, in accordance with the invitation to bid.



   (B)   If a third party conducts the reverse auction on behalf of the
town, all pre-qualified bidders must receive training provided by the third
party in order to participate in the reverse auction.



   (C)   Prior to receiving electronic offers, the Council must find
that:



      (1)   The invitation for bid for the reverse auction indicates
the procedure for transmitting the electronic offer; and



      (2)   The electronic system on which the offer is received has
a security feature that protects the content of an electronic offer with the
same degree of protection as the content of an offer that is not transmitted
by electronic means.



   (D)   In accordance with the invitation to bid, offers submitted by
pre-qualified bidders will only be received:



      (1)   Through the town’s secure website; or



      (2)   If a third party is conducting the reverse auction on
behalf of the town, through the third party’s secure website.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.070  REVERSE AUCTION BIDDING PERIOD.



   (A)   For each reverse auction, the purchasing agent must establish
an initial bidding period during which bidders may submit prices for which
the supplies being offered may be purchased. The initial bidding period shall
not be less than one hour. The purchasing agent may automatically extend the
reverse auction bidding period for additional pre-determined periods based
upon competitive activity.



   (B)   During the bidding period for the reverse auction, information
available for public display is limited to the ranking, price and name of
bidders of each price bid relative to all other prices bid.



   (C)   The dollar amounts of the prices bid by bidders shall not be
disclosed to the bidders until the close of the bidding period.



   (D)   All information received, obtained or retained during a
reverse auction remains confidential and may not be disclosed until after the
close of the reverse auction bidding period.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.071  OPENING OFFERS.



   (A)   In accordance with the Act, offers will be deemed to be opened
when a computer generated record of the information contained in all bids
received from pre-qualified responsive and responsible bidders is reviewed
publicly at the close of the bidding period for the reverse auction in the
presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids by the purchasing agency (or an authorized representative
of the purchasing agency, including the purchasing agent).



   (B)   The purchasing agency, and any of its agents or employees are
prohibited from displaying for public viewing the amount of each initial bid
price until the close of the initial bidding period for the reverse auction.
The purchasing agency is required to protect the identity of a bidder and the
prices which have been submitted by each bidder until the initial bid has
been placed until the reverse auction begins, at which time bids will be
deemed opened.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.072  CONTRACT AWARD.



   (A)   In accordance with I.C. 5-22-7-8, the purchasing agency must
award a contract for the purchase of supplies with reasonable promptness by
written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder.



   (B)   If the contract is not awarded to the lowest bidder, the
purchasing agent must indicate the reasons for the award in writing.



   (C)   As provided in the invitation to bid, the third party
conducting the reverse auction may impose a fee as a term of the contract for
a purchase made by means of a reverse auction.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.073  PURCHASE ORDERS AND PAYMENTS.



   (A)   A fully executed purchase order must be filed with the
Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days after the award of a contract of a purchase of
supplies through a reverse auction in accordance with I.C. 5-22-18-5.



   (B)   Payments for supplies purchased in a reverse auction shall be
made only after receiving properly submitted claims in accordance with I.C.
5-11-10 and I.C. 36-5-4.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.074  DOCUMENTATION.



   The purchasing agency shall be required to maintain adequate
documentation regarding its reverse auctions so that the transactions may be
audited as provided by law. The purchasing agency shall maintain an indexed
file of specifications prepared by or under the authority of its purchasing
agents for each reverse auction in which the purchasing agency participates.



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



§ 36.075  FORM.



CHECKLIST FOR INVITATION FOR BIDS FOR REVERSE AUCTION



Type of supply ______________



Requesting agency ___________



___________ Purchase description



___________ Description of contractual terms and conditions



___________ Evaluation criteria to be used (circle selections)



            Inspection



            Testing



            Quality



            Workmanship



            Delivery



            Other ___________ (specify)



___________ Requirements imposed on trusts



___________ Pre-qualification criteria



___________ Description of information and documentation required for
pre-qualification



___________ Evidence of financial responsibility required? (Circle selection)



            Certified check



            Bid bond



            Other ___________ (specify)



___________ Performance bond required?



___________ Deadline for submission of pre-qualification information



___________ Location and manner in which pre-qualification information to be
submitted



___________ Locations, including websites, where invitation to bid may be
viewed, including any third



          party procedures



___________ Third party conducting reverse auction?



___________ Statement as to how pre-qualified bidders may submit offers



___________ Date and time at which reverse auction bidding period commences;
approximate length



          of initial bidding period



___________ Statement concerning bidding period extensions



___________ Deadline for submission of initial price by pre-qualified bidders



___________ Statement of conditions under which reverse auction may be
postponed, rescheduled,



          or cancelled



___________ Place and approximate time at which offers may be viewed publicly
after close of bidding



          period



___________ Statement concerning imposition of fee by town or third party
service charge



___________ Town contact information



___________ Third party contact information



___________ Notice of invitation for bids published



Date of first publication _____________



Date of second publication ___________



___________ Date of reverse auction bidding period



   NON-COLLUSION AFFIRMATION FOR USE WITH REVERSE AUCTION



STATE OF INDIANA   )



            ) SS:



_____________ COUNTY   )



The undersigned offeror or agent, duly swears, under penalties for perjury
that he has not, nor has any other member, representative, or agent of the
firm, company, corporation or partnership represented by him, entered into
any combination, collusion or agreement with any person relative to the price
to be offered by any person nor to prevent any person from making an offer
nor to induce anyone to refrain from making an offer.



                                       �
�  ________________________________



                                       �
�  Offeror (Firm)



                                       �
�  ________________________________



                                       �
�  Signature of Offeror or Agent



(Res. 2007-24, passed 11-12-2007)



INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS POLICY



§ 36.085  ADOPTION OF INTERNAL CONTROL STANDARDS POLICY.



   (A)   The town hereby adopts the internal control stands policy
attached to Ord. 17-2016 and incorporated in this section.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer is directed to ensure that all personnel
receive training concerning the internal control procedures adopted and
approved in this section prior to June 30, 2016.



   (C)   The town hereby adopts a materially threshold of $5,000 for
purposes of the internal control procedures adopted and approved in this
section.



(Ord. 17-2016, passed 6-27-2016)



§ 36.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   A person who violates §§ 36.001 through 36.003 or knowingly
allows a violation to occur commits a Class C Infraction.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-161)  (Ord. 14-90, passed 9-10-1990)



CHAPTER 37:  PERSONNEL POLICY



Section




General Policy Matters




   37.01   Personnel policies incorporated by reference



   37.02   Participation in Public Employees’ Retirement Fund




Clothing Allowance




   37.15   Police Department policy



   37.16   Fire Department policy



   37.17   Public Works Department



   37.18   Effective date



GENERAL POLICY MATTERS



§ 37.01  PERSONNEL POLICIES INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   The Plainfield Personnel Policy Guide, as it may be amended from time
to time, is incorporated herein by reference, with two copies of the same
being maintained in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-60)



Editor’s note:



   The Plainfield Personnel Policy Guide was adopted by the Town Council
on June 28, 1976, effective July 1, 1976. It applies to all employees of the
town except those within the Police Department and Fire Department, with
subsequent amendments being made thereafter.



Statutory reference:



   Payment of compensation procedures prior to a vacation leave, see I.C.
36-5-4-7



   Setting of salaries or compensation for employees and officers, see
I.C. 36-5-3-2



   State established mileage reimbursement rate, see I.C. 36-2-7-7



§ 37.02  PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT FUND.



   (A)   (1)   Effective as of January 1, 2006, it is the desire of
the Town Council to pick-up all of the mandatory contributions by the
employees who are members of PERF through a payroll reduction.



      (2)   No contributions prior to the Town Council’s action
shall be picked-up.



   (B)   Said contributions even though designated as employee
contributions for state law purposes, are being paid by the town in lieu of
said contributions by the employee.



   (C)   Said contributions will not be included in the gross income of
the employees for tax reporting purposes, that is, for federal or state
income tax withholding taxes, until distributed from PERF.



   (D)   Said contributions will be included in the gross income of the
employees for employment tax purposes, as the contributions are made to PERF.



   (E)   Said employees shall not be entitled to any option of choosing
to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by
the town to PERF.



   (F)   (1)   The town elects to enlarge its participation in the
Public Employees’ Retirement Fund by including additional classes of
employees as stated below in the coverage under Chapter 340 of the Acts of
1945, all Acts amendatory and supplemental thereto. This agreement
supplements the original dated  November 28, 1977.



      (2)   The town agrees to make the required contributions under
the Public Employees’ Retirement Fund Act, which is the Act of 1945,
Chapter 340, and all Acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto,
including specifically the Acts of 1955, Chapter 329, commonly designated as
“The Indiana Public Employees’ Social Security Integration and
Supplemental Retirement Benefit Act”.



      (3)   These positions are declared to be covered by the Fund:



         (a)   Assistant Manager;



         (b)   GIS Specialist;



         (c)   Program Administrator;



         (d)   MS4 Operator;



         (e)   Deputy Director;



         (f)   Supervisor; and



         (g)   Assistant Supervisor.



   (G)   (1)   The town hereby amends and restates the deferred
compensation plan (the “Plan”) in the form of the ICMA Retirement
Corporation 457 Governmental Deferred Compensation Plan and Trust, to include
the associated Roth amendment.



      (2)   The assets of the Plan shall be held in trust, with the
town serving as trustee (“trustee”), for the exclusive benefit of Plan
participants and their beneficiaries, and the assets shall not be diverted to
any other purpose. The trustee’s beneficial ownership of Plan assets held
in Vantage Trust shall be held for the further exclusive benefit of the Plan
participants and their beneficiaries.



      (3)   The town hereby agrees to serve as trustee under the
Plan.



(Res. 2005-46, passed 12-28-2005; Res. 2007-10, passed 4-9-2007; Res. passed
3-24-2008; Res. 2007-22, passed 9-28-2007; Res. 2013-10, passed 2-25-2013)



CLOTHING ALLOWANCE



§ 37.15  POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICY.



   The policy concerning clothing allowance for the Town Police Department
has been and currently is as follows:



   (A)   Commencing January 1, 1982, the Town Police Department
provided a clothing allowance of $450 per year per employee;



   (B)   Commencing January 1, 1985, the clothing allowance for the
Town Police Department was increased to $500 per employee per year; and



   (C)   That January 1, 1986, the clothing allowance for the Town
Police Department was increased to $550 per year per employee and said
allowance is the current allowance as of the adoption of this section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-134)  (Ord. 7-86, passed 5-12-1986)



§ 37.16  FIRE DEPARTMENT POLICY.



   The clothing allowance provided by the town to the Town Fire Department
has been and is as follows:



   (A)   Commencing January 1, 1982, the clothing allowance for the
Plainfield Fire Department was established at $450 per year per employee; and



   (B)   On January 1, 1985, the Town Fire Department clothing
allowance was increased to $550 per year per employee, and said amount is the
current clothing allowance provided for such Department as of the adoption of
this section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-135)  (Ord. 7-86, passed 5-12-1986)



§ 37.17  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.



   The clothing allowance provided for the Public Works Department by the
town has been and is as follows:



   (A)   Commencing January 1, 1984, the town provided a clothing
allowance of $150 per year per employee to members of the Public Works
Department;



   (B)   Commencing January 1, 1986, the clothing allowance for Public
Works Department employees was increased to $200 per year per employee,
including the Superintendent of Public Works; and



   (C)   Commencing January 1, 1984, all new employees of the Public
Works Department shall be allowed an initial clothing allowance of $200 per
year per employee for their initial year of employment and then $200 per year
per employee for second and subsequent years.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-136)  (Ord. 7-86, passed 5-12-1986)



§ 37.18  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The ordinance setting forth the policies in §§ 37.15 through 37.17
shall be retroactive back to and including January 1,1982.



(1991 Draft Code, § 2-137)  (Ord. 7-86, passed 5-12-1986)



CHAPTER 38:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   38.01   Fee schedule



§ 38.01  FEE SCHEDULE.



 



 
Fee


Administration


General Admin




Peddler’s Permit
 


   Day
 
$20/day


   Week
 
$50/week


   Month
 
$100/month


Reproduction of public record information
 
$.10/page


Returned check charge (I.C. 35-43-5-5(e))
 
$27.50


Industrial revenue bond & economic development revenue bond application
 
1/2 of 1% of financing but not exceeding $5,000


Development Services


Utilities



Description

 

Residential Fees

 

Commercial/
Industrial Fees



Water treatment plant availability
 

$955/EDU

 

$955/EDU



Water distribution system availability and inspection
 

$300/EDU

 

$300/EDU



Sewer treatment availability
 

$1,325/EDU

 

$1,325/EDU



Sewer conveyance
 

$590/EDU

 

$590/EDU



Sewer connection
 

$325/each lateral sewer

 

$685/each lateral sewer



Sewer inspection new lateral or repair of existing lateral
 

$50/lateral

 

$100/each lateral sewer



Storm water
 

$100/dwelling unit

 

$100 per 3,000 sq. ft. of impervious surfaces



Note:

- 1 Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) = 300 gallons per day

- Commercial/industrial includes apartments   Park Impact



Park impact



Park impact
 
$ l,289/unit for single-family housing, $890/unit for duplex/
condo/townhome/apartment



Building Department



Residential
 


   Single-family
 


      Plan review
 

$50/application



      Dwelling
 

$100 + $0.05/sq. ft.



      Addition
 

$100 + $0.05/sq. ft.



      Remodel
 

$75 + $0.05/sq. ft.



      Electrical
 

$50/circuit panel, meter base, service



   Two-family
 




      Plan review
 

$50/unit



      Dwelling
 

$100/unit + $0.05/sq. Ft.



      Addition
 

$100 + $0.05/sq. Ft.



      Remodel/unit finish
 

$75/unit + $0.05/sq. Ft.



      Electrical
 

$50/circuit panel, meter base, service



   Multi-unit
 




      Plan review
 

$100/building + $10/unit



      Dwelling
 

$150/building + $20/unit



      Foundation
 

$150 + $5/unit



      Remodel/unit finish
 

$75/unit + $0.05/sq. Ft.



      Electrical
 

$75/circuit panel, meter base, service



   Accessory uses
 




      Plan review
 

$25/Application



      Accessory structure (permanent foundation)
 

$50 + $0.05/sq. ft.



      Structure other than building
 

$50 + $0.02/sq. ft.



Commercial
 




      Plan review
 

$150 + $0.002/sq. ft.



      Building
 




         1-20,000 sq. ft.
 

$300 + $0.10/sq. ft.



         20,001-50,000 sq. ft.
 

$300 + $0.05/sq. ft.



         >50,000 sq. ft.
 

$300 + $0.02/sq. ft.



      Addition
 

Same as new construction



      Remodel/tenant improvement
 

$150 + $0.10/sq. ft.



      Electrical
 

$75/circuit panel, meter base, service, lights



   Optional permit (only offered prior to an approval of the master permit)
 




      Plan review
 

$75/application



      Foundation
 

$150 + $0.01/sq. ft.



      Partial (structural only)
 

$150 + $0.01/sq. ft.



      Interim (interior only)
 

$200 + $0.01/sq. ft.



   Accessory permit
 




      Plan review
 

$75/Application



      Accessory building
 

$150 + $0.10/sq. ft.



      Structure other than building
 

$75 + $0.10/sq. ft.



Industrial
 




      Plan review
 

$150 + $0.001/sq. ft.



      Building
 




         1-500,000 sq. ft.
 

$500 + $0.006/sq. ft.



         >500,000 sq. ft.
 

$500 + $0.005/sq. ft.



      Addition
 

Same as New Construction



      Remodel/tenant improvement
 

$150 + $0.10/sq. ft.



      Electrical
 

$75/Circuit Panel, Meter Base, Service, Lights



   Optional permit (only offered prior to an approval of the master permit)
 




      Plan review
 

$75/application



      Foundation
 

$250 + $0.001/sq. ft.



      Partial (structural only)
 

$250 + $0.001/sq. ft.



      Interim (interior only)
 

$250 + $0.05/sq. ft.



   Accessory permit
 




      Plan review
 

$75/application



      Accessory building
 

$150 + $0.10/sq. ft.



      Structure other than building
 

$100 + $0.10/sq. ft.



Telecommunication
 




      Cell tower
 

$100 + $1.00/lineal feet of tower height



      Co-location (structure-shelter)
 

$75 + $0.10/sq. ft.



      Electrical
 

$75/circuit panel, meter base, service, lights



Swimming pool/spa
 




   Residential pool
 




      Plan review
 

$25/Application



      Above-ground or spa
 

$50



      In-ground
 

$75



   Commercial/public
 




      Plan review
 

$50/application



      Pool
 

$200



      Spa
 

$100



Demolition/relocation
 




   Residential
 




      Primary structure
 

$75



      Accessory structure
 

$50



   Non-residential
 




      Primary structure
 

$150



      Accessory structure
 

$75



Trailer permits
 




      Construction trailer
 

$50



      Sales/office trailer
 

$75



Duplication
 




      Plot plan
 

$5/copy



      Permit card
 

$10/copy



      Certificate of occupancy
 

$15/copy



Revision/addendum
 




      Same as the permit fee
 

Applicable to the requested amendment



Re-inspection fees
 




      1st re-inspection
 

$75



      2nd re-inspection
 

$150



      Subsequent re-inspections
 

$300



Note:

-Re-Inspection fees are assessed when an additional inspection is required
which deviates from the normal sequence of inspections.



Planning & Zoning




Petition/Application

 

Fees



Zone map change/ rezone
 


   Residential
 

$675 + $25/acre



   Commercial/industrial
 

$675 + $25/acre



   Planned unit development (PUD)
 

$1000 + $25/acre



   PUD amendment
 

$535 + $15/acre



   Amend commitments
 

$330 + $50/acre



   Text amendments
 

$350 + $50/additional amendments



Development plans
 




   Architecture & site design
 

$675 + $25/acre



   Development incentives
 

$500 + $25/acre + $ 100/additional incentives



   Final detailed plan/PUD
 

$675 + $25/acre



   Waivers
 

$100 + $50/additional waivers



   Amendments
 

$400 + $15/acre



   Appeals
 

$675 + $25/acre



Primary plat
 




   Minor residential
 

$350 + $5/lot



   Major single-family residential
 

$750 + $10/lot



   Multi-family/commercial/industrial
 

$750 + $10/acre



   Commercial/industrial/incremental
 

$800 + $10/acre



   Waivers
 

$100 + $50/additional waiver



   Vacation
 

$325



   Revised/amended primary plat
 

$500 + $5/acre



Secondary plat
 




   Review fee
 

$400 + $10/acre



   GIS fee
 

$100 + $25/lot, common area, or block



   Amended/replat
 

$260 + $10/lot




Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA)




Petition/Application

 

Fees



Use variance
 


   Residential
 

$400 + $50/additional development standard



   Commercial/industrial
 

$600 + $50/additional development standard



Development standard variance
 




   Residential
 

$350 + $50/additional development standard



   Commercial/industrial
 

$350 + $50/additional development standard



   Special exception
 

$300



   Administrative appeal
 

$300



   Waivers
 

$50 + $25/additional development standard



   Revised/amended plan
 

$175




Improvement Location Permits (ILP)




Type of Permit

 

Fees



Residential
 


   Single-family/two-family
 

$75



   Multi-family
 

$350 + $25/unit + $50/building



   Accessory/single & two family
 

$30 + $10/additional structure



   Accessory/multi-family
 

$50 + $15/additional structure



   Residential addition
 

$65



Commercial
 




   Primary building
 

$400 + $25/acre



   Parking only
 

Greater of $50 or $0.50/parking space



   Remodel
 

$250 + $10/acre



   Accessory building/structure
 

$150 + $50/additional structure



Industrial
 




   Primary building
 

$400 + $25/acre



   Parking only
 

Greater of $50 or $0.50/parking space



   Remodel
 

$250 + $10/acre



   Accessory building/structure
 

$150 + $50/additional structure



   ILP amendment
 

$300 + $5/acre



Signs
 




   Wall
 

$100 + $l/sq. ft.



   Ground up to 48 sq. ft.
 

$200



   Ground >48 sq. ft.
 

$200 + $l/sq. ft.



   Pylon up to 48 sq. ft.
 

$250



   Pylon >48 sq. ft.
 

$250 + $l/sq. ft.



   Pole up to 100 sq. ft.
 

$350 + $l/sq. ft. if over 20 ft.



   Pole > 100 sq. ft.
 

$350 + $l/sq. ft. + $10/ft. if over 20 ft.



   Suspended/projecting
 

$85+$l/sq. ft.



   Awning/canopy/marquee
 

$85 + $l/sq. ft.



   Incidental
 

$85



   Roof Sign in I-2 or I-3
 

$300



Off-premise advertising/billboard
 




   Ground
 

$500 + $l/sq. ft.



   Pole
 

$500 + $l/sq. ft.



   ILP sign amendment
 

$50 + $l/sq. ft. per sign



Miscellaneous
 




   Fence permit
 

$50



   Zoning verification letter
 

$50 + $25/additional hour



Note:

-  Advertising fees are not included in the fees.

-  Petitioners will be billed by the Town of Plainfield upon receipt of a
statement from the Hendricks Co. Flyer.

-  All fees are rounded up “per acre”, “per sq. ft.”, or “per
ft.” for any portion.


Fee Adjustments:

Not-for-profits: the filling fee shall be reduced by 50% for any charitable
organization which submits a copy of current statement from the IRS
confirming its charitable (501c3) status at the time of filing the
petition/application.



Fire



Ambulance service
 


   Town residents:
 


      Basic life support
 

$760 + $10/loaded mile



      Advanced life support I
 

$912 + $10/loaded mile



      Advanced life support II
 

$2,090 + $10/loaded mile



      Special care transport
 

$2,470 + $10/loaded mile



   Non-town residents:
 




      Basic life support
 

$960 + $10/loaded mile



      Advanced life support I
 

$1,152 + $10/loaded mile



      Advanced life support II
 

$2,640 + $10/loaded mile



      Advanced life support assist
 

$1,680



      Special care transport
 

$3,120 + $10/loaded mile



   Non-transport fee if services provided
 

$300



Note:

-  Rates are based on the Medicare reimbursement rate



Service

 

Fees



Fire reports
 
$2/first page + $1/additional page


Plan review
 
$150 < 50,000 sq. ft.

$300 > 50,001 sq. ft.


Certificate of occupancy
 
Initial inspection $150 < 50,000 sq. ft.

Initial inspection $300 > 50,001 sq. ft.

   Re-inspections:   1st re-inspection $75

            2nd re-inspection $150


Racking/conveyors/mezzanine plan review

Racking inspection

Conveyor inspection

Mezzanine/platform inspection
 
$50

$100 + $.10 per $1,000 of the estimated material cost

$100 + $.10 per $1,000 of the estimated material cost

$100 + $.10 per sq. ft. of the mezzanine/platform


New fire alarm permit
 

$150/22,500 sq. ft.= l fire alarm zone



New sprinkler permit
 

$150/sprinkler riser



New special hazard suppression permit (clean agent suppression, kitchen hood)
 

$75



System modification permit
 

$50



Fire extinguisher training
 

$20/person, $200 minimum



Annual inspections
 
1st inspection $0.00

1st re-inspection $75

2nd re-inspection $150


Hazardous materials, fuel spill, or chemical or hazardous materials related
to fire
 
Initial response -

   $250 per fire engine/ladder/medic

   $100 per command control vehicle

Per hour after -

   $150 per fire engine/ladder/medic

   $50 per command/control vehicle

Plus - expendable materials such as absorption materials, emulsifiers, or
other agents used in cleanup operations, the actual replacement cost of those
materials.

Plus - for collection of debris, chemicals, fuel, or contaminated materials
resulting from a spill, the actual cost of removal and disposal at an
authorized location.


Working structure fires
 

$500/incident



CPR instruction
 




   CPR check off
 

$25



   Heartsaver adult AED
 

$50



   Heartsaver adult first aid
 

$50



   Heartsaver adult AED & first aid
 

$90



   Heartsaver pediatric AED
 

$50



   Heartsaver pediatric first aid
 

$50



   Heartsaver pediatric AED & first aid
 

$90



   BLS healthcare provider
 

$60



Note:

-  Plan review: we review all of the building plans for commercial
properties, multi-tenant (hotel, motel and assisted living) and tenant
improvement plans for life safety, fire suppression and fire department
access. This takes between 5 to 10 hours per plan depending on the size of
the facility. This includes TAC meetings.

-  Working structure fires fee is to be billed to the insurance company for
the structure and not the home owner. The majority of all insurance company
allows for this fee. (Based on state fire marshal fee schedule).

-  All CPR instruction costs are per person.



Police



Incident or CAD reports
 

$5/incident



Accident reports
 

$5/incident



Vehicle identification number (VIN check)
 

$5



Background check
 

$7/printed, $3/view



Fingerprints
 

$5/card



Gun permit (license type)
 




   Lifetime personal protection (no current handgun permit)
 

$50



   Lifetime personal protection (current valid handgun permit)
 

$40



   Four-year personal protection
 

$10



   Four-year hunting & target
 

$10



   Lifetime hunting & target (no current permit)
 

$50



   Lifetime hunting & target (current valid permit)
 

$40



Photos
 




   Disc
 

$5



   Page
 

$1



Precious metals dealer registration fee
 

$50/annual



Vehicle release administration fee
 

$20





 



 




Parks & Recreation



Daily Admissions
 

Regular Rates

 

Town Resident



   Adult day pass
 

$11

 

$7



   Youth day pass
 

$10

 

$6



   Pre-school day pass
 

$8

 

$5



   Senior citizen day pass
 

$9

 

$6



   Just watching pass
 

$5

 

$4



Recreation & Aquatics Center Memberships
 

12 Month

 

6 Month

 

3 Month

 

1 Month



   Plainfield resident
 


 


 


 




      Household
 

$620

 

$340

 

$186

 

$67



      Adult
 

$347

 

$191

 

$104

 

$38



      Youth
 

$204

 

$112

 

$61

 

$22



      Senior citizen
 

$204

 

$112

 

$61

 

$22



      Adult couples
 

$589

 

$324

 

$176

 

$64



      Senior couples
 

$371

 

$204

 

$111

 

$40



      Ten visit pass
 

$43

 

$43

 

$43

 

$43



   Guilford Township resident
 


 


 


 




      Household
 

$651

 

$358

 

$195

 

$70



      Adult
 

$364

 

$201

 

$109

 

$40



      Youth
 

$214

 

$118

 

$64

 

$23



      Senior citizen
 

$214

 

$118

 

$64

 

$23



      Adult couples
 

$618

 

$340

 

$185

 

$67



      Senior couples
 

$390

 

$214

 

$117

 

$42



      Ten visit pass
 

$45

 

$45

 

$45

 

$45



   Non-resident
 


 


 


 




      Household
 

$867

 

$478

 

$260

 

$93



      Adult
 

$485

 

$267

 

$146

 

$53



      Youth
 

$286

 

$156

 

$86

 

$30



      Senior citizen
 

$286

 

$156

 

$86

 

$30



      Adult couples
 

$824

 

$454

 

$247

 

$89



      Senior couples
 

$519

 

$286

 

$155

 

$57



      Ten visit pass
 

$61

 

$61

 

$61

 

$61





 



 

Park Shelter Rental
 

Town Residents

 

Non-Residents



   Friendship Gardens
 

$105

 

   $210



   Franklin Park Shelter
 

$55 1/2 day



$85 full day

 

$80 1/2 day



$105 full day



   Swinford Park Shelter
 

$55 1/2 day



$85 full day

 

$80 1/2 day



$105 full day



   Interurban Depot
 

$45/hr



$290 full day

 

   $55/hr



$360 full day



   Diamond and Ball Fields
 

$20/hr

 

$25/hr




 



 



Recreation & Aquatics Center Rentals
 

Member

 

Resident/ Non-Member

 

Non-Resident/ Non-Member



   Media center
 
$35/hr
 
$45/hr
 
$65/hr


   Meeting/banquet rooms
 
$35/hr
 
$45/hr
 
$65/hr


   Full day room rental
 
$225/Day
 
$290/Day
 
$350/Day


   Courts
 
$85/hr
 
$95/hr
 
$105/hr


   Wet party (pool) room
 
$120/hr
 
$140/hr
 
$160/hr


   Splash island exclusive use
 
$627/hr
 
$716/hr
 
$836/hr


   Recreation center exclusive use
 
$540/hr
 
$620/hr
 
$720/hr




 



(1991 Draft Code, §§ 4-114, 4-125, 4-126, 4-127, 4-129)  (Ord. 11-90,
passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 17-96, passed 7-22-1996; Ord. 38-2005, passed
7-11-2005; Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012; Ord. 06-2015, passed 4-27-2015;
Ord. 35-2017, passed 12-21-2017)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   GENERAL SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



      52.   WATER REGULATIONS



      53.   CONSERVATION AND WATER RATIONING



      54.   DRAINAGE



      55.   MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS



      56.   STORM WATER



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Authority to establish utility service



   50.02   Authority to establish waterworks



   50.03   Authority to regulate the disposal of sanitary sewage



   50.04   Control of waterworks utility



   50.05   Assuming jurisdiction of certain sewer and water utilities
outside the corporate boundaries




Regulating Access to Town Water Supply




   50.20   Purpose



   50.21   Definitions



   50.22   Regulation and operation



   50.23   Territorial application



   50.24   Jurisdiction




Miscellaneous Regulations




   50.35   Fluorides into the public water supply



   50.36   Opening or tampering with water meters and pits



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH UTILITY SERVICE.



   A town may furnish or regulate the furnishing of utility service to the
public.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal sewage works, see I.C. 36-9-23-1 through I.C. 36-9-23-36



   Utility service to the public, see I.C. 36-9-2-15



§ 50.02  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH WATERWORKS.



   A town may regulate the furnishing of water to the public, and may
establish, maintain and operate waterworks.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-2)



Statutory reference:



   Waterworks, see I.C. 36-9-2-14



§ 50.03  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE THE DISPOSAL OF SANITARY SEWAGE.



   (A)   A town may regulate the furnishing of the service of
collecting, processing and disposing of waste substances and domestic or
sanitary sewage, which includes the power to fix the price to be charged for
that service.



   (B)   A town may collect, process and dispose of waste substances
and domestic or sanitary sewage, and may establish, maintain and operate
sewers, sewage disposal systems and systems to collect and dispose of waste
substances.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-3)



Statutory reference:



   Disposal of substances and domestic or sanitary sewage, see I.C.
36-9-2-16 and I.C. 36-9-2-17



§ 50.04  CONTROL OF WATERWORKS UTILITY.



   The waterworks utility of the town shall be controlled by a Board
consisting of the members of the Town Council.



(Ord. 3-96, passed 2-12-1996)



§ 50.05  ASSUMING JURISDICTION OF CERTAIN SEWER AND WATER UTILITIES OUTSIDE
THE CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The town’s ordinances, service agreements and other legally
binding documents that in any manner apply to the provision of public water
by the town shall be binding and enforceable on all waterworks owned or
operated within four miles outside the town’s corporate boundaries.



   (B)   The town’s ordinances, service agreements and other legally
binding documents that in any manner apply to the provision of sewer service
by the town shall be binding and enforceable on all sewer works owned or
operated within ten miles outside the town’s corporate boundaries.



   (C)   The town hereby exercises its legal authority to regulate the
furnishing of the service of collecting, processing and disposing of waste
substances and domestic or sanitary sewage in areas within four miles outside
its corporate boundaries. Such authority includes the power to fix the prices
to be charged for that service. The town shall exercise the authority at its
discretion.



   (D)   All sewage works within ten miles outside the corporate
boundaries of the town shall be properly designed and constructed.



   (E)   All new and rehabilitated sewers and sewer disposal systems
within ten miles outside the corporate boundaries of the town, including both
collector sewers and service laterals, shall be subject to testing and
inspection by the town.



   (F)   The town shall regulate flows from any sewer works satellite
collection systems within ten miles outside the corporate boundaries of the
town.



   (G)   All sewers and sewer disposal systems within ten miles outside
the corporate boundaries of the town shall prohibit the connection or
introduction of storm water sources to the collection system.



   (H)   (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this division (H) is to
enlarge and amend the town’s extraterritorial boundaries and exercise the
town’s extraterritorial powers over watercourses and well fields and to
regulate the furnishing of water to the public within the town water
territory as described on Exhibit A, attached hereto and made a part hereof
as if set out in full herein.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         GROUND WATER. All water occurring beneath the surface of
the ground regardless of location and form.



         PERSON. An individual, a firm, a limited liability company,
a corporation, an association, a public utility, a private utility or a
governmental agency. However, for purposes of this division (H), a
governmental agency shall not include the State of Indiana or the federal
government.



         PLAINFIELD WATER TERRITORY. The area depicted on Exhibit A
attached hereto and made a part hereof as if set out in full herein.



         TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana.



         TOWN WATER SYSTEM. All pipes, lines, joints, tanks,
hydrants, wells, water treatment plant and all related parts used to supply
public water to users.



         USER. Any person or entity connected to the town water
system.



         WATERCOURSE. Includes lakes, rivers, streams, ground water
and any other body of water.



         WELL FIELDS. Areas owned or controlled by the town that
have established water wells or planned water wells on them for use by the
town water utility.



      (3)   Extraterritorial power. The town hereby exercises its
power and authority to control and regulate all watercourses, well fields and
furnishing of water to the public in the area described and depicted on
Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof (the “town water
territory”).



      (4)   Regulation.



         (a)   No person shall interfere with the town’s access
to and use of water from its existing or later developed well fields.



         (b)   No person shall provide public water to a person
or property located within the town water territory without the express
written consent from the town after written application to the town by such
person.



         (c)   No person shall furnish water to the public or
provide public water from a source within the town water territory, without
the express written consent from the town after written application to the
town by such person.



         (d)   No person shall take water from or cause or
prevent water to escape from a watercourse or do any act that might affect
the water flow in a watercourse in the town water territory without the
express written consent from the town after written application to the town
by such person.



         (e)   Nothing in this division (H) shall be construed to
prohibit the taking of water from a watercourse or ground water for
reasonable personal use by an individual, including, but not limited to,
residential water wells.



      (5)   Territorial application. This division (H) shall apply
to the town water territory as defined and depicted on Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof as if set out in full herein.



      (6)   Exclusion for existing agreements. The terms of this
division (H) are subject to and subordinate to any currently existing
agreements between the town and any other entities providing public water to
users.



      (7)   Jurisdiction. The Town Court and the Circuit and
Superior Courts of the county shall have jurisdiction for the enforcement of
this division (H) and the determination of any penalties and issuance of an
injunction.



(Ord. 17-2004, passed 8- -2004; Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-28-2011)  Penalty,
see § 50.99



REGULATING ACCESS TO TOWN WATER SUPPLY



§ 50.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish regulations for access
to the town water supply; the use of water meters; to eliminate illegal
access to the town water supply by not using proper metering devices owned by
the town; and to prohibit the tampering with the water system.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 12-29-2004)



§ 50.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   JUMPER. Any device or system used or intended to supply water from the
town water supply to any structure, person or entity without the use of a
proper metering device.



   PROPER METERING DEVICES. Equipment owned by the town to measure the
water passing through or out of the town water supply.



   TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM. To turn any portion of the town water
system on or off or otherwise change or damage it.



   TOWN WATER SUPPLY. The water in any part of the town water system.



   TOWN WATER SYSTEM. All pipes, lines, joints, tanks, hydrants, wells,
water treatment plant and all related parts used to supply public water to
users.



   TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 12-29-2004)



§ 50.22  REGULATION AND OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall install or cause to be installed any jumper
for the purpose of accessing water from the town water supply that results in
access to the such water without passing through an operating proper metering
device.



   (B)   No person shall, without authority from the Town Water
Department, turn on or off any portion of the town water system or otherwise
change or damage the town water system.



   (C)   Upon discovery of a jumper or any form of tampering with the
water system, the Town Metropolitan Police Department shall be notified and
shall issue a citation for violation of the subchapter to the person or
entity who has caused such violation and to the owner of the property where
the violation occurred.



   (D)   The owner of the property where the violation of the
subchapter occurred shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties and
damages resulting from the violation.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 12-29-2004)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.23  TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall apply to the entire town water system both inside
and outside of the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 12-29-2004)



§ 50.24  JURISDICTION.



   The Town Court and the Circuit and Superior Courts of the county shall
have jurisdiction for the enforcement of this subchapter and the
determination of any and all penalties and damages.



(Ord. 29-2004, passed 12-29-2004)



MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



§ 50.35  FLUORIDES INTO THE PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   The Water Works Superintendent is authorized and directed to
have plans and specifications prepared for the purchase and installation of
equipment to add fluoride to the water being distributed by town water
utility, and to submit them to the State Board of Health for approval.



   (B)   Upon the approval of these plans and specifications by the
State Board of Health, such equipment and supplies be purchased and installed
in the manner provided by state law, and that thereupon said fluoride
compound be added to the public water supply in sufficient quantities to
bring the total amount of fluoride ions (F-) present in the finished water to
the optimum (1.0 ppm) concentration recommended by the State Board of Health,
but not exceeding 1.5 parts per million weight.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-165)  (Res. passed 5-14-1984)



§ 50.36  OPENING OR TAMPERING WITH WATER METERS AND PITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than employees of the water
utility of the town while acting within the scope of their employment or any
other person or persons specifically authorized by the water utility, to open
a meter pit lid, enter a meter pit or in any manner tamper with a water meter
or attempt to heat a meter pit or meter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-166)  (Ord. 1-84, passed 4-9-1984)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Assuming jurisdiction of certain sewer and water utilities
outside the corporate boundaries.



      (1)   Penalty. Any person who violates § 50.05(H) shall be
fined not less than $100 or more than $2,500. A separate offense shall be
committed for each day of the violation.



      (2)   Injunction. In addition to the penalty provided by
division (B)(2) above, the town shall be entitled to an injunction, enjoining
any further violation of § 50.05(H).



      (3)   Attorneys’ fees. Any person found by a court to have
violated this § 50.05(H) shall pay all costs and reasonable attorneys’
fees incurred by the town as a result of the town’s enforcement of §
50.05(H).



   (C)   Regulating access to town water supply.



      (1)   Any person who violates §§ 50.20 through 50.24 shall
be fined not less than $100 or more than $300 for the first offense. For the
second and all subsequent offences, the fine shall be not less than $250 or
more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate offense shall be committed for
each parcel of real estate owned by the owner on which a violation occurs.



      (2)   In addition to the penalty provided for in division
(C)(1) above, any person violating §§ 50.20 through 50.24 may also be
required to pay all damages to the town water system as a result of said
violation and for the value of the water used as a result of such violation.



   (D)   Opening or tampering with water meters and pits.



      (1)   Any act by any unauthorized person as described in §
50.36 shall constitute an unlawful trespass against the property of water
utility of the town, shall constitute an infraction against the town and each
such unauthorized act shall be punishable by a fine of $25 plus the cost of
repairing any damage resulting from the unauthorized act and the cost of
restoring water service.



      (2)   Any penalty assessed pursuant to § 50.36 shall be
assessed by adding such penalty and costs to the next month’s water billing
of the person committing such act.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-166)



(Ord. 1-84, passed 4-9-1984; Ord. 01-2011, passed 2-28-2011; Ord. 29-2004,
passed 12-29-2004)



CHAPTER 51:  GENERAL SEWER USE AND
WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT



Section




General Provisions




   51.001   Purpose and policy



   51.002   Administration



   51.003   Abbreviations



   51.004   Definitions



   51.005   General regulations



   51.006   Connection requirements; connection charges



   51.007   Connection permits



   51.008   General requirements for the construction of sewers and
laterals



   51.009   Installation and specification



   51.010   Maintaining and repairing sewers



   51.011   Extensions outside the town



   51.012   Right to prohibit new connections



   51.013   Private wells




Wastewater Admissibility and General Requirements




   51.025   Prohibited discharge standards



   51.026   Abnormal waste surcharge



   51.027   National categorical pretreatment standards



   51.028   Local limits



   51.029   Town’s right of revision and modifications



   51.030   Dilution




Pretreatment of Wastewater




   51.045   Pretreatment facilities



   51.046   Additional pretreatment measures



   51.047   Accidental discharge/slug control plans



   51.048   Hauled wastewater




Wastewater Discharge Permit Application




   51.060   Wastewater analysis



   51.061   Wastewater discharge permit requirement



   51.062   Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections



   51.063   Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections



   51.064   Wastewater discharge permit application contents



   51.065   Fees, rates, and charges




Regulation of Waste Received from Other Districts




   51.080   Inter-local agreements



   51.081   Information



   51.082   Inter-local agreement conditions




Reporting Requirements




   51.095   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   51.096   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste



   51.097   Analytical requirements



   51.098   Sample collection



   51.099   Recordkeeping




Compliance Monitoring




   51.110   Monitoring



   51.111   Industrial survey



   51.112   Right of entry: inspection and sampling



   51.113   Search warrants




Confidential Information




   51.115   Confidential information




Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance




   51.120   Publication of users in significant noncompliance




Administrative Enforcement Remedies




   51.125   Notification of violation



   51.126   Agreed orders



   51.127   Show cause hearing



   51.128   Compliance orders



   51.129   Cease and desist orders



   51.130   Administrative fines



   51.131   Emergency suspensions



   51.132   Termination of discharge




Judicial Enforcement Remedies




   51.145   Injunctive relief



   51.146   Civil penalties



   51.147   Reserved



   51.148   Remedies nonexclusive




Supplemental Enforcement Action




   51.160   Performance bonds



   51.161   Liability insurance



   51.162   Water supply severance



   51.163   Public nuisances



   51.164   Contractor listing




Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations




   51.175   Upset



   51.176   Prohibited discharge standards



   51.177   Bypass




Fees, Rates, and Sewer Charges




   51.190   Permit fees



   51.191   Water usage; meter reading schedule



   51.192   Water obtained from other sources



   51.193   Single meter for multiple properties



   51.194   Multiple meters for single industrial user



   51.195   Portion of water not entering sewerage system



   51.196   Billing procedures



   51.197   Town subject to sewer charges



   51.198   Sewer charges



   51.199   Delinquent accounts



   51.200   Adjustments for fire protection



   51.201   Equitable adjustment; unusual circumstances



   51.202   Rates outside town




Review of Regulations by Town




   51.215   Wastewater review




Miscellaneous provisions




   51.230   Pretreatment charges and fees



   51.231   Operation of POTW



   51.232   Effective dates



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
publicly owned treatment works for the Town of Plainfield (“Plainfield”
or “town”) and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations
(“CFR”) Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;



      (3)   To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;



      (5)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of
the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and



      (6)   To enable the town to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned
treatment works is subject.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all direct and indirect users of
the publicly owned treatment works, including persons or entities outside the
town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of the publicly
owned treatment works. The chapter authorizes the establishment of a
pretreatment program; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user
reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein and fines
and other remedies for violation of the chapter.



   (C)   Unless otherwise defined herein, terms shall have the meanings
adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
American Waterworks Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation,
as set forth in 40 CFR Part 136. Waste constituents and characteristics shall
be measured by standard methods unless a mutually agreed upon acceptable
alternative method is adopted by agreement of the permittee and the
permitting authority or any other method is established by federal or state
regulatory agencies. Monitoring and metering shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.002  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town Council
(“Council”) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Council or the
Superintendent may be delegated to other Town personnel or qualified
contractors.



   (B)   The town will maintain sufficient resources and qualified
personnel to carry out the non-delegated pretreatment program in accordance
with 327 I.A.C. 5-19-3.



   (C)   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.003  ABBREVIATIONS.



   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:



      AAS         -   Alkyl Arial Sulfonate



      ABS         -   Alkyl Benzene Sulfonate



      ASTM         -   American Society for Testing
Materials



      BOD5         -   Biochemical oxygen demand - five day



      BMP         -   Best management practices



      BMR         -   Baseline monitoring report



      CFR         -   Code of Federal Regulations



      CA            -   Control Authority



      CIU         -   Categorical industrial user



      COD         -   Chemical oxygen demand



      CSO         -   Combined sewer overflow



      EPA         -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
- Washington D.C.



      EPA Region V   -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Region V - Chicago, Illinois



      ERP         -   Enforcement response plan



      FOG         -   Fats, oils, and grease



      gpd            -   gallons per day



      IAC         -   Indiana Administrative Code



      IC            -   Indiana Code



      I/I            -   Inflow and infiltration (clear
water flow)



      IDEM         -   Indiana Department of Environmental
Management



      IOSHA         -   Indiana Occupational Safety &
Health Act



      IU            -   Industrial user



      IWP         -   Industrial wastewater pretreatment
permit



      MGD         -   Million gallons per day



      mg/l         -   milligrams per liter



      MSDS         -   Material safety data sheet



      NPDES         -   National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System



      NSCIU         -   Non-significant categorical user



      O&M         -   Operations and maintenance



      POTW         -   Publicly owned treatment works



      PUWWS      -   IDEM’s pretreatment and urban wet
weather section



      RCRA         -   Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act



      SIC         -   Standard industrial classification



      SIU         -   Significant industrial user



      SNC         -   Significant noncompliance



      TSS         -   Total suspended solids



      U.S.C.         -   United States Code



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any pretreatment limit or
prohibitive standard (federal, state, or local) contained in the ordinance
and considered to be the most restrictive with which non-domestic users will
be required to comply.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Regional Administrator of EPA Region V. IDEM
will automatically be designated as the Approval Authority if its
pretreatment program is approved by the EPA and EPA delegates its
pretreatment program authority to IDEM.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment  recommendations,  and  initiate  and  direct  or other
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
wastewater discharge permit or requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental
facility: a director or the highest official appointed or designated to
oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental
facility, or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
of this definition may designate duly AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
Superintendent.



   BENEFICIAL USES.  Include, but are not limited to, domestic,
municipal, agricultural, industrial, power generation, recreation, aesthetic
enjoyment, navigation, the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife,
and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible and
intangible, as specified by state or federal law.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMP.  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 51.025(A) and (B) and 40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD5.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN - SANITARY.  That part of the lowest horizontal piping
of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building
sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING DRAIN - STORM.  A building sewer that conveys stormwater or
other clearwater drainage, but no sanitary or industrial sewage.



   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD.  Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply
to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD.  The quantity of the oxygen equivalent
of that portion of the organic matter in a sample that is susceptible to
oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.



   CLEAR WATER FLOW.  Ground water or precipitation related water which
enters the sanitary sewer collection system through pipe defects
(infiltration) or conduits (inflow).



   COLOR.  The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%)
transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.



   CONTROL AUTHORITY.  The Commissioner of the Indiana Department of
Environmental Management.



   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   COUNCIL.  The Town Council of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana, or any
duly authorized official acting on its behalf; the governing body of the
POTW. The terms TOWN COUNCIL and COUNCIL are used interchangeably in this
chapter.



   DAILY DISCHARGE.  Discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar
day or any 24-hour period that reasonably represents the calendar day for
sampling purposes.



   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of the POTW to fund
debt service on outstanding revenue bonds and current capital costs.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EFFLUENT.  The water, together with any wastes that may be present,
flowing out of a drain, sewer, receptacle, or outlet.



   ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN (ERP).  A document that provides protocol
for responding to industrial pretreatment violations consistently and
systematically and notifies industries of how the town will respond to
pretreatment violations. The ERP is a guidance document and is part of the
pretreatment program procedures.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Region V Water Management
Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.



   EXISTING SOURCE.  Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
Categorical Pretreatment Standards which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.



   FATS, OILS, AND GREASE or FOG, (also referred to as TOTAL OIL AND
GREASE).  A group of substances including hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps,
fats, waxes, oils, or any other material that is extracted by a solvent from
an acidified sample and that is not volatilized during the laboratory test
procedures.



   FLOW PROPORTIONAL COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A 24-hour composite sample that
consists of at least three grab samples collected over equal time intervals
during the period of process discharge. The grab samples for the composite
shall be proportioned to flow. If a user does not utilize an automatic
sampler, a flow proportioned composite sample may be obtained by:



      (1)   Recording the discharge flow rate at the time each
individual sample is taken;



      (2)   Adding together the discharge flow rates recorded from
each individual sampling time to formulate the “total flow value”;



      (3)   Dividing the discharge flow rate of each individual
sampling time by the “total flow value” to determine its percentage of
the “total flow, value”; and



      (4)   Multiplying the volume of the total composite sample by
each individual sample’s percentage to determine the volume of that
individual sample that will be included in the total composite sample.



   GARBAGE.  Any solid wastes from the preparing, cooking, or dispensing
of food or from the handling, storing, or selling of produce.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard
to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15
minutes.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  Any waste defined as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR
Part 261.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGES.  Wastewater or storm water discharges that do not
meet the town’s standards for quality.



      (1)   Illicit discharges for wastewater will include:



         (a)   Non-sanitary wastewater from infiltration or
inflow as defined in this chapter; and



         (b)   Wastewaters that are specifically prohibited as
defined in § 51.025 of this chapter.



      (2)   Illicit discharges for storm water will include:



         (a)   Yard waste;



         (b)   Animal wastes;



         (c)   Chlorinated pool waters;



         (d)   Hazardous or other regulated wastes; and



         (e)   Other materials deemed incompatible with
stormwater by town review.



   INDIANA PLUMBING RULES.  The latest edition of Volume III, Plumbing
Rules and Regulations of the Administrative Building Council of the State of
Indiana.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from
any non-domestic source.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  An indirect discharger.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance or form of
energy that is discharged, permitted to flow into, or enter the sewer system
or ground from an industrial, manufacturing, commercial, or business process
or from the development, recovery, or processing of any natural resource
carried on by any person, and shall further mean any waste from an industrial
user, but not including sanitary sewage or storm water.



   INFILTRATION.  Water entering the sewerage system directly or via
private sewers, building drains, and building sewers connected therewith,
from the ground, through whatever means, including, but not limited to
defective pipe joints, connections, or manhole walls.



   INFLOW.  Water, other than wastewater, entering the sewerage system
from sources such as cellars, yard areas, foundation drains, drains from
springs and swampy areas, manhole areas, cross connections between storm and
sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm water, surface runoff,
and street wastewater or drainage.



   INSPECTOR.  A person or persons duly authorized by the town, through
its Town Council, to perform inspections and approve the installation of
building sewers and their connection to the public sewer system



   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT.  The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent
of the flow rate and/or the duration of the sampling event.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations, its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the town’s NPDES
Permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder or any more stringent State or local regulations:



      (1)   Section 405 of the Act;



      (2)   The Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II,
commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) any
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act;



      (3)   The Clean Air Act;



      (4)   The Toxic Substances Control Act; and



      (5)   The Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act.



   MAXIMUM DAILY DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.  The highest allowable pollutant
concentration for a sample representing the discharge for a 24 hour period.



   MEDICAL WASTE.  Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (l)(b) or (c) of this
definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:



         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous
on-site construction program:



            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of
facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Significant site preparation work, including
clearing, excavating, or removing existing buildings, structures, or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this division.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



   NON-POLAR OIL AND GREASE.  Petroleum-based oil and grease, also known
as total petroleum hydrocarbons or TPH.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Sewage as discharged by residential users
with a BOD concentration not in excess of 250 mg/l, a suspended solids
concentration not in excess of 250 mg/l, and an ammonia nitrogen
concentration not in excess of 20 mg/l.



   NUISANCE.  Any substance which is injurious to health or offensive to
the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.  All expenses related directly to operating
and maintaining (including replacement of) the sewage works as identified in
the Uniform System of Accounts for Wastewater Utilities or as prescribed by
the Indiana State Board of Accounts under the general headings, Plant
Operation and Maintenance, Sewer Operation and Maintenance, Customer
Accounts, Administrative and General, Insurance, and Taxes.



   PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the town’s NPDES permit (IN0062456), including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed
in standard units.



   POLLUTANT.



      (1)   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.  Wastewater having or containing
measurable BOD, suspended solids, pH, fecal coliform bacteria, or additional
pollutants identified or defined in the town’s NPDES permit or by the state.



      (2)   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS.  Any pollutants which are not
compatible pollutants.



   POLLUTION.  An alteration of the quality of water by waste,
contaminants, or pollutants to a degree that renders the water unfit for
beneficial uses.



   PRETREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless dilution is
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Pretreatment Standards shall mean state
pretreatment standards as established in 327 IAC 5-18-8; pretreatment
standards for prohibited discharges, as established in 327 IAC 5-18-2;
national categorical Pretreatment Standards incorporated by reference in 327
IAC 5-18-10, and local limits.



   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.  Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 51.025 of this chapter.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A “treatment works,” as
defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the town.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.



   RECEIVING SEWER SYSTEM.  The Plainfield municipal sewer system.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the POTW to maintain the capabilities and performance for which the POTW was
designed and constructed.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  Sewage such as, and having the characteristics of,
domestic sewage from dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels, office
buildings, factories, or institutions, free from storm and surface water and
industrial wastes.



   SEPTIC TANK WASTE.  Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



   SEWAGE.  Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, and the like).



   SEWAGE CHARGES.  The total of the user charge and the debt service
charge.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit laid for carrying sewage or other liquids
and solids suspended or entrained therein. Types of sewers:



      (1)   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer that carries both sanitary and
storm water flow by design.



      (2)   HOUSE LATERAL SEWER.  A lateral sewer installed in a
residential property.



      (3)   LATERAL SEWER. A sewer from the building drain to the
sewerage system.



      (4)   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned by the town.



      (5)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries only sanitary or
sanitary and industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants, and institutions.



      (6)   STORM SEWER.  A sewer that carries only storm water
flow.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM (also referred to as COLLECTION SYSTEM).  The network
of publicly-owned sewers and appurtenances used for collecting, transporting,
and pumping wastewater to the wastewater treatment plant and the wastewater
treatment plant itself.



   SHREDDED GARBAGE.  Garbage that is shredded to a degree so that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under the conditions normally
prevailing in the sewerage system, with no particle being greater than
one-half inch in dimension.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU).  Except as provided in division (3)
of this definition, a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER is:



      (1)   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or



      (2)   A user that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and
boiler blowdown wastewater);



         (b)   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up
5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the Control Authority on
the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



      (3)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
division (2) of this definition, has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the town may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC).  For compliance provisions of this
chapter, SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC) is defined as follows:



      (1)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits:



         (a)   Chronic violations. Sixty-six percent (66%) or
more of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during
a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard
or requirement, including instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits;



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC). Thirty-three
percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant
parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);



         (c)   Any other violation(s) of a pretreatment standard
or requirement as defined by division (2), (3) or (4) of this definition,
(daily discharge, long-term average, instantaneous maximum allowable
discharge limit or narrative standard) that the Council, on the
recommendation of the Superintendent, determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant which has caused
imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in
the POTWs exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;



      (2)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;



      (3)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date,
any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



      (4)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (5)   Any other violation or group of violation(s) which may
include a violation of best management practices, which the Council, on the
recommendation of the Superintendent determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



   SLUDGE.  Any solid, semi-solid, or liquid waste generated from a
municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility or any other waste having
similar characteristics and effects.



   SLUG DISCHARGE or SLUG LOAD.  Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 51.025 of this chapter. A SLUG DISCHARGE is any discharge of
a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE.  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.



   STORM SEWER SYSTEM.  The network of storm collection infrastructure
that includes: sewers, swales, ditches, streams and waterways that are used
for collecting and transporting storm water drainage. The Town of Plainfield
is responsible for the maintenance of all publicly-owned ditches and swales
that convey drainage. All privately owned stormwater conveyances are governed
under the town’s drainage ordinance.



   STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The person holding the title of Superintendent of
Public Works as designated by the Town Council who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized
representative as designated by the Town Council.



   SURCHARGE.  A charge for sewerage services in addition to the basic
sewage charge. This charge is assessed to users whose sewage places a burden
on the POTW greater than that covered by the basic sewage charges.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



   TIME WEIGHTED COMPOSITE SAMPLE.  A 24 hour composite sample that
consists of at least three grab samples collected over equal time intervals
during the period of process discharge. Equal aliquots of each grab sample
are combined to form the composite sample representing the 24 hour period.



   TOWN.  The Town of Plainfield, Indiana, acting by and through its duly
authorized representatives.



   TOWN COUNCIL or COUNCIL.  The Town Council of the Town of Plainfield,
Indiana, or any duly authorized official acting on its behalf; the governing
body of the POTW. The terms TOWN COUNCIL and COUNCIL are used interchangeably
in this document.



   USER.  A person who introduces or discharges any substance into the
POTW.



   USER CHARGE.  A charge levied on users of the POTW, or that portion of
the ad valorem taxes paid by a user, for the user’s proportionate share of
the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of the
treatment works.



   USER CLASSES.  A source of indirect discharge. The following are the
USER CLASSES:



      (1)   Commercial user.  Transit, lodging, retail, and
wholesale establishments or places engaged in providing merchandise for
personal, household, or industrial consumption and rendering services to
others.



      (2)   Governmental user. A user engaged in legislative,
judicial, or administrative activities of federal, state, and local
governments such as courthouses, police and fire stations, town hall, and
similar governmental uses.



      (3)   Industrial user.  Any person who introduces or has the
potential to introduce pollutants into a POTW from any manufacturing,
noncommercial, or non-domestic source.



      (4)   Institutional user.  A publicly- or privately-owned
school, hospital, nursing home, prison, or other similar institution whose
wastes are segregated domestic wastes.



      (5)   Residential user.  A user who introduces only normal
domestic sewage from a single-family or multi-family dwelling into the POTW.



   WASTE.  Sanitary sewage and any and all other waste substances,
liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or
of human or animal origin, or from any producing, processing, manufacturing,
or industrial operation of whatever nature, including waste placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to and for purposes of disposal.



   WASTEWATER.  Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



   WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS.  The individual chemical,
physical, bacteriological, and radiological parameters, including volume,
flow rate, and other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure
the contents, quality, quantity, and strength of wastewater.



   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT (INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PERMIT
or IWP).  A permit issued by the Control Authority to a user of the
wastewater utility which establishes specific conditions and requirements.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.005  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or
permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private
property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town,
any human excrement, garbage, or other, objectionable waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or to
any storm sewer within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
town, any sanitary sewage, process water, industrial waste, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
this chapter. All discharges must meet all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and regulations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any substance into a manhole
or other opening in the sewerage system other than through an approved
building or house lateral sewer, except in accordance with this chapter or
the express permission of the Superintendent.



   (D)   Unless approved by the Superintendent, no person shall
discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, non-contact cooling water,
chlorinated swimming pool water, or other unpolluted water to any sanitary
sewer. Storm water and other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers that are specifically designated as storm sewers or combined sewers or
to a natural outlet as approved by the Superintendent. Storm water and other
unpolluted water shall be separated from sanitary connections that discharge
to a combined sewer in order to facilitate disconnection of the former in the
event that a separate storm sewer becomes available. Industrial non-contact
cooling water may be discharged to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural
outlet as approved by the superintendent. All discharges must meet all
applicable federal, state, and local regulations.



   (E)   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is part of the town’s sewerage works.



   (F)   Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facilities within the boundary limits of the town intended or used for the
disposal of sewage or wastewater. Existing septic tank systems and fields
must be repaired and maintained in accordance with applicable laws and
ordinances. No privy, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility shall release
sewage effluent to the surface of the ground or to any receiving water course.



   (G)   No persons shall knowingly make or submit to the town a false
statement, representation, record, report, plan, or other document required
to be filed under this chapter or a regulation adopted by the Council or
voluntarily filed for the town to rely upon. No person shall falsify, tamper
with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring, testing, measuring, or
timing device required or installed under this chapter. Persons submitting
false information may be fined in accordance with § 51.130(B) of this
chapter.



   (H)   An industrial user shall not alter industrial processes or
other activities for the purpose of rendering samples or measurements that
are not characteristic or representative of normal operations, flows, or
concentrations of pollutants. Persons, submitting false information may be
fined in accordance with § 51.130 of this chapter.



   (I)   The construction of combined sewers is expressly prohibited.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)  Penalty, see § 51.146



§ 51.006  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS; CONNECTION CHARGE.



   (A)   The owner of any building that generates sewage or wastewater
situated in the town and abutting any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is or may in the future be located a public sewer of the town must, at
the owner’s own expense, install suitable toilet facilities and connect
those facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, provided that the public sewer is within 300 feet
of the property line. The town shall give the property owner notice by
certified mail at least 90 days before the date specified for connection in
the notice.



   (B)   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available
under the provisions of division (A) of this section, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all
recommendations of the Indiana State Department of Health and the Hendricks
County Health Department.



   (C)   The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the town.



   (D)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in division (B) of
this section and upon receipt of the official notice as provided in division
(A) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and decommissioned
within 90 days after the date specified for connection in the notice. The
closure of such facilities shall be in accordance with town, Indiana
Department of Environmental Management, Indiana Department of Health and
Hendricks County Health Department regulations



   (E)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to
interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local
health officer.



   (F)   The owner of every lot, parcel of real estate, or building
connecting to a municipal sewer financed or paid for by the town shall, prior
to being permitted to make the connection, pay a connection charge as
provided in division(G) of this section. The charges set forth in division
(G) of this chapter are reasonable and equitable pro-rations of the cost of
construction of the treatment facilities and collection system that serve the
property connecting to the sewer.



   (G)   Connection charges. The owner of any lot, parcel of real
estate, or building connecting to the town’s sanitary sewage system shall,
prior to being permitted to make the connection, pay a connection charge as
defined in the town’s sewer rate ordinance (most current version).



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.007  CONNECTION PERMITS.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with, cut an opening into, alter, or disturb any sewer lateral to or from any
sewer which is a part of the municipal sewage system without first obtaining
a written permit from the Superintendent. The permit must be on-site during
all sewer construction.



   (B)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits; one for
residential and commercial services and a second for establishments producing
industrial waste. There also shall be a sewer connection or tap permit.



   (C)   An application for a permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the Superintendent for that purpose and, when applicable, shall be
accompanied by a street cut bond payable to the town for the amount
equivalent to the estimated replacement value of the street, and conditioned
upon the permittee replacing the street, alley, or public place in accordance
with town construction standards. The approval by the Superintendent of the
tap permit shall void the bond.



   (D)   Each permit application shall give the precise location of the
property, the name of the owner, and the name of the person employed to do
the work. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent by the
Superintendent.



   (E)   These permits shall expire within 90 days of the date of their
issuance. The Superintendent may issue a second 90-day permit without
additional charge if application is made prior to the expiration of the
first-permit and the application adequately explains why the construction of
the building sewer was not made within the first 90-day period.



   (F)   The person employed to do the work shall not commence any work
until after examining the permit issued by the town and providing notice to
the Superintendent within a minimum of two (2) days prior to commencement of
construction. Once started, construction should be completed as expeditiously
as possible.



   (G)   Upon the issuance of the permit, the town may designate the
position or location of the Y-branch in the street. After the work has been
completed, the permittee shall file in the Superintendent’s office, on a
form furnished for the purpose, a correct statement of the work completed
under the permit and a sketch showing the location of the lateral sewer.



   (H)   Prior to the issuance of a permit required by this Section,
the permittee shall pay an availability fee to the town in an amount as
defined in the town’s Rate Ordinance (current version) per equivalent
dwelling unit (“EDU”).



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.008  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF SEWERS AND LATERALS.



   (A)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of a building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or the
person installing the building sewer for the owner shall indemnify the town
from any loss or damage that results directly or indirectly from the
installation.



   (B)   Sanitary sewage facilities built to serve residents or future
residents of the town, or any facilities designed to convey wastewater into
the town’s system, shall be designed, constructed, and tested in compliance
with current town construction standards.



   (C)   All new or repaired laterals shall be subject to permitting by
the town. All sanitary sewage facilities and appropriate easements shall be
dedicated to the town upon completion and certification by the Town Engineer
that all requirements have been met.



   (D)   All sanitary sewage facilities shall be designed by a
registered professional engineer. Plans and specifications shall be submitted
to the Town Engineer (two sets) for approval prior to construction.



   (E)   Prior to construction of any sanitary sewage facilities, the
applicant shall obtain a bond by an approved surety, or other proof of
financial responsibility, as prescribed in this section, that is in an amount
determined by the town to be sufficient to complete the sanitary sewage
facilities in compliance with town specifications. Other proof of financial
responsibility may take the following forms:



      (1)   An agreement in which cash would be advanced to the town
by the applicant in an amount the Council determines is necessary to complete
all facilities. As work is completed on a percentage basis as determined by
the Town Engineer, the Town Clerk-Treasurer would release an equal percentage
of the retained cash until 5% of the total is remaining. Upon final
completion and acceptance of all facilities and the submittal of a
maintenance bond as required, the applicant would receive the balance of the
cash advance.



      (2)   An arrangement in which the town would have undeniable
access to funds in an escrow account, or other type of account, held by a
bank or other lending institution, until all of the sanitary sewage
facilities have been completed, accepted, and a maintenance bond provided as
required.



   (F)   The applicant shall provide a three year maintenance bond as
required by the Council covering the constructed sanitary sewage facilities.



   (G)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway. In
these cases, the building or house lateral sewer from the front building or
house may be extended to the rear building or house and the whole considered
as one building or house lateral sewer. Nothing in this Subsection shall be
construed to apply to lateral sewer connections between different facilities
of an industrial user located on contiguous properties.



   (H)   Old building sewers can be used in connection with new
building sewers only when they are inspected by the Superintendent and found,
in writing, to meet all the requirements of this chapter.



   (I)   All building sewer excavations shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed during an excavation
shall be restored by the owner in a manner satisfactory to the town.
Appropriate construction safety measures shall be the responsibility of the
owner and/or contractor.



   (J)   Proper traffic controls shall be maintained in accordance with
the Manual on Traffic Control Devices to guard the public against accidents
during the building, maintenance, or repair of sanitary sewers. All IOSHA
safety rules shall be adhered to during construction or repair of sanitary
sewers.



   (K)   No buildings shall be constructed over sewer lines.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.009  INSTALLATION AND SPECIFICATION.



   (A)   The size, shape, alignment, materials, or construction of a
building or house lateral sewer and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform
to the requirements of the latest editions of the town’s construction
standards, Indiana Plumbing Rules, and other applicable rules and regulations
of the town. In the event that code requirements conflict, the town’s
construction standards shall take precedence.



   (B)   No person shall hereafter connect or reconnect roof
downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, driveways, parking lots, sump
pumps, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building or
house lateral sewer or building or house drain which is in turn connected
directly or indirectly to the sewerage system. All property owners who have
such connections must disconnect the same prior to January 1, 2018. All such
sources of surface runoff or ground water shall be discharged in accordance
with town standards.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.010  MAINTAINING AND REPAIRING SEWERS.



   (A)   The maintenance and repair of sanitary sewers owned by the
town shall be the responsibility of the town. The maintenance and repair of
trunk lines are the responsibility of the town only if an easement has been
granted to the town and the line has been accepted by the town as a public
line.



   (B)   All repair and maintenance of lateral sewers, including the
tap into the trunk line, shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
Before installation or repair of a private lateral sewer, the property owner
shall first secure a permit as provided by § 51.007 of this chapter and post
the bond required therein to insure proper replacement of town property.



   (C)   The town may require a property owner to repair or replace the
sewer lateral if an excessive amount of infiltration of storm or ground water
enters the town sewage system or if actual physical defects are found in the
lateral. Tests used to determine defects in sewer laterals include smoke
testing, camera inspection, and other methods approved by the Council. The
town has the sole authority to determine if a lateral needs to be repaired or
replaced. If the town completes repairs that are the responsibility of the
property owner as set forth in this section, the town shall require payment
from the property owner of all expenses for such repair.



   (D)   Until defective laterals as described in division (C) of this
section have been repaired to the satisfaction of the town, the town reserves
the right to impose a surcharge to cover the cost of treating the excessive
clear water that is infiltrating through the defective lateral. The surcharge
would remain in place until the lateral is properly repaired or replaced.



   (E)   All repair and maintenance of privately owned lift stations
and sewers shall be the responsibility of the property owner, who shall first
secure a permit as provided by § 51.007 of this chapter and post the bond
required therein to insure proper replacement of town property.



   (F)   The town has the right to inspect privately owned lift
stations and sewers and may require the owner to maintain, repair, or replace
privately owned lift stations and/or sewers that are determined to be in need
of maintenance, repair or replacement. The town has the sole authority to
determine if a privately owned lift station and/or sewer needs to be
maintained, repaired, or replaced. If the town completes repairs that are the
responsibility of the property owner as set forth in this section, the town
shall require payment from the property owner of all expenses for such repair.



   (G)   In all instances where a sewer is excavated under a town
street, the ground shall be hauled away and the excavation backfilled in
accordance with town standards..



   (H)   Whenever any repairs are made to the sewer system, the
Superintendent shall inspect and approve, in writing, the installation before
the backfill is put in.



   (I)   All work in the maintenance or repair of sanitary sewers shall
be performed according to the latest edition of the town’s construction
standards.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.011  EXTENSIONS OUTSIDE THE TOWN.



   No person shall directly or indirectly make any connections with or
openings into the sewerage system or appurtenances owned or operated by the
town for the purpose of serving any, areas outside the corporate boundaries
of the town without first securing specific approval from the Council
describing the real estate and property to be served and authorizing the
connection.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)  Penalty, see § 51.146



§ 51.012  RIGHT TO PROHIBIT NEW CONNECTIONS.



   The town shall have the right to prohibit new connections when the
excess capacity of the sewerage system is deemed insufficient by the Council
to accommodate the expected flow, BOD, or suspended solids loading from the
prospective user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.013  PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   Every owner or real estate occupant within the corporate
limits of the town from which there is a direct or indirect flow into the
sewerage system shall report the existence of any well to the Superintendent
on a form provided by the Superintendent. The information furnished shall
include, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The name(s) of the owner and occupant of the real estate.



      (2)   The location of the well on the real estate.



      (3)   The size of the well pipe.



      (4)   The size, voltage, amperage, and horsepower, where
ascertainable, of the well pump motor.



      (5)   The purpose for which the well water is used by the
owner, occupant, or others.



   (B)   The Council shall determine, by any reasonable means, the flow
of the well to determine the amount of sewage entering the sewerage system.
Reasonable means include, but are not limited to, the use of water meters and
timing devices (“metering device”). The Council shall approve the
metering device utilized. The metering device shall be paid for by the
property owner or occupant and shall remain the property owner’s or
occupant’s property, but shall be under the exclusive control of the Board.
No person shall tamper with the metering device.



   (C)   In the case of wells for household use only, the Council may
provide for the use of reasonable estimates regarding water volume in lieu of
metering devices.



   (D)   The Council may direct the Superintendent, Inspector, or other
employee to enter private property to:



      (1)   Determine the existence of private wells.



      (2)   Oversee or direct the installation of metering devices.



      (3)   Read the metering devices.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



WASTEWATER ADMISSIBILITY AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.025  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass
through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards
or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Storm water prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to
be introduced into the storm sewer system any pollutants or wastewater that
are specifically prohibited nor any of the materials that are defined as
illicit discharges.



   (C)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;



      (2)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0,
or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment;



      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, TSS levels in
excess of 250 mg/l daily average may be subject to a surcharge in accordance
with the Town of Plainfield Sewer Rate Ordinance;



      (4)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW. BOD levels in excess of 250 mg/l daily
average may be subject to a surcharge in accordance with the Town of
Plainfield Sewer Rate Ordinance.



      (5)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(65.5°C) or that will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F
(40°C);



      (6)   Ammonia levels in excess of 20 mg/l daily average may be
subject to a surcharge in accordance with the Town of Plainfield Sewer Rate
Ordinance.



      (7)   Total oil and grease concentrations in excess of 200
mg/l daily average are prohibited and may result in the imposition of a fine
per § 51.130 of this chapter;



      (8)   Phosphorus levels in excess of ten mg/l daily average
may be subject to a surcharge in accordance with the Town of Plainfield Sewer
Rate Ordinance.



      (9)   Concentrations of non-polar oil and grease, (total
petroleum hydrocarbons), in excess of 100 mg/l or that could cause
interference or pass through are prohibited and may result in the imposition
of a fine per § 51.130 of this chapter.



      (10)   Pollutants that could result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW sewers, including in a quantity that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems;



      (11)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the Superintendent in accordance with § 51.048 of this
chapter;



      (12)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



      (13)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed
by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the town’s NPDES Permit
(No. IN000062456);



      (14)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (15)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water, sump pump discharges, and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent;



      (16)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



      (17)   Medical  wastes,  except  as  specifically 
authorized  by the Superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit;



      (18)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a whole effluent toxicity,
(WET), test;



      (19)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances
which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



   (D)   Instantaneous flows and loadings which are in excess of the
POTWs functional and treatment capacities or are likely to cause overflow
conditions.



   (E)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
Section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



   (F)   Unpolluted water shall not be discharged through direct or
indirect connection to the POTW. Limitations on the amount of unpolluted
water that is discharged shall be part of the user’s permit.



   (G)   Only properly shredded garbage, as defined in § 51.004 of
this chapter, may be discharged into the POTW.



   (H)   The surcharges set forth in this section of the ordinance
generally are considered user fees to account for additional treatment costs
of discharges at these levels.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.026  ABNORMAL WASTE SURCHARGE.



   (A)   All wastewater discharged by significant industrial users
shall meet the admissibility standards set forth in § 51.025 of this chapter.



   (B)   The costs of treatment for each pound of BOD, suspended
solids, and ammonia nitrogen removed by each treatment works may be reviewed
by the town at the end of each fiscal year. If a discrepancy exists between
the actual costs as found by the town and the estimated costs, the town shall
increase or decrease the surcharge rates as reflected in the sewer rate
ordinance sufficiently to cover only the projected actual costs for the
ensuing year.



   (C)   No reduction in service charges, fees, or taxes will be
permitted because of the fact that certain industrial wastes discharged to
the public sanitary sewerage system contain less than the surcharge based
limitations.



   (D)   Surcharge rates for wastewater characteristics not provided
for in the sewer rate ordinance may be set at the reasonable discretion of
the Council, taking into account all of the POTWs significant cost factors
relating to treatment, handling, and disposal. The surcharge rates shall be
specified in the Town of Plainfield Sewer Rate Ordinance.



   (E)   The surcharges set forth in sewer rate ordinance are generally
considered to be user fees to account for additional treatment costs of
discharges at these levels.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.027  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at
40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 which are hereby incorporated.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste
stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.028  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   The Superintendent is authorized to establish local limits
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).



   (B)   The following pollutant limitations are established to protect
against pass through and interference. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants concentrations in excess of the following daily maximum
concentrations. Wastewater concentration shall be determined by the analysis
of samples collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136. Except for
the cyanide, oil and grease, phenols, and total toxic organics, (TTO), 24
hour composite samples proportioned by either time or flow shall be analyzed
to determine pollutant concentrations. Grab samples will be used for the
analysis of cyanide, oil and grease, phenols, and TTO’s. Results shall not
exceed the following noted limitations:



 



32.51 mg/l
 
Arsenic


0.2947 mg/l
 
Cadmium


78.14 mg/l
 
Total Chromium


1.692 mg/l
 
Hexavalent Chromium


0.915 mg/l
 
Molybdenum


5.074 mg/l
 
Copper


0.9 mg/l
 
Cyanide (total)


200 mg/l
 
Total oil and grease (FOG, polar and non-polar)


100 mg/l
 
Non-polar oil and grease (mineral or petroleum origin)


1.369 mg/l
 
Lead (total)


0.0015 mg/l
 
Mercury


25.20 mg/l
 
Nickel


5.928 mg/l
 
Selenium


TBD mg/l
 
Phenolic compounds that cannot be removed by the POTW


25.0 mg/l
 
Phosphorus


2.01 mg/l
 
Silver


2.14 mg/l
 
TTO (total toxic organics)


19.48 mg/l
 
Zinc (total)




 



   (C)   The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for
“total” recoverable metal unless indicated otherwise. The Superintendent
may impose mass limitations that are equivalent to the concentration-based
limitations above.



   (D)   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard (NCPS) for a particular user, that standard, if more stringent than
the limitations imposed under this Section for sources in that category,
shall, when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions
imposed under this chapter. The Superintendent shall notify all known
affected users of the applicable permitting and reporting requirements under
40 CFR 403.12.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.029  TOWN’S RIGHT OF REVISION AND MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance,
different or more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the
POTW that are reasonably necessary to enable the town to comply with its
NPDES permit and federal and state laws to which the POTW is subject.



   (B)   Any significant modifications the town intends to make will be
submitted to PUWWS for approval prior to being enacted. Significant
modifications include the following:



      (1)   A major modification in the town’s administrative
procedures.



      (2)   A significant reduction in the monitoring procedures.



      (3)   A significant change in the financial or revenue
limitations contained in this chapter.



      (4)   A change in the industrial survey.



      (5)   A change in federal or state regulations or requirements.



      (6)   An increase in pollutant limits.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.030  DILUTION.



   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
The Superintendent may impose mass limitations that are equivalent to the
concentration-based limitations on users who are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)  Penalty, see § 51.146



PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER



§ 51.045  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in § 51.025 of this
chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the
Superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable
to the Superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the town under the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.046  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.



   Additional pretreatment measures shall be installed and maintained at
the user’s expense to the satisfaction of the town. If the Superintendent
determines it is necessary to protect the POTW and/or ensure compliance with
the town’s NPDES permit:



   (A)   The Superintendent may require users to retreat their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial streams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the
user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on the user’s property and at the user’s
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to insure equalization
of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.



   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.



   (D)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand except
that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user, at the user’s expense.



   (E)   Users who operate vehicular wash facilities shall provide,
operate, and maintain pretreatment facilities and/or operational procedures
required and approved by the Superintendent to control solids and preclude
the discharge of toxics to the POTW.



   (F)   Users who operate food preparation facilities shall provide,
operate, and maintain pretreatment facilities and/or operational procedures
required and approved by the Superintendent to control the discharge of FOG
and food solids to the POTW. This shall include the proper installation and
maintenance of grease traps. The Superintendent reserves the right to
determine appropriate maintenance intervals and to require associated
documentation.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.047  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.



   The Superintendent may evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Superintendent may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan.
Alternatively, the Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user and
require the user to comply with the plan. An accidental discharge/slug
control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



   (A)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine
batch discharges;



   (B)   Description of stored chemicals;



   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Superintendent of any
accidental or slug discharge; and



   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading
and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment
for emergency response.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.048  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Wastewater haulers are prohibited except under the express and
specific written permission of the Superintendent.



   (B)   Industrial or septic waste haulers who receive the express and
specific written permission of the Superintendent to introduce industrial or
septic waste into the POTW must comply with the following conditions:



      (1)   Industrial or septic waste haulers may discharge loads
only at times and locations designated by the Superintendent. No load may be
discharged without prior written consent of the Superintendent. The
Superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to insure compliance
with applicable standards. The Superintendent may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.



      (2)   Industrial or septic waste haulers must provide a
waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum,
the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck
identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and
characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known
or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION



§ 51.060  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.



   At the request of the Superintendent, all non-residential users must
submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater no
later than 45 days before operations are to commence so that the
Superintendent or Council can determine if the user is a significant
industrial user (“SIU”). This due date may be extended by the
Superintendent, in writing, upon written request by the user. The extension
request must be submitted to the Superintendent at least three days prior to
the due date. The user’s written request must include, at a minimum,
reason(s) the request should be granted and a proposed due date. The
Superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.061  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No SIU shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first
obtaining an industrial wastewater pretreatment (IWP) permit from the Control
Authority (CA).



   (B)   The Superintendent may require other users to obtain an IWP
permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.



   (C)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWP permit
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and would subject the permittee
to the sanctions set out in §§ 51.125 through 51.164 of this chapter.



   (D)   Obtaining an IWP permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or
requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.062  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an IWP permit that was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter, as set
forth in Section 18, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the
future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the control authority
for an IWP permit in accordance with § 51.064 of this chapter, and shall not
cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the
effective date of this chapter, as set forth in § 51.232, unless a permit
application has been filed. This due date may be extended by the
Superintendent, in writing, upon written request by the user submitted to the
Superintendent at least three days prior, to the due date. The user’s
written request must include, at a minimum, reason(s) the request should be
granted and a proposed due date.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.063  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW CONNECTIONS.



   Any user required to obtain an IWP permit who proposes to begin or,
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the
beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this IWP
permit, in accordance with § 51.064 of this chapter, must be filed at least
30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.064  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS.



   All users required to obtain an IWP Permit must submit a permit
application to the Control Authority.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.065  FEES, RATES, AND CHARGES.



   All users are subject to all applicable fees, rates, and charges set
forth in §§ 51.190 through 51.202 of this chapter and in accordance the
Town Sewer Rate Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS



§ 51.080  INTER-LOCAL AGREEMENT.



   If another municipality or sewer district contributes wastewater to the
POTW, the Superintendent shall enter into an inter-local agreement with the
contributing entity.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.081  INFORMATION.



   Prior to entering into an agreement required by § 51.080, the
Superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing
entity:



   (A)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing entity;



   (B)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
entity that are discharging to the POTW; and



   (C)   Such other information as the Superintendent may deem
necessary.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.082  INTER-LOCAL AGREEMENT CONDITIONS.



   Inter-local agreements, as required by § 51.080, shall contain the
following conditions:



   (A)   A requirement for the contributing entity to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 51.028. The
requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as
necessary to reflect changes made to the town’s ordinance or local limits;



   (B)   A requirement for the contributing entity to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;



   (C)   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and
sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing
municipality; which of these activities will be conducted by the
Superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by
the contributing municipality and the Superintendent;



   (D)   A requirement for the contributing entity to provide the
Superintendent with access to all information that the contributing entity
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



   (E)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
entity’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;



   (F)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing entity’s
discharge;



   (G)   A provision insuring the Superintendent access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing entity’s jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties
deemed necessary by the Superintendent; and



   (H)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the inter-municipal or inter-district agreement.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.095  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation of this chapter,
a wastewater discharge permit, federal, state, or local law, the user must
notify the Superintendent within two hours of, becoming aware of the
violation. The user also shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the Superintendent within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. Re-sampling by the industrial user is not
required if the Superintendent performs sampling at the user’s facility at
least once a month, or if the Superintendent performs sampling at the user
between the time when the initial sample was conducted and the time when the
user or the Superintendent receives the results of this sampling, or if the
Superintendent has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
industrial user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.096  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the Superintendent, the EPA Region V Waste Management Division
Director, and the IDEM, Office of Solid and Hazardous Waste, in writing, of
any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to
the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of
the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However,
notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under § 51.099. The
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the
self-monitoring requirements of §§ 51.095, 51.097, and 51.098.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than
15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any such hazardous wastes do
not require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Superintendent, the EPA Region V Waste Management Division Director, and
IDEM, Office of Solid and Hazardous Waste, in writing, of the discharge of
such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this Section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.097  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.098  SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.



   (A)   Except as indicated in divisions (B) and (C) below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the Superintendent. Where time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Superintendent, the
samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis as follows; for cyanide, total phenols, and
sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for
volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Superintendent, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples
may be required to show compliance with instantaneous maximum allowable
discharge limits.



   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
sample collection techniques.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.099  RECORDKEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling,
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods
used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available
for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the town,
or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period
by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 51.110  MONITORING.



   (A)   The town reserves the right to inspect, sample, and analyze
food service and industrial discharges in the following manner:



      (1)   The sample types will be the same type as required in
the IWP discharge authorization issued by the controlling legal authority or
in accordance with this chapter (§ 51.098).



      (2)   The samples will be collected at the sample location
specified in the IWP or discharge authorization issued by the controlling
legal authority.



      (3)   A sampling and inspection program shall be implemented
for, at a minimum, all IWP facilities, facilities authorized to discharge and
any food establishments with regulated grease traps. All of these facilities
will be inspected by the town or town’s authorized representative at a
frequency that is specified in the discharge permit/authorization. Grease
traps shall be inspected annually by the regulated entity. Proof of
inspection shall be submitted to the town by the regulated entity.



      (4)   All regulated facilities will be required to collect and
test samples and submit monitoring reports as required by the discharge
permit or discharge authorization.



      (5)   The self-monitoring analytical results of the samples
will be submitted to the town and IDEM by the 28th day of the month following
the month in which the samples were taken.



      (6)   The town will keep a record of each industrial
inspection it performs. A copy of each IWP inspection report will be sent to
the PUWWS with the annual report.



   (B)   The town will immediately sample and analyze the POTW influent
and effluent for suspected pollutant(s) when the POTW operation is upset. The
town will immediately contact PUWWS and IDEM’s compliance evaluation
section by telephone at the time of the occurrence. The results of each
analysis conducted as a result of an upset will be submitted to PUWWS.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.111  INDUSTRIAL SURVEY.



   (A)   The Superintendent will maintain an industrial survey that
contains information about each industrial user that discharges into the
POTW. An industrial survey will be conducted at a minimum frequency of once
every two years.



   (B)   Information concerning any industrial user commencing or
ceasing discharge shall be updated on the industrial survey immediately. The
Superintendent will notify the PUWWS of any new industrial user commencing
discharge into the POTW within 30 days of becoming aware of the new user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.112  RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The Superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any
user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this
chapter and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the Superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and
the performance of any additional duties.



   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the Superintendent or his or her
agent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.



   (B)   The Superintendent or his or her agent shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



   (C)   The Superintendent may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated at least annually to insure their accuracy.



   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Superintendent and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.



   (E)   The user shall install and maintain suitable access means,
together with any necessary appurtenances, to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of wastewater. The access means shall be
constructed and maintained to the town’s satisfaction at the user’s
expense.



   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent or his or
her agent access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.113  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the Superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the town designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the Superintendent may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Hendricks County Circuit Court in
Danville, Indiana.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



§ 51.115  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs and from the Superintendent’s inspection and sampling
activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and
demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be
held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program and in
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE



§ 51.120  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Superintendent may publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper
published in the Town of Plainfield, a list of the users which, during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. This list shall include the name of
the user and the basis for the SNC determination. The term significant
noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates divisions (C), (D) or (H) of this
section) and shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits as defined in §§ 51.025 through 51.030;



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by §§ 51.025 through 51.030 multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by §§ 51.025 through 51.030 (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Superintendent
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;



   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (H)   Any other violation(s), which the Superintendent determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 51.125  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation.
Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
Superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Superintendent or the Council to take any action, including emergency actions
or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.126  AGREED ORDERS.



   The Council may enter into agreed orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time
period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §§ 51.128 and
51.129 and shall be judicially enforceable.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.127  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   The Superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to
appear before the Council and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 15 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the Superintendent or the Council
taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.128  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, the Superintendent or the Council taking any other action against the
user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.129  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the
Superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, the Superintendent or the Council taking any
other action against the user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.130  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   When the Superintendent or the Council finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Superintendent or the Council may
impose a fine of at least $1,000 per day, per violation, in accordance with
40 CFR 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A), but no more than $2,500 per day, per violation for
a first violation nor more than $7,500 per day, per violation for subsequent
violations, in accordance with I.C. 36-l-3-8(a)(10)(B). Fines and regulations
relating to illicit discharges to the storm sewer system are outlined in the
Town Drainage Ordinance.



   (B)   When the Superintendent or the Council finds that a user has
falsified any information provided to the Superintendent, the town, IDEM, or
the EPA, the Superintendent or the Council may fine such user in an amount
not to exceed $2,500 as provided by I.C. 36-1-3-8. Such fines shall be
assessed on a per violation, per day basis.



   (C)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 60 calendar
days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.8% per month. A lien against
the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.



   (D)   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written
request with the Superintendent or the Council, whichever assessed the fine,
requesting the reconsideration of the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has
merit, the Council may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the
user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest
accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Superintendent or the
Council may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions,
such as notices and orders, to the fine.



   (E)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, the Superintendent, the Board, or the Council taking
any other action against the user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.131  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.



   (A)   The Superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after formal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears
to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Superintendent also may immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents, or may
present, an endangerment to the environment.



      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Superintendent may take such steps as are deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
Superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 51.132 are
initiated against the user.



      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Superintendent prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§ 51.127 or 51.132.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.132  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to
discharge termination:



      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;



      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of its discharge;



      (3)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;



      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 51.025
through 51.030.



   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 51.127 why the
proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
Superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, the
Superintendent or the Council taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES



§ 51.145  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   When the Superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Superintendent may petition the Hendricks County Circuit Court, through
the town’s attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on the activities of the user. The Superintendent
also may seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.146  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the town for a civil penalty of at least $1,000 per day, per violation in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A), but no more than $2,500 per
violation, per day for a first violation. Subsequent violations can be fined
at up to $7,500 per day per violation in accordance with I.C.
36-1-3-8(a)(10)(B). In the case of a monthly or other long term average
discharge limit violation, penalties shall accrue for each day during the
period of the violation.



   (B)   The town may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
by the town.



   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court shall
take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation,
corrective actions taken by the user, the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.



   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against,
or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.147  RESERVED.



§ 51.148  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The
Superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against
a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the town’s enforcement response plan. However, the
Superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the Superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION



§ 51.160  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such
user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the town, in a sum not to
exceed a value determined by the Council to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.161  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user
first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to
restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.162  WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE.



   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be
severed. Service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with the foregoing.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.163  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the Superintendent. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the town for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.164  CONTRACTOR LISTING.



   Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the town. Existing contracts for the
sale of goods or services to the town held by a User found to be in
significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be
terminated at the discretion of the Council.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS



§ 51.175  UPSET.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent
caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless
or improper operation.



   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (C) of this section are met.



   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures;



      (3)   The user provided the Superintendent with a verbal
notification of the upset within two hours of becoming aware of the upset; and



      (4)   The user submitted the following information to the
Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset:



         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause
of noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (E)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of their treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.176  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
51.025(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in § 51.025(C)(1)
through (19) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permits and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.177  BYPASS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provisions of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.



   (C)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior written notice to the Superintendent at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Superintendent of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
two hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
also shall be provided to the Superintendent within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the
oral report has been received within two hours.



   (D)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Superintendent may take
an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C) of this section.



      (2)   The Superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Superintendent determines that
it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(l) of this section.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



FEES, RATES, AND SEWER CHARGES



§ 51.190  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Permit fees as defined in the town’s Rate Ordinance are to
be paid at the time the application is filed.



   (B)   Applicability of fees and sewer charges:



      (1)   Sewer charges shall be collected from the person who
owns each and every parcel of real estate that is connected directly or
indirectly to the town’s sewerage system or otherwise discharges wastewater
directly or indirectly into the town’s sewerage system.



      (2)   The sewer charges established by this chapter shall
become effective at the time the user first discharges to the town’s
sewerage system.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.191  WATER USAGE; METER READING SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The sewer flow charges shall be based on the quantity of water
as measured by the water meter used on or in the premises subject to the
sewer charges unless otherwise provided in this chapter. The town reserves
the option to bill based on a flat rate as determined by the Council.



   (B)   Water shall be read monthly unless otherwise provided by the
town.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.192  WATER OBTAINED FROM OTHER SOURCES.



   (A)   If a user obtains water partially or wholly from sources other
than the town waterworks, the total water used must be measured as provided
in § 51.013 of this chapter or as directed by the Council.



   (B)   Single-family homes having any source of water other than the
town waterworks shall be charged in accordance with the Town Sewer Rate
Ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.193  SINGLE METER FOR MULTIPLE PROPERTIES.



   (A)   Multiple lots or buildings. If two or more residential lots,
parcels of real estate, or buildings discharging wastewater into the town’s
sewerage system, directly or indirectly, are town water consumers and the
quantity of water is measured by a single water meter, the owner of the meter
will be billed for the quantity of water used. The minimum charge and the
sewage rates and charges shall apply to each of the number of residential
lots, parcels of real estate, or buildings served through the single water
meter.



   (B)   Multiple dwelling units.



      (1)   If two or more dwelling units (i.e., trailers,
apartments, or housekeeping rooms) discharging sanitary sewage, water, or
other liquids directly or indirectly into the town’s sanitary sewage system
use water measured by a single water meter, the owner of the meter will be
billed for the quantity of water used. The minimum charge and the sewage
rates and charges shall apply to each of the number of residential lots,
parcels of real estate, or buildings served through the single water meter.



      (2)   For mobile home communities, the number of dwelling
units shall be computed and interpreted as the total number of dwelling units
located and installed in the community that are served through the meter.



      (3)   A dwelling unit is a room or rooms or space in which
cooking, facilities are provided.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.194  MULTIPLE METERS FOR SINGLE INDUSTRIAL USER.



   If two or more meters serve buildings or operations of an industrial
user that discharges wastewater into the POTW at a single point, the
industrial User shall be billed for a single service in accordance with §§
51.190 through 51.202.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.195  PORTION OF WATER NOT ENTERING SEWERAGE SYSTEM.



   If a user utilizing more than 20,000 gallons of water per day can
substantiate that a portion of the water does not and cannot enter the
town’s sewerage system, the Council may consider flow data submitted to
determine the portion of the measured water to be used in determining the
appropriate sewer charges or approve a technique of flow measurement for
determining wastewater discharged to the sewerage system. Facilities and
equipment utilized for flow measurement shall be installed and maintained in
a manner approved by the town at the owner’s expense. The town shall have
the right to access the user’s property and the flow measurement equipment
to verify its accuracy and obtain any samples deemed necessary by the town.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.196  BILLING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Sewer bills and invoices shall be rendered and collected
approximately monthly.



   (B)   The Council shall make and enforce any bylaws and regulations
as may be deemed necessary for the regulation, collection, rebating, and
refunding of the sewer charges prescribed by this section.



   (C)   The Council may, on proper cause being shown by the applicant
that in a singular occurrence metered water did not reach the sewerage
system, adjust the user’s sewer charge with respect to the occurrence.



   (D)   In the event there is a difference in analytical results that
is not explainable by normal variation in the testing procedure, the user
may, within 30 days of billing, appeal to the Superintendent.



   (E)   All sewer charges for use of the town’s sanitary sewer
system shall be based on the quantity as measured by the water meter used on
or in the premises so served. No adjustment shall be made to such User
charges for the sprinkling of lawns, filling of swimming pools, and other
such water uses where it is probable that the water so used will not enter
the sanitary sewer system, except in accordance with § 51.195.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.197  TOWN SUBJECT TO SEWER CHARGES.



   Town services or departments, except the wastewater utility, shall be
subject to sewer charges established in the town’s rate ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.198  SEWER CHARGES.



   The Council is authorized to determine rates, charges, and fees for
septic tank, industrial wastes, and other disposable wastewater and wastes
delivered to the POTW as provided in § 51.048 and to collect those charges
and fees.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.199  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   Charges for sewage services levied pursuant to this section shall be
due and payable on or before the due date shown on the bill. Any delinquency
associated with this bill will be responded to in accordance with the
procedures outlined in the town’s sewer rate ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.200  ADJUSTMENTS FOR FIRE PROTECTION.



   Adjustments for fire protection shall be in accordance with the
town’s sewer rate ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.201  EQUITABLE ADJUSTMENT; UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   (A)   The town shall have the right to base its charges on volume,
strength, or character of the wastewater in order that rates and charges may
be equitably adjusted to services rendered.



   (B)   The town reserves the right to determine, using flow meters or
other reasonable means, the actual flow of any contributor into the town
sewage system if the discharge appears to the Superintendent to exceed the
contributor’s water usage.



   (C)   The identified owner of the real estate shall provide and
maintain, at its own expense, flow measuring equipment approved by the
Superintendent. The flow measuring equipment shall remain the property of the
owner, but shall be under the exclusive control of the Superintendent. No
person shall tamper with the flow measuring equipment.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.202  RATES OUTSIDE TOWN.



   For services rendered by the POTW to lots, parcels of real estate, or
buildings located outside the town limits, the rates and charges shall be
determined in a fair and equitable manner.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



REVIEW OF REGULATIONS BY TOWN



§ 51.215  WASTEWATER REVIEW.



   The town may review the wastewater contribution of users, user classes,
the total cost of operation and maintenance of the POTW, and its approved
user charge system every two to five years, as necessary. The town shall
revise the appropriate charges for uses and user classes to:



   (A)   Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and
maintenance costs among users and user classes.



   (B)   Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and
maintenance costs of the POTW.



   (C)   Apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the
costs of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next
year and adjust the rate accordingly.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 51.230  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.



   The Council may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs
incurred by the town in setting up and operating the town’s pretreatment
program, which may include, but would not be limited to the following:



   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including
the costs of processing such applications;



   (B)   Fees for the issuance of permits;



   (C)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures,
including fees for the cost of collection of and analyzing a user’s
discharge, the collection of and analyzing samples, reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by users, and conducting site visits;



   (D)   The cost of mileage and labor incurred in detecting and
correcting violations and potential violations;



   (E)   Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and
correcting violations;



   (F)   Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or
associated with detecting and correcting a violation or violations;



   (G)   Costs of additional equipment acquired or expended by the town
for detecting or correcting a violation or violations;



   (H)   Repair and/or replacement of any part of the sewerage system
damaged by a violation or violations;



   (I)   Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by the
town as a result of a violation or violations;



   (J)   Any and all expenses of outside professionals including, but
not limited to, engineers, scientists, and legal counsel that are incurred
due to a violation or violations;



   (K)   Other costs associated with detection and correction of the
violation or violations;



   (L)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge
procedures and construction;



   (M)   Fees for filing appeals; and



   (N)   Other fees as the Council may reasonably deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.



   (O)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the town. Such fees may be invoiced directly from the town or assignee.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.231  OPERATION OF POTW.



   The town shall make and enforce such bylaws and regulations as may be
deemed necessary for the safe, economic, and efficient management of the POTW.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



§ 51.232  EFFECTIVE DATES.



   This chapter shall become immediately effective upon its adoption by
the Town of Plainfield Town Council, signature by the Clerk-Treasurer,
enrollment in the book of ordinances, and publication of notice as required
by law.



(Ord. 06-2017, passed 5-22-2017)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER REGULATIONS



Section




Program for Protecting the Public Water System




   52.001   Definition of cross connection



   52.002   Interconnections



   52.003   Inspections and reinspections



   52.004   Access and refuse



   52.005   Discontinuance of water service



   52.006   Emergency discontinuance; hearing



   52.007   Reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer



   52.008   Supplementary conditions




Rates and Charges for the Waterworks System




   52.020   Metered and unmetered schedule of rates and charges



   52.021   Minimum monthly charge



   52.022   Fire protection; hydrant rental



   52.023   Automatic sprinkler connection



   52.024   Reconnection charges



   52.025   Customer meter deposit



   52.026   Bad check charge



   52.027   Compound meters



   52.028   Economic development rates



   52.029   Distribution system availability and inspection fees;
treatment plant availability fees



   52.030   Wholesale supply rate




Waterworks General Provisions




   52.045   Monthly billing 



   52.046   Payment 



   52.047   Disconnnection 



   52.048   Collection 



   52.049   Connection 



   52.050   Deposit 



   52.051   Installation of water pipes and connections




Automatic Sprinkler Connection Rates




   52.065   Automatic sprinkler connection rates




Plainfield Water Utility Removed from Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission




   52.080   Removal from state jurisdiction



   52.081   Notice to rate payers



   52.082   Effective date



PROGRAM FOR PROTECTING THE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM



§ 52.001  DEFINITION OF CROSS CONNECTION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CROSS CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate systems, one of which contains potable water from the town
water system, and the other, water from a private source, water of unknown or
questionable safety, or steam, gases or chemicals, whereby there may be a
flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the
pressure differential between the two systems.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-115)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.002  INTERCONNECTIONS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any cross connection. No
interconnection shall be established whereby potable water from a private
auxiliary, or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the town may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private auxiliary, or emergency water supply and
the method of connection and use of such supply be approved by the Municipal
Water Department and by the Environmental Management Board in accordance with
Rule 320 I.A.C. 3-9.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-116)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 52.003  INSPECTIONS AND REINSPECTIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Municipal Water Department to cause
inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water system
where cross connections with the public water system is deemed possible. The
frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards
involved shall be as established by the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-117)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.004  ACCESS AND REFUSE.



   Upon presentation of credentials, the representative of the Municipal
Water Department shall have the right to request entry at any reasonable time
to examine any property served by a connection to the public water system of
the town for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of
any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent
information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The
refusal of access or refusal of requested pertinent information shall be
deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-118)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.005  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.



   The Municipal Water Department is authorized and directed to
discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this subchapter exists, and to take such other precautionary measures
deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
system. Water service shall be discontinued only after reasonable notice is
served on the owner, lessee or occupants of the property or premises where a
violation is found or suspected to exist. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-119)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.006  EMERGENCY DISCONTINUANCE; HEARING.



   If it is deemed by the Municipal Water Department that a cross
connection or an emergency endangers public health, safety or welfare and
requires immediate action, and a written finding to that effect is filed with
the Clerk-Treasurer of the town and delivered to the consumer’s premises,
service may be immediately discontinued. The consumer shall have an
opportunity for hearing within ten days of such emergency discontinuance.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-120)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.007  REDUCED-PRESSURE-PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTER.



   All consumers using toxic or hazardous liquids, all hospitals,
mortuaries, wastewater treatment plants, laboratories and all other hazardous
users install and maintain a reduced-pressure-principle backflow preventer in
the main water line serving each building on the premises. The backflow
preventer must be installed in an easily accessible location not subject to
flooding or freezing.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-121)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



§ 52.008  SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS.



   This subchapter does not supersede the State Uniform Plumbing Code or
any ordinance of the town, but is supplementary to them.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-122)  (Ord. 7-83, passed 11-14-1983)



RATES AND CHARGES FOR THE WATERWORKS SYSTEM



§ 52.020  METERED AND UNMETERED SCHEDULE OF RATES AND CHARGES.



 


Metered Rate




Minimum Charge

 

Gallons Allowed Per Minimum

 

Per Month






5/8 inch

 

2,000

 

$8.57




3/4 inch

 

3,608

 

$13.71




1 inch

 

5,673

 

$20.74




1-1/2 inch

 

10,106

 

$35.13




2 inch

 

15,639

 

$50.93




3 inch

 

21,333

 

$84.54




4 inch

 

47,227

 

$153.12




6 inch

 

104,827

 

$306.48




8 inch

 

160,000

 

$456.61




10 inch

 

230,000

 

$644.22




12 inch

 

430,000

 

$1,141.12




Unmetered Rate



Former customers of Deer Path Utilities; flat rate per month per EDU
 

$33.22





 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-127)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.021  MINIMUM MONTHLY CHARGE.



   There is hereby established the following rates and charges for the use
and services rendered by the waterworks system of the town to become
effective on the first full billing period commencing upon an adoption of
this section. Such rates or charges shall be based upon the following
criteria:



 


Monthly Service Charge Meter Size

 

Meter Equivalency Ratio

 

Billing and Meter Charge Per Month






5/8 inch

 

1.0

 

$2.49




3/4 inch

 

1.1

 

$2.74




1 inch

 

1.4

 

$3.49




1-1/2 inch

 

1.8

 

$4.48




2 inch

 

2.9

 

$7.22




3 inch

 

11.0

 

$27.39




4 inch

 

14.0

 

$34.86




6 inch

 

21.0

 

$52.29




8 inch

 

29.0

 

$72.21




10 inch

 

38.0

 

$94.62




12 inch

 

48.0

 

$119.52










 


Metered Revenue

 

Per 1,000 Gallons




First 10,000 gallons

 

$3.04




Over 10,000 gallons

 

$2.36









 


Wholesale Revenue



Wholesale revenue (minimum usage of 60 MGM)
 

$0.50




 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-128)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.022  FIRE PROTECTION; HYDRANT RENTAL.



 


Fire Protection Service - Hydrant Rental

 

Per Annum



Municipal (lump sum for all town hydrants) (annual)
 

$0.00



Private (for each fire hydrant per annum)
 

$300




 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-129)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.023  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER CONNECTION.



 


Automatic Sprinkler Connection

 

Per Annum






1 inch connection

 

$8.34




1-1/4  inch connection

 

$13.02




1-1/2 inch connection

 

$18.75




2 inch connection

 

$33.33




3 inch connection

 

$75




4 inch connection

 

$133.32




6 inch connection

 

$300




8 inch connection

 

$533.34




10 inch connection

 

$833.34




12 inch connection

 

$1,200




Temporary Hydrant Meter Rental

 

Per Connection



Charge per connection (exclusive of water consumption)
 

$100



Meter deposit (refundable)
 

$750





 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-130)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.024  RECONNECTION CHARGES.



 


Reconnection Charge



Reconnection charge
 

$50




 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-133)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.025  CUSTOMER METER DEPOSIT.



 


Customer Meter Deposit





Existing commercial connection (includes $1 transfer fee)
 

$101



Existing home connection (includes $1 transfer fee)
 

$26



New commercial connection
 

$100



New home connection
 

$25



Renter (includes $1 transfer fee)
 

$76



Miscellaneous Meter Charges


Labor and materials to repair
 

Actual costs



Meter tampering fee
 

$100



Penalty
 

$25





 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-134)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.026  BAD CHECK CHARGE.



 


Bad Check Charge

 

Per Occurrence




Bad check charge

 

$27.50




 



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-135)  (Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.027  COMPOUND METERS.



   (A)   (1)   Compound meters (as defined below) will be billed as
follows unless it is otherwise determined by the town that the compound meter
was installed and the larger meter included in the compound meter is
necessary to provide for purposes other than fire protection only:



 

Smaller meter of compound meter
 
Billed in accordance with the monthly service charge, metered revenue and
minimum charge rate schedules set forth in this Chapter 52


Larger meter of compound meter
 
Billed in accordance with the automatic sprinkler connection rate schedule
set forth in § 52.023



 



      (2)   If it is determined by the town that the compound meter
was installed and the larger meter of the compound meter is necessary for
purposes other than fire protection only, then the  user shall be billed
accordance with the monthly service charge, metered revenue and minimum
charge rates schedule set forth herein for both meters included in the
compound meter. This division (A)(2) applies to customers of the town’s
waterworks system  having one master water meter including a positive
displacement meter and a turbine meter (a “compound meter”).



   (B)   All private fire hydrants, including hydrants on private
property that are connected to the town’s waterworks system will be billed
for the fire protection service - hydrant rental set forth in § 52.022.



   (C)   All fire protection charges may be billed monthly or annually
at the discretion of the town.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.028  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT RATES.



   (A)   Any economic development project within the town will be
charged the following rates and charges for the use and services rendered by
the waterworks system of the town, effective on the first full billing period
commencing upon the adoption of a resolution of the Town Council finding that
the applicant has fulfilled the criteria set forth below:



      (1)   Has been approved for tax abatement relief from the town;



      (2)   Has invested $25,000,000 or more in land, building and
equipment by the party approved for the aforementioned tax abatement;



      (3)   Creates 35 or more new jobs in the town; and



      (4)   Utilizes, on average, not less than 150,000 gallons per
day of water flow.



 

Minimum Charge
 
Gallons Allowed Per Minimum 
 
Per Month





5/8 inch

 

2,000

 

$7.45




3/4 inch

 

3,608

 

$11.69




1 inch

 

5,673

 

$17.56




1-1/2 inch

 

10,106

 

$29.47




2 inch

 

15,639

 

$42.17




3 inch

 

21,333

 

$72.59




4 inch

 

47,227

 

$126.67




6 inch

 

104,827

 

$247.78




8 inch

 

160,000

 

$367.01




10 inch

 

230,000

 

$515.42




12 inch

 

430,000

 

$900.32





 



 

Monthly Service Charge Meter Size
 
Billing and Meter Charge Per Month





5/8 inch

 

$2.49




3/4 inch

 

$2.74




1 inch

 

$3.49




1-1/2 inch

 

$4.48




2 inch

 

$7.22




3 inch

 

$27.39




4 inch

 

$34.86




6 inch

 

$52.29




8 inch

 

$72.21




10 inch

 

$94.62




12 inch

 

$119.52





 



 

Metered Revenue
 
Per 1,000 Gallons



First 10,000 gallons

 

$2.48




Over 10,000 gallons

 

$1.80




 



   (B)   The applicant shall make a written request to the town, in
care of the Town Manager, in order to have the Town Council consider whether
the economic development rates shall apply.



(Ord. 30-2009, passed 11-9-2009)



§ 52.029  DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AVAILABILITY AND INSPECTION FEES; TREATMENT
PLANT AVAILABILITY FEES.



   (A)   No connection to the town’s waterworks system shall be
allowed until a permit is obtained and payment of distribution system
availability and inspection fees and treatment plant availability fees have
been made to the town or, if applicable, payments have been arranged in
accordance with division (D) below.



   (B)   DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AVAILABILITY AND INSPECTION FEE is the
charge to a user for a new or additional connection to the town’s
waterworks system and is charged in return for the town making available to
such user the town’s water main distribution system consisting of all
facilities and operations necessary to provide water utility service to such
user and the inspection of the connection to such water main distribution
system. The distribution system availability and inspection fee is hereby
established in the amount of $300 per EDU or 300 GPD of estimated average
flow. The amount of the distribution system availability and inspection fee
may, from time to time, be changed by the Town Council.



   (C)   TREATMENT PLANT AVAILABILITY FEE is the charge to a user for a
new or additional connection to the town’s waterworks system and is charged
in return for the town providing capacity in its water treatment plant system
to such user. The treatment plant availability fee is hereby established in
the amount of $955 per EDU or 300 GPD of estimated average flow.  The amount
of the treatment plant availability fee may, from time to time, be changed by
the Town Council.



   (D)   Payment of the distribution system availability and inspection
fee and the treatment plant availability fee shall be made at the following
times:



      (1)   For new construction, both the distribution system
availability and inspection fee and the treatment plant availability fee
shall be paid in full before the issuance of a building permit; and



      (2)   For all new or additional users not qualifying as “new
construction”, both the distribution system availability and inspection fee
and the treatment plant availability fee shall be paid in full before the new
or additional connection is made to the town’s waterworks system.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.030  WHOLESALE SUPPLY RATE.



   (A)   The town finds that it is necessary and appropriate that
wholesale users of the waterworks pay specified rates and charges for the
treated water purchased by such wholesale users.



   (B)   (1)   Effective April 1, 2002, there is hereby established
the following rates and charges for the use and services rendered by the
waterworks system of the town to certain specified wholesale users (the
“wholesale supply rate”). Such rates or charges shall be based upon the
following criteria:



 

For All Usage Per Month (Minimum 60,000,000 Gallons Per Month)



Rate per 1,000 gallons

 

$0.50 per 1,000 gallons




 



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, IWC shall be charged a
minimum of $30,000 per calendar month during which IWC is obligated to
purchase treated water from the town, all as provided in the IWC contract,
commencing April 1, 2002, the initial delivery date.



   (C)   (1)   This wholesale supply rate shall apply only to users
who enter into an enforceable agreement with the town under which the user
becomes a qualified wholesale user.



      (2)   A QUALIFIED WHOLESALE USER is a user who agrees to each
of the following:



         (a)   To use the water supplied by the water utility
under this rate only for resale to consumers within designated areas and for
its own minor usage;



         (b)   1.   To allow the town to reduce the amount of
water available to the user during a water shortage, or at any time in which
the supply of water available for the town to deliver to the user is
otherwise diminished over an extended  period of time.



            2.   This reduction shall be the greater of either:



               a.   Fifty percent; or



               b.   The same proportion as the amounts
supplied to the town’s other large commercial and industrial users are
reduced or diminished.



         (c)   To provide for a capability and to allow the town
to draw water from water supplies otherwise available to the user in the
event of emergency conditions; and



         (d)   To provide facilities for the provision of this
service or for the cost of such facilities in a manner which is acceptable to
the town.



(Ord. 4-02, passed - -2002)



WATERWORKS GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.045  MONTHLY BILLING.



   Charges for water service shall be made each month of the calendar
year. All bills are to be rendered each month following the month for which
charges are made, and shall be due and payable on the date of rendition
thereof; provided, however, that if said bills are paid within 15 days, they
shall be considered current.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.046  PAYMENT.



   If rates charged for services are not paid in full within 15 days after
rendition of the bill, a collection or deferred payment charge of 10% shall
be added to the bill.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.047  DISCONNNECTION.



   All water service shall be discontinued without further notice if the
charges for such service are not paid within 60 days after rendition of the
bill therefor.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.048  COLLECTION.



   The rates and charges herein established shall be collected from the
owners, occupants and users of the premises within the town from and after
the effective date of this subchapter.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.049  CONNECTION.



   No water from the town’s waterworks supply shall be turned on for any
service in any premises, by any person except as authorized by the Town
Council to perform such service.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.050  DEPOSIT.



   Every user who has been disconnected for nonpayment of charges, or new
users, or new customers, shall pay a deposit in the amount set forth in §§
52.025. The sum retained by the town to ensure such deposit, less any amount
due the town for service, shall be refunded without interest at the
conclusion of such users or customers’ use of the town’s waterworks
system.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)



§ 52.051  INSTALLATION OF WATER PIPES AND CONNECTIONS.



   All water pipes and connections shall comply with and be installed in
accordance with the direction of the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 23-2009, passed 7-27-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER CONNECTION RATES



§ 52.065  AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER CONNECTION RATES.



   (A)   The following automatic sprinkler connection rates having
heretofore been approved by the Town Council, be established as the automatic
sprinkler connection rates for the municipal water utility of the town. Said
rates are as follows:



 

Automatic Sprinkler Connection Rates


Connection Size
 
Rate per Annum





1 in. connection

 

$8.34




1-1/4 in. connection

 

$13.02




1-1/2 in. connection

 

$18.75




2 in. connection

 

$33.33




3 in. connection

 

$75




4 in. connection

 

$133.32




6 in. connection

 

$300




8 in. connection

 

$533.34




10 in. connection

 

$833.34




12 in. connection

 

$1,200





 



   (B)   Any water user installing an automatic sprinkler system, shall
pay to the municipal water utility of the town an annual rate in accordance
with the schedule set forth above. Said annual charges shall be due on
January 15 of each year and on connection to the water utility that the
initial charge shall be on a pro-rated basis up to January 15, of the year
following the initial connection and shall be billed accordingly thereafter.
The annual charge being due as set forth above.



   (C)   The annual charge shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town and credited to the proper municipal water utility account.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-140)  (Ord. 6-76, passed 10-25-1976; Ord. 23-2009,
passed 7-27-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PLAINFIELD WATER UTILITY REMOVED FROM INDIANA
UTILITY REGULATORY COMMISSION



§ 52.080  REMOVAL FROM STATE JURISDICTION.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by I.C. 8-1.5-39.1, 60 days from the
date of final action hereon the Town Water Utility, a department of the town,
shall be removed from the jurisdiction of the Indiana Utility Regulatory
Commission for purposes of approval of rates and charges and of the issuance
of stocks, bonds, notes or other evidence of indebtedness unless prior to the
expiration of such 60 days the Town Council receives a petition, as provided
by law, which requests the Town Council to submit such removal from the
Commission to the registered voters of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-145)  (Ord. 5-89, passed 5-8-1989)



§ 52.081  NOTICE TO RATE PAYERS.



   On or before April 1, 1989, the Clerk-Treasurer shall mail written
notice to all rate payers of the Town Water Utility, a department of the
town, notifying such rate payers that on May 8, 1989, the Town Council would
take final action on the question of removal of the Town Water Utility, a
department of the town, from the jurisdiction of the Indiana Utility
Regulatory Commission for purposes of approval of rates and charges and the
issuance of stocks, bonds, notes and other evidence of indebtedness. Such
notice also shall be mailed to the Indiana Regulatory Commission.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-146)  (Ord. 5-89, passed 5-8-1989)



§ 52.082  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   Ordinance 5-89 became effective 60 days after adoption by the Town
Council, as provided by I.C. 8-1.5-3-9.1(c).



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-147)  (Ord. 5-89, passed 5-8-1989)



CHAPTER 53:  CONSERVATION AND WATER RATIONING



Section



   53.01   Application



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Declaration of need for water conservation



   53.04   Levels of conservation



   53.05   Level 1 - Voluntary Conservation



   53.06   Level 2 - Restricted Use



   53.07   Level 3 - Prohibitive Use



   53.08   Level 4 - Rationing



   53.09   Notice of water conservation level to users



   53.10   Exceptions



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to all persons who are users, customers or
water purchasers of the town’s water utility, unless otherwise excepted by
this chapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-150)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense, include the future, words in the plural include
the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word
“shall” is always meant to be mandatory and not merely directory.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PRESIDENT. The president of the Town Council or, in his or her absence,
the Vice-President.



   TOWN. The Town of Plainfield.



   USER/CUSTOMER. Any person whose residence and/or business is connected
to the water utility, whether legally or illegally.



   WATER. The water from the town municipal water system.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-151)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.03  DECLARATION OF NEED FOR WATER CONSERVATION.



   The President of the Town Council, after consultation with the Director
of Public Works, upon determining that the town municipal water system is in
imminent danger of a shortage of water or is experiencing a shortage of
water; that it is unable to maintain adequate water pressure in the system;
that the water demands of the system exceed the ability to service these
demands; that major malfunctions or breakdowns of equipment have occurred or
other circumstances have caused an actual or imminent danger to the water
supply; the President may declare a water conservation emergency and
establish the level of conservation appropriate to the existing
circumstances. The level of conservation declared shall remain in effect for
seven days subject to extensions of like periods. However, no level of
conservation shall be extended more than three consecutive times without the
consent of the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-152)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.04  LEVELS OF CONSERVATION.



   In order to implement a water conservation program appropriate to the
needs of the water utility and its users, the following levels of
conservation are established:



   (A)   Level 1 – Voluntary Conservation;



   (B)   Level 2 – Restricted Water Use;



   (C)   Level 3 – Prohibited Water Use; and



   (D)   Level 4 – Water Rationing.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-153)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.05  LEVEL 1 - VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION.



   Level 1 – Voluntary Conservation shall be comprised of the following:



   (A)   Requesting that the users engage in a conscious effort to
reduce water consumption by practicing such voluntary water conservation
techniques as will be helpful in managing the existing water shortage; and



   (B)   Suggesting reasonable and meaningful actions that users can
take which will be beneficial to the alleviation of the existing water
shortage.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-154)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.06  LEVEL 2 - RESTRICTED USE.



   (A)   Level 2 – Restricted Use shall be compromised of methods
restricting water usage by users to such times, terms and conditions as the
President initially or Town Council thereafter shall determine appropriate.
Level 2 does not contemplate a severe water shortage, but rather that
mandatory conservation methods must be imposed to ensure adequate water
supply or pressure for future needs.



   (B)   Restricted use may include, but not be limited to any or all
of the following:



      (1)   Sprinkling, watering or irrigating of shrubbery, trees,
lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables or any other
vegetation;



      (2)   Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, mobile homes,
railroad cars or any other type of mobile equipment, except as required by
applicable local, state or federal law for health and safety reasons;



      (3)   Cleaning of outdoor surfaces such as sidewalks,
driveways, filling station aprons, paved areas, structures, buildings,
porches or other outdoor surfaces;



      (4)   Washing and cleaning of any business equipment or
machinery;



      (5)   Filling empty swimming pools;



      (6)   Using hydrants except for fire suppression or as
otherwise directed by the town;



      (7)   Operating water fountains that are non-recycling; and/or



      (8)   Limitation on amounts by contract purchasers.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-155)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)  Penalty, see
§ 53.99



§ 53.07  LEVEL 3 - PROHIBITIVE USE.



   Level 3 – Prohibitive Use shall be comprised of the following:



   (A)   Level 3 prohibitions may include any or all of the water usage
restrictions listed in § 53.06; and



   (B)   Users may be subjected to additional prohibitions as
determined by the President or the Town Council as conditions and needs
dictate.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-156)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)  Penalty, see
§ 53.99



§ 53.08  LEVEL 4 - RATIONING.



   In addition to the water use prohibitions identified in §§ 53.06 and
53.07, and in accordance with § 53.09, users shall be limited to water use
per the following schedule.



   (A)   Residential use shall be limited to 105 gallons of water per
dwelling unit per day.



   (B)   Apartment buildings, apartment complexes and multi-family
dwellings with a single water meter shall be limited to a total consumption
not to exceed 105 gallons per dwelling unit per day.



   (C)   Business, commercial and industrial users shall be limited to
65% of the volume of water used during the corresponding month of the
preceding year. Business, commercial and industrial users that were not in
business and operating in the area served by the town water utility more than
one year period to the declaration of need shall be restricted to 65% of the
average monthly volume of water used during the number of months such
business, commercial or industrial users was in business and operating in the
town.



   (D)   Contract purchasers may be limited to up to 50% of their
volumes provided by contract as determined by the Town Council.



   (E)   Nothing in § 53.07 shall prevent the Town Council from
imposing more restrictive water rationing measures.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-157)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)  Penalty, see
§ 53.99



§ 53.09  NOTICE OF WATER CONSERVATION LEVEL TO USERS.



   In order to inform users of the water conservation level in effect, the
water utility shall give its users notice as soon as it is practical. Notice
of Level 1, 2 and 3 shall be by publication in a local newspaper of general
circulation or by other means as deemed appropriate by the President or the
Town Council. Level 1, 2 and 3 notice shall be effective upon publication.
Notice of Level 4 shall be sent by the water utility to each user, at his or
her last known address, by first class mail, postage prepaid. Notice of Level
4 shall be deemed effective at noon the third day after depositing same in
the United States mail.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-158)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.10  EXCEPTIONS.



   The Town Council reserves the right to establish alternative water
conservation and rationing requirements for the following:



   (A)   Health care providers;



   (B)   A reasonable use of water to maintain adequate health and
sanitary standards;



   (C)   Those industrial and agricultural activities declared by the
Town Council to be necessary for the public health and well being;



   (D)   Automatic commercial car washes using a majority of recycled
water and golf courses; and



   (E)   Contract purchasers.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-159)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of Level 2 and 3, shall be
subject to a first time written warning by either the Town Metropolitan
Police Department or a water utility employee or such other duly authorized
and designated employee of the town. In the event said user violates the
water conservation restrictions imposed by Level 2 or 3 a second time, that
person shall be cited with a written citation and subject to a fine up to
$100. All subsequent violations by a user of Level 2 or 3 shall be subject to
a fine of no less than $250 nor more than $2,500 for each violation.



   (B)   A person who violates water conservation Level 4 shall be
cited by the Town Metropolitan Police Department or water utility employee,
or such other duly authorized and designated employee of the town, with
violation of this chapter. A fine may be imposed against said violator in the
sum of up to $500. Additionally, the water utility may disconnect the water
service to any such user or customer, at the time the citation is issued, or
as soon thereafter as possible. Water service for said violator shall be
reconnected upon the payment of a reconnection fee in the sum of $100.



(1991 Draft Code, § 9-160)  (Ord. 12-2012, passed - -2012)



CHAPTER 54:  DRAINAGE



Section



   54.01   Title



   54.02   Purpose



   54.03   Policy statement



   54.04   Allowable storm water release rate



   54.05   Submittals



   54.06   Exclusions



   54.07   Detention location limitations



   54.08   Impact drainage areas



   54.09   As-built drawings



   54.10   Maintenance of approved drainage patterns



   54.11   Erosion control practices



   54.12   Facility maintenance responsibility



   54.13   Disclaimer



   54.14   Corrective action



   54.15   Incorporation by reference



§ 54.01  TITLE.



   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Drainage Chapter”.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prescribe the conditions
under which land use changes from open or agricultural to a more urbanized
use may take place with regard to allowable storm water release rate and to
prescribe the provision for erosion control measures.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.03  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the town that the storage and controlled
release of storm water runoff shall be required for any new development,
redevelopment and new construction located within the town not exempt under
this chapter. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or the
extension of any proposed or existing building in the town until the required
drainage plans have been approved in writing by the Town Engineer, except for
the exceptions listed in § 54.06.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.04  ALLOWABLE STORM WATER RELEASE RATE.



   The release rate of storm water from development, redevelopment and new
construction may not exceed the storm water runoff from the land area in its
present state of development. The developer shall submit to the Town
Engineer, detailed computations of runoff before and after development,
redevelopment or new construction which demonstrate that runoff will not be
increased to the extent that the peak runoff after development, redevelopment
or new construction for the 100-year return period storm of critical duration
does not exceed the runoff before development, redevelopment or new
construction for the ten-year return period storm. The critical duration
storm is that storm duration which requires the greatest detention storage.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.05  SUBMITTALS.



   The preparation of and the submittal of calculations, specifications
and drawings detailing the provisions for the design and construction of
drainage, storage and controlled release facilities shall be in accordance
with such standards and specifications that the Town Engineer may promulgate.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.06  EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   The activities listed in this section shall be excluded from
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The exceptions in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(3), however,
shall not be applicable to a project if located in a designated drainage
impact area as established per § 54.08.



   (C)   Exclusions:



      (1)   Construction or extension of a single-family dwelling
house or an accessory use building thereto;



      (2)   Construction or extension of a duplex dwelling house or
an accessory use building thereto;



      (3)   Extension or replacement of any existing building that
does not increase the existing rate of runoff;



      (4)   New development, redevelopment and new construction
located within the Town Center Zoning boundary; and



      (5)   Any residential, commercial or industrial subdivision
(major or minor) or construction project thereon, which has had its final
drainage plan approved by the Town Engineer prior to the effective date of
this chapter.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.07  DETENTION LOCATION LIMITATIONS.



   All storm water storage facilities shall meet the following standards.



   (A)   The boundary of the maximum water surface elevation of any
detention facility resulting from a post-development 100-year return period
storm shall be separated by not less than 25 feet horizontally from any
building or structure.



   (B)   The maximum water surface elevation of any detention storage
facility resulting from a post- development 100-year return period storm
shall be at least two feet lower than the lowest finished floor of any
building located on any property which uses the detention facility as a
drainage outlet.



   (C)   Detention facilities that rely on human-made berms of any kind
to hold back ponding water shall be provided with an automatic non-mechanical
emergency by-pass drainage system capable of passing the flow resulting from
a post-development 100-year return period storm without causing failure of
the human-made berms or ponding greater than two feet above the maximum water
surface elevation resulting from a post-development 100-year return period
storm.



   (D)   Only dedicated drainage easements may be used for detention
facilities. Any portion of a residential lot, combined utility/drainage
easements, utility easements and traffic rights-of-way do not qualify for use
as detention facilities.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.08  IMPACT DRAINAGE AREAS.



   (A)   The Council is authorized, but is not required, to classify
certain geographical areas as impact drainage areas and to enact and
promulgate regulations which are generally applied. In determining impact
drainage areas, the Council shall consider such factors as topography, soil
type, capacity of existing drains and distance from adequate drainage
facilities.



   (B)   In addition to specific impact drainage areas classified by
the Council, the following areas are hereby designated as impact drainage
areas, unless good reason for not including them is presented to the Council:



      (1)   A floodway or floodway fringe as designated by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources;



      (2)   Land within 75 feet of each bank of any regulated drain;
and



      (3)   Land within 75 feet of the centerline of any regulated
drain tile.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.09  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   After completion of the project and before final approval and
acceptance can be made, a professionally prepared and certified
“as-built” set of plans and calculations shall be submitted to the Town
Engineer for review. If notice of noncompliance is not given within 30
calendar days from the date of submission of “as-builts”, the plans shall
be construed as approved and final approval and acceptance can be made. The
preparation of and the submittal of “as-builts” shall be in accordance
with such standards and specifications that the Town Engineer may promulgate.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.10  MAINTENANCE OF APPROVED DRAINAGE PATTERNS.



   It shall be the responsibility of the land owner to maintain the grade,
as it applies to drainage, as provided for by approved construction plans or
by natural drainage patterns.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.11  EROSION CONTROL PRACTICES.



   The deposition of sediment in drainage systems shall be avoided. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner to submit construction plans
pertaining to erosion control measures to the County Soil Conservation
Service for review and to submit a notice of intent letter to the Indiana
Department of Environmental Management in accordance with the requirements of
327 I.A.C. 15-5. A copy of the erosion control submittal to the County Soil
Conservation Service and a copy of the notice of intent letter shall be given
to the Town Engineer at the time of construction plan submittal. The
preparation of erosion control plans shall be in accordance with standards
and specifications that the Town Engineer and/or the County Soil Conservation
Service may promulgate. Individual lots which are otherwise subject to the
Building Code of the town are further subject to the implementation of
satisfactory erosion control practices as required by the Building Code of
the town.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.12  FACILITY MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   Facility maintenance of detention facilities during construction and
thereafter, shall be the responsibility of the land developer/property owner.
Assignment of responsibility for maintaining facilities serving more than one
lot or holding shall be documented by appropriate covenants to property deeds.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.13  DISCLAIMER.



   The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon historical records,
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or storm
water runoff depths may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that land uses permitted will be free from storm water
damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or
any officer or employee thereof for any damage which may result from reliance
on this chapter or on any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.14  CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. All
costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 54.15  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Throughout the various sections of this chapter, reference is made to
other regulations or ordinances of the town. Two copies of each such
regulation or ordinance of the town are on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town and are available for public inspection.



(Ord. 17-97, passed 12-22-1997)



CHAPTER 55:  MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS



Section



   55.01   Title



   55.02   Parties defined



   55.03   Purpose



   55.04   Main extensions



   55.05   Metering



   55.06   Maintenance responsibility



   55.07   Construction requirements



   55.08   Fire pump and storage utilization



   55.09   Cross connection control



   55.10   Secondary sources of supply



   55.11   Land irrigation facilities



   55.12   Scheduled maintenance requirements



   55.13   Non-scheduled maintenance



   55.14   Leak repair



   55.15   Corrective action



   55.16   Incorporation by reference



§ 55.01  TITLE.



   This chapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Water Use Chapter”.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.02  PARTIES DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CUSTOMER. The individual, firm, corporation, government agency or other
entity being supplied by the water utility via a connection.



   WATER UTILITY. The town municipal waterworks.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to prescribe construction and
maintenance requirements for connections to the water utility.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.04  MAIN EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Whenever service is to be provided to a customer, the water
utility main shall be extended across the full length of the addressed side
of the customer’s property. In the case of a corner lot with an extension
originating from the non-addressed side of the property, the requirement to
extend across the full length of the addressed side of the property will
require that the extension be constructed across the full length of both the
non-addressed side and the addressed side of the property. All costs
associated with the construction of the water utility main shall be paid by
the customer.



   (B)   All mainline water mains whether public or private shall be a
minimum of eight inches in diameter except dead-end mainline water mains
serving permanent residential cul-de-sacs a maximum of 400 feet in length and
with a maximum of 12 equivalent dwelling units may be six inches in diameter.
Domestic service connections shall be sized as prescribed by the water
utility. It shall be the customer’s responsibility to coordinate sizing of
each extension and connection with the water utility. In the event that the
water utility requires mains to be sized in excess of eight inches in
diameter, the water utility may participate in the material cost of the size
increase.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.05  METERING.



   Connections to the water utility shall be metered as prescribed by the
water utility. Meters shall be located adjacent to the addressed side of the
customer’s property. Unless specifically stated otherwise in the town
standards, all meters and appurtenances shall be furnished and installed by
the customer.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.06  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   For connections for owner occupied residential structures
which are accepted by the water utility and whose meter pit is located
immediately adjacent to the right-of-way in accordance with town standards,
the water utility will maintain the meter and that portion of the connection
from the water utility main to the meter pit and the customer shall maintain
the meter appurtenances and the remaining portion of the connection.



   (B)   For connections for nonresidential structures, for connections
for non-owner occupied residential structures, or for connections that the
water utility elects to allow meters to remain or to be installed at
locations not in accordance with town standards, the water utility will
maintain the meter and that portion of the connection from the water utility
main to the curb stop and the customer shall maintain the meter appurtenances
and the remaining portion of the connection.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.07  CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   The materials, design and construction of connections shall be in
accordance with town standards and shall be subject to review and comment by
the water utility. Connections which serve multi-family residential property
or are required to cross property lines shall be provided within a drainage
and utility easement throughout the entire system.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.08  FIRE PUMP AND STORAGE UTILIZATION.



   (A)   It is recognized that the water utility must limit the
allowable flow to that flow which maintains 20 pounds per square inch
pressure in water utility main. The water utility typically can provide
approximately 1,500 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square inch.



   (B)   Private fire pumps and private water storage will typically be
required in cases where greater than the allowable flow and/or pressure is
required for a connection. The minimum requirement for private water storage
shall be based upon the requirement for the fire pump to be tested at 150% of
its rated capacity. Thus, the rated capacity of a fire pump system absent
private water storage shall be two-thirds of the allowable flow resulting in
a typical rated capacity of 1,000 gallons per minute. The water utility
requires that all private fire pump systems be provided with a pressure
sensing control device which automatically throttles the flow via a control
valve placed on the discharge side of the fire pump. Connections which
require fire pumps and/or water storage shall be independent and specific to
each building. The customer shall provide the water utility with the
necessary observations and design calculations such that the meter and
connection sizing can be coordinated.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.09  CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL.



   (A)   Refer to 327 I.A.C. 8-10 and to Ordinance  9-97, “An
Ordinance for Cross Connection Control of the Public Water System” for
additional requirements.



   (B)   Whenever a cross connection control device of any kind is
required, by-passing shall be prohibited unless the by-pass is provided with
a similar cross connection control device as the by-pass constitutes a cross
connection. All cross connection devices shall be inspected/tested by a
registered inspector at the time of installation and at intervals required by
this section. Reports of all inspections and tests shall be submitted to the
water utility and to the customer within 30 calendar days of the inspection
or test. The location and specification of cross connection control devices
shall be as required by the water utility.



   (C)   Air gaps shall terminate a minimum of two pipe diameters of
the discharge pipe or six inches, whichever is the lesser, above the maximum
recorded flood or above the rim of receiving vessel, whichever is the higher.
Air gaps shall be inspected at intervals not exceeding 12 months to ensure
compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed horizontally, with no plug or additional piping affixed to the
pressure differential relief valve port, and with the pressure differential
relief valve port a minimum of 12 inches above floor level. Additionally, the
device must be installed at a location where any leakage from the pressure
differential relief valve port will be noticed, and that allows access to the
device for maintenance and testing from floor level, and that will not
subject the device to flooding, excessive heat or freezing. Reduced pressure
principle backflow preventers shall be tested at intervals not exceeding six
months.



   (E)   Double check valve assemblies shall be installed horizontally
at a location that allows access to the device for maintenance and testing
from floor level and that will not subject the device to excessive heat or
freezing. Double check valve assemblies shall be tested at intervals not
exceeding 12 months.



   (F)   Pressure type vacuum breakers shall be installed as near as
possible to the irrigation facility, at a location that allows access to the
device for maintenance and testing from floor or ground level and that will
not subject the device to flooding, excessive heat or freezing. Additionally,
the device must be installed with its centerline or datum point a minimum of
12 inches above: the floor level, the highest downstream shut-off valve, and
the highest downstream overflow rim or discharge point. Pressure type vacuum
breakers shall be tested at intervals not exceeding six months.



   (G)   Except for connections for facilities which present a “cross
connection hazard” as defined by 327 I.A.C. 8-10, connections to the water
utility shall have double check valve assemblies between the water utility
and the customer.



   (H)   Connections for facilities which present a “cross connection
hazard” as defined by 327 I.A.C. 8-10 shall have an air gap or a reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer between the water utility and the
customer or component thereof which presents the “cross connection
hazard”.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.10  SECONDARY SOURCES OF SUPPLY.



   Storage tanks used only to store water from the water utility for
firefighting which are constructed to maintain the bacteriological quality of
the water shall be isolated from the water utility by an air gap, reduced
pressure principle backflow preventer or double check valve assembly. Other
secondary sources of supply shall not be physically connected to a connection
served by the water utility.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.11  LAND IRRIGATION FACILITIES.



   (A)   With regard to water used for land irrigation, relief from
sewage charges which are based upon metered flows of the water utility will
not be granted.



   (B)   Land irrigation facilities constructed after July 19, 1985
which receive flow from the water utility, are buried below the ground and
have sprinkling outlets located less than six inches above grade shall be
isolated from the water utility by an air gap, reduced pressure principle
backflow preventer or pressure type vacuum breaker.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.12  SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Connections that are greater than or equal to four inches in diameter
shall be completely flushed, shall have connection valves exercised and shall
have connection fire hydrants exercised at intervals not exceeding six
months. Given that serious problems may result from unregulated flushing, the
water utility shall be notified in writing at least seven calendar days in
advance of any flushing operation such that the water utility can authorize a
time and date for flushing. A customer affidavit stating that flushing, valve
exercising and fire hydrant exercising has occurred shall be submitted to the
water utility within 24 hours of the occurrence. In the event that the
customer fails to provide an affidavit of flushing to the water utility
within 24 hours of flushing, the water utility may cause the main to be
flushed and the customer may be subject to a fee established by “An
Ordinance Establishing Fees and Permits for the Town of Plainfield”,
including any amendments or replacements of such ordinance.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.13  NON-SCHEDULED MAINTENANCE.



   Connections may be subject to non-scheduled maintenance per the
requirements of the water utility. The water utility may require immediate
non-scheduled main flushing. In the event that the customer fails to provide
an affidavit of flushing to the water utility within 24 hours of a
non-scheduled flushing request by the water utility, the water utility may
cause the main to be flushed and the customer may be subject to a fee
established by “An Ordinance Establishing Fees and Permits for the Town of
Plainfield”, including any amendments to or replacements of such ordinance.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.14  LEAK REPAIR.



   Proper materials, construction and maintenance should minimize the
potential for leakage from connections. However, deterioration or accidents
may cause leaks. Leakage from connections shall be subject to immediate
repair. The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue
water service to a connection in the event that the leakage from said
connection is, in the opinion of the water utility, causing unacceptable
detriment to the water utility or the customer fails to repair less serious
leakage from connections within 24 hours of a written request by the water
utility.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.15  CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   (A)   The water utility may sever the connection of any customer who
is in violation of any provision of this chapter or is in violation of any
rule or law regulating connections to the water utility. Prior to severing
the connection, the water utility shall file a written finding with the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town and deliver finding to the customer’s premises.
The customer shall have an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of the
connection being severed.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the water utility or
the town from taking such other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the
person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 55.16  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Throughout the various sections of this chapter, reference is made to
other regulations or ordinances of the town. Two copies of each such
regulation or ordinance of the town are on file in the office of the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town and are available for public inspection.



(Ord. 19-97, passed 12-22-1997)



CHAPTER 56:  STORM WATER



Section




Storm Water Quality Management Plan




   56.01   Applicability



   56.02   Postconstruction Storm Water Quality Management Plan policy



   56.03   Postconstruction storm water quality management review and
approval




Storm Water Erosion and Sediment Control




   56.15   Introduction/purpose



   56.16   Definitions



   56.17   Permits



   56.18   Review and approval



   56.19   Inspection



   56.20   Enforcement



   56.21   Termination




Storm Water Management Department




   56.35   Definitions



   56.36   Storm Water Department user fee



   56.37   Storm Water Department user fee structure



   56.38   Fee establishment procedure



   56.39   Schedule of rates



   56.40   Availability fees



   56.41   Billing and payments



   56.42   Adjustment of fees



   56.43   Storm Water Revenue Fund



 



   56.99   Penalty



STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN



§ 56.01  APPLICABILITY.



   New development and redevelopment areas that disturb one or more acres
of land or disturbances of less than one acre of land that are part of a
larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will
ultimately disturb one or more acres of land within the MS4 area shall meet
the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 33-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 56.02  POSTCONSTRUCTION STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PLAN POLICY.



   (A)   Procedures shall be utilized to promote improved water
quality, and a Postconstruction Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall
be submitted to the town for review for each new and redevelopment site. The
Plan must include the following information:



      (1)   A description of potential pollutant sources from the
proposed land use that may reasonably be expected to add a significant amount
of pollutants to storm water discharges;



      (2)   Location, dimensions, detailed specifications and
construction details of all postconstruction storm water quality measures.
Postconstruction storm water quality measures shall be located within platted
drainage easements, and adequate access easements or right-of-way shall be
provided to allow access to the postconstruction storm water quality measure
locations;



      (3)   A description of measures that will be installed to
control pollutants in storm water discharges that will occur after
construction activities have been completed. Such practices include
infiltration of run-off, flow reduction by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions, buffer strip and riparian zone preservation, filter
strip creation, minimization of land disturbance and surface imperviousness,
maximization of open space and storm water detention ponds;



      (4)   A sequence describing when each postconstruction storm
water quality measure will be installed;



      (5)   Storm water quality measures that will remove or
minimize pollutants from storm water run-off;



      (6)   Storm water quality measures that will be implemented to
prevent or minimize adverse impacts to stream and riparian habitat;



      (7)   An operations and maintenance (O&M) manual that includes
a narrative description of the maintenance guidelines for all
postconstruction storm water quality measures to facilitate their proper long
term function. This O&M manual shall clearly state that the BMP shall be
owned by the developer/property owner, and that any and all maintenance and
repair activities shall be paid for by the owner. The requirements of the O&M
manual shall remain in effect regardless of change in ownership of the
development. It shall be the responsibility of the BMP owner to provide the
O&M manual to future parties who will assume responsibility for the operation
and maintenance of the postconstruction storm water quality measures;



      (8)   The town or its representatives shall have the right to
access the site for inspection of the storm water quality BMP. Any
maintenance or repairs that are required as a result of the town’s
inspection shall be paid by the owner;



      (9)   Supporting calculations and documentation demonstrating
the adequacy of the selected postconstruction storm water management measures
in a report that is signed and stamped by a professional engineer; and



      (10)   Any other information and provisions required by the
town, or as specified in the town standards.



   (B)   For purposes of establishing a minimum storm water quality
treatment level required of new and redevelopment sites, the town’s storm
water quality policy shall be based on the reduction of total suspended
solids (TSS) through the use of best management practices (BMP). The proposed
methodology within the town’s MS4 area shall meet the requirements outlined
within Chapters 8 and 9 of the Hendricks County Storm Water Technical
Standards Manual. The use of specific BMP described within the Hendricks
County Storm Water Technical Standards Manual are required to be approved by
the town, and a list of pre-approved (as well as prohibited) BMP will be
provided in the town standards. A non pre-approved BMP may be proposed
provided that independent, third-party documentation is provided to the town
which demonstrates that a minimum treatment level of 80% TSS removal shall be
achieved. Regardless of the BMP utilized, each site shall incorporate methods
to capture floatables (oils, debris and the like).



   (C)   Where appropriate, any combination of storage, infiltration,
filtering or vegetative practices shall be used to reduce the impact of
pollutants in storm water run-off on receiving waters. In addition to the
combination of practices, the following requirements shall be utilized:



      (1)   Infiltration practices will not be allowed in wellhead
protection areas;



      (2)   Discharges from an MS4 area will not be allowed directly
into sinkholes or fractured bedrock without treatment that results in the
discharge meeting state ground water quality standards as referenced in 327
I.A.C. 2-11.



      (3)   Any storm water practice that is a Class V injection
well must ensure that the discharge from such practices meets state ground
water quality standards as referenced in 327 I.A.C. 2-11;



      (4)   As site conditions allow, the rate at which water flows
through the MS4 conveyances shall be regulated to reduce outfall scouring and
stream bank erosion;



      (5)   As site conditions allow, a vegetated filter strip of
appropriate width shall be maintained along unvegetated swales and ditches;
and



      (6)   New retail gasoline outlets, new municipal, state,
federal or institutional refueling areas, or outlets and refueling areas that
replace their existing tank systems shall be required to design and install
appropriate practices to reduce lead, copper, zinc and polyaromatic
hydrocarbons in storm water run-off.



(Ord. 33-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 56.03  POSTCONSTRUCTION STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT REVIEW AND
APPROVAL.



   (A)   No applicant shall be granted construction plan approval or
building permit approval, or in the case where a building permit is not
required, improvement location permit approval, without the review and
approval of a Postconstruction Storm Water Management Plan and issuance of an
storm water quality permit by the town.



   (B)   The storm water quality management permit application, with
accompanying documentation shall be submitted with the number of copies
identified on the town provided application form.



   (C)   In order to defray the town’s administrative costs
associated with the review and issuance of the storm water quality permit,
the applicant shall, prior to receiving a notice of permit approval or
conditional notice of permit approval, pay such fees as required by “An
Ordinance Establishing Fees and Permits for the Town of Plainfield”
including any amendments to or replacements of such ordinance.



(Ord. 33-2006, passed 10-9-2006)  Penalty, see § 56.99



STORM WATER EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



§ 56.15  INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE.



   (A)   During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to
erosion by wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches
and the dredging of lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during
construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial
and aquatic habitat.



   (B)   As a result, the purpose of this subchapter is to safeguard
persons, protect property and prevent damage to the environment in the town.
This subchapter will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating
and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any
development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results
in the movement of earth on land in the town.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)



§ 56.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE). An activity or structure that helps
improve the quality of storm water runoff.



   CLEARING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Land disturbing activities associated with the
construction of infrastructure or structures. The term CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
does not include routine ditch or road maintenance or minor landscaping
projects.



   CONSTRUCTION PROJECT SITE. The physical location(s) or legal boundaries
within which a construction activity or a series of construction activities
is planned to be or is being accomplished.



   CONSTRUCTION SITE ACCESS. A stabilized stone surface at all points of
construction related egress from a project site planned and installed in
accordance with specification from an approved reference manual and
maintained throughout the period of land disturbing activities for the
purpose of capturing and detaining sediment carried by tires, tracks or other
surface contact components of vehicles, earthmoving equipment or material and
personnel transport conveyances.



   DRAINAGE WAY. Any channel that conveys surface storm water runoff.



   DEPARTMENT. Reference to the Indiana Department of Environmental
Management (IDEM).



   DEVELOPER. A project site owner or person financially responsible for
construction activity; or an owner of property who sells, leases or offers
for sale or lease, any lot(s) in a subdivision or larger common plan of
development or sale.



   DIRECTOR. The chief executive officer of IDEM.



   EROSION CONTROL. A measure that prevents erosion.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued by the
municipality for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and
structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. An ordered collection of drawings,
narratives, data and documents, prepared by or under the direction of a
licensed professional engineer or certified professional in storm water
quality (CPSWQ), assembled for review, approval, authorization and
establishment of guidelines and schedules for the implementation, management
and completion of construction activities, and used to control sediment and
erosion on a development site during and after construction at a project site
regulated by this subchapter. A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3)
is a part of the EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL SYSTEM. Appropriate control measures
combined to prevent or minimize the wearing away of soil, sediment and rock
fragments by water, wind, or ice, and to intercept detached or suspended
particles to prevent their discharge from or within a project site.



   FINAL STABILIZATION. The establishment of permanent vegetative cover or
the application of a permanent, non-erosive material to areas where all land
disturbing activities have been completed and no additional land disturbing
activities are planned under the current plan.



   GRADING. Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.



   INDIVIDUAL BUILDING LOT. A single parcel of land in a multi-parcel
development.



   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any human-made change of the land surface,
including removing vegetative cover that exposes the underlying soil,
excavating, filling, transporting and grading.



   MEASURABLE STORM EVENT. A precipitation event that results in a total
measured accumulation of precipitation equal to or greater than one-half inch
of rainfall.



   MS4 (MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM). A system of storm water
conveyances either owned or operated by a governmental agency that IDEM has
designated as responsible to eliminate or minimize pollutant loadings of the
storm water entering waters of the state.



   MS4 AREA. Within this subchapter, the corporate limits of the town
under an NPDES permit regulated by 327 I.A.C. 15-13.



   MS4 OPERATOR. The person locally responsible for development,
implementation or enforcement of the Storm Water Quality Management Plan
(SWQMP) for the town as regulated under 327 I.A.C. 15-13, or a representative
thereof.



   NOTICE OF PERMIT APPROVAL (NPA). A notification from the MS4 operator
to the project site owner that the erosion and sediment control permit
application for a project site has been reviewed and approved by the MS4
operator.



   NPDES. The national pollutant discharge elimination system, a program
administered by IDEM to reduce or eliminate the pollutant loadings into
public waters.



   PEAK DISCHARGE. The maximum rate of flow from a point of storm water
discharge during or immediately following a storm event, usually in reference
to a specific return period or design storm.



   PERIMETER CONTROL. A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site
by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or
basin.



   PERMANENT STABILIZATION. The establishment, at a uniform minimum of 70%
across the disturbed areas, of vegetative cover or permanent non-erosive
material that ensures the resistance of the underlying soil to erosion,
sliding or other movement.



   PHASING OF CONSTRUCTION. Sequential development of smaller portions of
a large project site, stabilizing each portion before initiating land
disturbing activities on the next portion, to minimize exposure of land to
erosion.



   RUNOFF. An accumulation of storm water flow that is moving across the
surface of the earth as sheet flow or concentrated flow in natural surface
watercourses, drains or waterways.



   SEDIMENT. Solid material, both organic and mineral, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth’s surface.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL. Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving
the site.



   SEDIMENTATION. The settling and accumulation of unconsolidated sediment
carried by storm water runoff.



   SITE. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading and
filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.



   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWP3). A plan developed to
minimize the impact of storm water pollutants resulting from construction and
post-construction activities.



   STORM WATER QUALITY MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to
control or minimize pollutants associated with storm water runoff.



   TEMPORARY STABILIZATION. The covering of soil to ensure its resistance
to erosion, sliding or other movement. The term includes vegetative cover,
anchored mulch or other non-erosive materials applied at a uniform minimum
density of 70% across the disturbed areas of a project site.



   TRACKING. The movement and re-depositing of dirt, mud, aggregate,
sediment or other storm water pollutants from a project site by the actions
of wheels, tires, skids, tracks or other surface contact components of cars,
trucks, heavy equipment or material and personnel transport conveyances.



   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams and bodies of water delineated within the town.



   WATERWAY. A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drainage system.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)



§ 56.17  PERMITS.



   (A)   No applicant shall be granted construction plan approval or
building permit approval, or in the case where a building permit is not
required, improvement location permit approval, without the review and
approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and issuance of an erosion
and sediment control permit by the town MS4 operator for land-disturbing
activity uncovering one or more acres of land. (For individual building lots
less than one acre, see division (B) below.)   



   (B)   The developer of an individual building lot containing less
than one acre, but which is a part of a multi-lot construction project
permitted under division (A) above, shall be required to complete an erosion
and sediment control agreement prior to receipt of a building permit. This
declaration assigns responsibility for conformance to the construction plan
as required in 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7.5 to the individual building lot developer.



   (C)   No erosion and sediment control permit is required for the
following activities:



      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property or natural resources; or



      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted
as a permitted main or accessory use.



   (D)   The erosion and sediment control permit application, with
accompanying documentation as required (including the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan), shall be submitted with the number of copies identified on the
town provided application form. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
submitted to the MS4 operator shall include all documents and information
required within 327 I.A.C. 15-5.



   (E)   Each erosion and sediment control permit application shall
bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of
any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the
applicant’s principal contact at such firm.



   (F)   In order to defray the town’s administrative costs
associated with the review of the erosion and sediment control permit
application, the applicant shall, at the time of filing a permit application,
pay such erosion and sediment control permit application fees as required by
“An Ordinance Establishing Fees and Permits for the Town of Plainfield”
including any amendments to or replacements of such ordinance.



   (G)   Any application for primary plat approval or secondary plat
approval which has been filed with the Director of the Department of Planning
and Zoning and which application is full and complete under the provisions of
the town subdivision regulations (Ord. 9-89, as amended, and codified in
Chapter 153 of this code) prior to the effective date of this subchapter
shall not require submittal of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan and
permit application to the town MS4 operator, but shall provide any and all
erosion control measures required as part the development’s review and
approval process.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)



§ 56.18  REVIEW AND APPROVAL.



   (A)   (1)   The MS4 operator will review each erosion and
sediment control permit application to determine its conformance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Within 28 days after receiving an application,
the MS4 operator shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the
application.



      (2)   Possible actions are further defined as:



         (a)   APPROVE. The permit application is found to be
completely consistent with the requirement within this subchapter, therefore,
the MS4 operator shall issue a notice of permit approval (NPA);



         (b)   APPROVE WITH CONDITIONS. The permit application is
generally consistent with the requirements within this subchapter, but
specific minor modifications are required to meet all of the applicable
requirements. Therefore, the MS4 operator shall issue the permit subject to
these written conditions along with a conditional notice of permit approval
(CNPA); or



         (c)   DISAPPROVE. The permit application does not meet
the requirements of this subchapter and requires modifications that would
result in significant changes to the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
Therefore, the MS4 operator shall disapprove the application indicating the
reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.



   (B)   The developer must include the NPA or CNPA as verification of
erosion and sediment control permit approval with the notice of intent (NOI)
sent to the Director of IDEM in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5-6(a) at least
48 hours prior to land-disturbing activities.



   (C)   The initiation of construction activity following notification
by the MS4 operator that the erosion and sediment control permit application
does not meet the requirements of this subchapter is a violation and subject
to enforcement action.



   (D)   If the project site owner does not receive notification within
28 days after the erosion and sediment control permit application is received
by the MS4 operator stating that the erosion and sediment control permit
application is disapproved, the project site owner may submit the NOI letter
information to IDEM in accordance with 327 I.A.C. 15-5-6(a).



   (E)   If notification of a disapproved erosion and sediment control
permit application is received after the review period outlined in §
56.17(D) and following commencement of construction activities, the Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan must be modified to meet the requirements of the
subchapter and resubmitted within 14 days of receipt of the notification of
the disapproved erosion and sediment control permit application.



   (F)   In order to defray the town’s administrative costs
associated with the inspection and oversight of the erosion and sediment
control permit, the applicant shall, prior to receiving a notice of permit
approval or conditional notice of permit approval, pay such erosion and
sediment control permit approval fees as required by “An Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Permits for the Town of Plainfield” including any
amendments to or replacements of such ordinance.   



   (G)   Per Section 2.3 of the town subdivision control ordinance
(Ord. 22-97, as codified in Chapter 153 of this code), the applicant will be
required to file with the town a faithful performance or maintenance bond,
letter of credit or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient
to cover all costs of improvements, including, but not limited to, erosion
control measures, grading, landscaping and maintenance of improvements, for
such period as specified by the town and engineering and inspection costs to
cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
The applicant shall file the required performance or maintenance bond, letter
of credit or other improvement security with the town prior to receiving a
notice of permit approval or conditional notice of permit approval.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 56.99



§ 56.19  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The permittee shall maintain a copy of the approved Erosion
and Sediment Control Plan and erosion and sediment control permit on site.



   (B)   Per the requirements of 327 I.A.C. 15-5-7 and as part of the
approved erosion and sediment control permit, the permittee shall implement a
self-monitoring program that, at a minimum, shall include the following:



      (1)   A written self-evaluation performed by a trained
individual of the project site by the end of the next business day following
each measurable storm event, and at a minimum of one time per week;



      (2)   The self-evaluation must address the maintenance of
existing storm water quality measures to ensure that they are functioning
properly, and identify additional measures necessary to remain in compliance
with all applicable statutes and rules;



      (3)   Written self-evaluation reports must include the
following:



         (a)   The name of the individual performing the
evaluation;



         (b)   The date of the evaluation;



         (c)   Problems identified at the project site; and



         (d)   Details of corrective actions recommended and
completed.



      (4)   All self-evaluation reports for the project site must be
made available to the MS4 operator within 48 hours of a request.



   (C)   Every active site having an erosion and sediment control
permit will be inspected by the MS4 operator for compliance with the approved
Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



   (D)   The MS4 operator’s designated inspectors shall notify the
on-site personnel or the developer in writing when violations are being
observed, describing items to address and actions to be taken.



   (E)   It shall be a condition of every erosion and sediment control
permit that the MS4 operator has the right to enter the construction project
site periodically to inspect for compliance with the Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan and this subchapter.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)



§ 56.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations. In the event that any person holding a erosion and
sediment control permit pursuant to this subchapter violates the terms of the
permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to prosperity or improvements in the
neighborhood, the MS4 operator may issue a:



      (1)   Written warning indicating actions deemed contrary to
the erosion and sediment control permit which are required to be corrected
and brought into compliance within 48 hours; or



      (2)   Stop-work order; revocation of erosion and sediment
control permit in writing to any persons engaged in the doing or causing of
such work to be done, and all persons shall forthwith stop such work until
authorized by the MS4 operator to proceed with the work.



   (B)   Appeals. Upon receipt of a written violation resulting in
penalties against an erosion and sediment control permit, the developer may,
within 30 days of receipt of such violation, file a written appeal to the
Town Council for review of the penalties.



      (1)   The Town Council shall complete its review within 60
days of receipt of said request for appeal. The Town Council’s
determination on the appeal shall be in writing and set forth in detail the
reason for its decision.



      (2)   In evaluating the appeal, the Town Council shall be
bound by the standards and review criteria contained or referenced herein.



      (3)   All determinations of the Town Council arising out of
this section shall be final.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 56.99



§ 56.21  TERMINATION.



   (A)   (1)   Upon completion of all construction activities
associated with the erosion and sediment control permit, the applicant shall
submit a notice of termination (NOT) letter to the MS4 operator.



      (2)   Termination of permit will be issued by the MS4 operator
only if the following conditions are met:



         (a)   All land disturbing activities, including
construction on all building lots, have been completed and the entire site
has been stabilized; and



         (b)   All public and common improvements, including
infrastructure, have been completed and permanently stabilized and have been
transferred to the appropriate local entity.



   (B)   The applicant may submit an NOT letter to obtain early release
from compliance with this rule if the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The remaining, undeveloped acreage does not exceed five
acres, with contiguous areas not to exceed one acre;



      (2)   A map of the project site, clearly identifying all
remaining undeveloped lots, is attached to the NOT letter. The map must be
accompanied by a list of names and addresses of individual lot owners or
individual lot operators of all undeveloped lots;



      (3)   The remaining acreage does not pose a significant threat
to the integrity of the infrastructure, adjacent properties or water quality;
and



      (4)   All permanent storm water quality measures have been
implemented and are operational.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005)



STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT



§ 56.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The
word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is
permissive. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meanings
given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster’s Dictionary.



   APPROVED PLANS. Plans approved by the town according to a permits and
plan review which will govern all improvements made within the town that
require a storm water system or changes or alterations to the existing storm
water system.



   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel of land altered from its natural
state by the construction, creation or addition of impervious area, except
public rights-of-way.



   EDU (EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT). Each residential property is equal to
one EDU. For nonresidential properties, an EDU is equal to 3,000 square feet
of impervious area.



   IMPERVIOUS AREA. Any part of any developed property that has been
modified by the action of persons to reduce the land’s natural ability to
absorb and hold rainfall. This includes any hard surface area which either
prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as it entered
under natural conditions pre-existent to development. By way of example,
common IMPERVIOUS AREAS include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways,
patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving,
gravel roads, or any cleared, graded, paved, graveled or compacted surface or
packed earthen materials, or areas covered with structures of other surfaces
which similarly impede the natural infiltration of surface water into the
soil mantle.



   LOT. The smallest separately segregated parcel, unit or plot of land
having an identified owner, boundaries, and surface area which is documented
for property tax purposes by the County Assessor.



   NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. All properties not encompassed within the
definition of residential property, including but not limited to: commercial,
industrial, retail, multi-family, governmental, institutional, schools and
churches.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution
or other entity.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any lot or parcel existing in the sewage works
system service area on which resides either a single-family dwelling unit or
an individually metered single-family dwelling unit within a duplex or other
multi-family property.



   SERVICE METER (AKA METER). A water meter or sewage meter intended to
measure flow to/from the town’s utility services.



   SEWAGE WORKS SERVICE AREA. All property within the corporate boundary
of the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana and any property outside
the corporate boundary receiving sewer service from the town.



   STORM WATER. The chemical compound of hydrogen and oxygen which is
produced from atmospheric clouds as rain, snow, sleet and hail.



   STORM WATER AVAILABILITY FEES. The charge to a user for a new or
additional connection to the town’s storm water system, charged in return
for the town making available to such user the town’s storm water system
consisting of all facilities, operations and maintenance activities.



   STORM WATER SYSTEM. All constructed facilities, including structures
and natural watercourses under the ownership, and/or control of the town,
used for collecting and conducting storm water to, through and from drainage
areas to the point of final outlet, including, but not limited to, any and
all of the following: inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, creeks,
channels, catch basins, ditches, streams, streets, culverts, retention or
detention basins and pumping stations; and excluding therefrom, any part of
the system of drains and watercourses under the jurisdiction of the County
Drainage Board or waters of the state.



   STORM WATER DEPARTMENT USER FEE. A charge imposed on users of the
town’s storm water system.



   SURFACE WATER. Water occurring on the surface of the land, from natural
causes such as rainfall, whether falling on the land in question or flowing
onto the land in question.



   TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, Indiana acting by and through the Town
Council.



   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana, or
any duly authorized officials acting on its behalf.



   UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. That which has not been altered from its natural
state by the addition of any improvements such as a building, structure or
impervious surface, change of grade or landscaping. For new construction, a
property shall be considered developed pursuant to this subchapter:



      (1)   Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon
completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is
issued; or



      (2)   Where construction is at least 50% complete and
construction is halted for a period of three months.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.36  STORM WATER DEPARTMENT USER FEE.



   A Storm Water Department user fee shall be imposed on all property
within the sewage works system service area, including those classified as
non-profit or tax-exempt, for services and facilities provided by the Storm
Water Department. This user fee is deemed reasonable and is necessary to pay
for the repair, replacement, planning, improvement, operation, regulation and
maintenance of the existing and future storm water system for the town.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.37  STORM WATER DEPARTMENT USER FEE STRUCTURE.



   (A)   (1)   For the purposes stated herein, there is hereby
assessed a Storm Water Department user fee to each Storm Water Department
user within the sewage works system service area of the town, in an amount as
determined below.



      (2)   For purposes of imposing the Storm Water Department user
fee, all lots and parcels within the sewage works system service area are
classified as either:



         (a)   Residential;



         (b)   Nonresidential; or



         (c)   Undeveloped.



   (B)   Residential properties: monthly fees for residential
properties located within the sewage works system service area are hereby
established as one EDU multiplied by the base rate.



   (C)   Nonresidential properties: monthly fees for nonresidential
properties located within the sewage works system service area are hereby
established as the number of EDU each contains multiplied by the base rate.
The number of EDU is determined by dividing the total amount of impervious
area by 3,000 square feet, rounding the resulting calculated EDU to the next
whole number, with two being the lowest whole number for such purpose.



   (D)   Undeveloped properties: monthly fees for undeveloped
properties located within the corporate boundary of the town are hereby
established as $0.10 per acre, rounding to the next whole ten acre increment,
with a minimum charge being equal to the herein established base rate.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.38  FEE ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Storm Water Department user fee shall be based on the
relative contribution of surface and storm water runoff from a given parcel
to the town’s storm water system. This Storm Water Department user fee rate
is designed to recover and be able to pay the cost of rendering storm water
service to the users of the storm water system, and shall be the basis for
assessment of the town’s Storm Water Department user fee. This rate is
established so as to maintain adequate fund reserves to provide for
reasonably expected variations in the cost of providing services, as well as
variation in the demand for services. This rate shall be evaluated annually
as to its sufficiency to satisfy the needs of the Storm Water Department.



   (B)   The following methods may be used to determine the
nonresidential factors:



      (1)   Computation of the parcel size or impervious area using
on-site measurements of the apparent outside boundaries of the parcel or
impervious area in or on such developed parcel, respectively, made by the
town or on its behalf;



      (2)   Computation of the parcel size or impervious area using
the dimensions of the parcel or impervious area in or on the parcels which
are set forth and contained in the records of the office of the County
Assessor;



      (3)   Estimation, calculation and computation of the parcel
size or impervious area using aerial photography or photogrammertry, or using
the information and data from on-site measurements of like or similar
property or features or as contained in the records of the town or county; or



      (4)   Computation of parcel size or impervious area using data
provided by the owner, tenant or developer.



   (C)   The authorized official may require additional information as
necessary to make the determination.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.39  SCHEDULE OF RATES.



   The Storm water Department user fee base rate shall be implemented in
two phases.



   (A)   Phase One. The Phase One base rate per month shall be $2 and
shall become effective on the utility bills distributed in September, 2006.



   (B)   Phase Two. The Phase Two base rate per month shall be $4 and
shall become effective on the utility bills distributed in January, 2007.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.40  AVAILABILITY FEES.



   (A)   No connection to the town’s sewage works system shall be
allowed until a permit is obtained and payment of storm water availability
fees has been made to the town.



   (B)   Storm water availability fees shall be:



 

Residential Users
 
Nonresidential Users



$100/EDU

 

$100/EDU




 



   (C)   Payment of storm water availability fees shall be made at the
following time:



      (1)   For new construction, the storm water availability fee
shall be paid in full before issuance of a building permit; and



      (2)   For all new or additional users not qualifying as “new
construction”, the storm water availability fee shall be paid in full
before the new or additional connection is made to the town’s sewage system.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 56.99



§ 56.41  BILLING AND PAYMENTS.



   Such rates and charges shall be prepared, billed and collected by the
town in the manner provided by law and ordinance.



   (A)   The rates and charges for all users shall be prepared and
billed monthly.



   (B)   The rates and charges may be billed to the tenant or tenants
occupying the properties served, unless otherwise requested in writing by the
owner, but such billing shall in no way relieve the owner from the liability
in the event payment is not made as herein required. The owners of properties
served, which are occupied by a tenant or tenants, shall have the right to
examine the collection records of the town for the purpose of determining
whether bills have been paid by such tenant or tenants, provided that such
examination shall be made at the office at which said records are kept and
during the hours that such office is open for business.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.42  ADJUSTMENT OF FEES.



   That the rules and regulations promulgated by the town, after being
approved by the Town Council, shall among other things, provide for an appeal
procedure whereby a user shall have the right to appeal a decision of the
Administrator of the sewage works system and the user fee structure to the
Town Council and that any decision concerning the sewage works system or user
fee structure of the Town Council may be appealed to the circuit court of the
county under the appeal procedures provided for in the Indiana Administrative
Orders and Procedures Act, being I.C. 4-21.5.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.43  STORM WATER REVENUE FUND.



   (A)   All revenues earned and fees collected for storm water
service, including but not limited to, department user fees, availability
fees, penalties assessed by this subchapter or subsequent amendments, or
interest earnings on any unused funds shall be deposited in an account
entitled “Town of Plainfield Storm Water Revenue Fund” and shall be
subject to the provisions of I.C. 36-9-23, as amended. Funds from this
account shall not revert to any other town utility or the General Fund of the
town and may not be transferred for any other purpose. To the extent that
there are outstanding revenue bonds of the town issued pursuant to the
provisions of I.C. 36-9-23, as amended, revenues deposited in the Storm Water
Revenue Fund shall be subject to the covenants contained in the ordinance or
ordinances authorizing such outstanding bonds. Disbursements from the Storm
Water Revenue Fund shall be authorized by the Town Clerk-Treasurer and, as
required by law, the Town Council.



   (B)   Such disbursements shall be used exclusively for the
operation, maintenance and improvement of the town’s Storm Water
Department, which includes, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Storm water management services, such as studies,
design, permit review, plan preparation and development review;



      (2)   Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the
storm water collection, storage, conveyance and/or treatment infrastructure;



      (3)   Project costs related to constructing major or minor
structural improvements to the town’s storm water system;



      (4)   Administrative costs associated with the management of
the Storm Water Department;



      (5)   Debt service financing of the town’s storm
water-related capital improvements;



      (6)   Funding of studies such as water quantity and quality
monitoring, aerial photography and geotechnical work associated with the
planning of the storm water-related infrastructure; and



      (7)   Implementation of long range storm water plans developed
and approved by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management for
elimination of combined sewer overflows.



(Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



§ 56.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain
any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any terms of §§ 56.15 through 56.21. Any person violating
any of the provisions of §§ 56.15 through 56.21 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions
of §§ 56.15 through 56.21 is committed, continued or permitted, shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such
person, partnership or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $2,500 for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by
this division (B), any person, partnership or corporation convicted of
violating any of the provision of §§ 56.15 through 56.21 shall be required
to bear the expense of such restoration.



   (C)   As provided by statute, all rates and charges not paid when
due are hereby declared to be delinquent and a penalty of 10% of the amount
of the rates or charges shall thereupon attach thereto. The time at which
such rates or charges shall be paid is now fixed at 15 days after the date of
mailing of the bill.



(Ord. 36-2005, passed 7-11-2005; Ord. 20-2006, passed 7-24-2006)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   SPEED LIMITS



      73.   OVERSIZE VEHICLE REGULATIONS



      74.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      76.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Traffic Plan




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Parking and traffic regulations



   70.03   Contracts with shopping center



   70.04   Traffic plans



   70.05   Enforcement proceedings



   70.06   Enforcement of one-way traffic regulations



   70.07   Enforcement of no passing regulations



   70.08   Enforcement of yield sign regulations




Traffic Control Regulations




   70.20   Purpose



   70.21   Definitions



   70.22   Obedience to police



   70.23   Scene of fire



   70.24   Automatic traffic signals



   70.25   Flashing signal indications



   70.26   Other signs and signals



   70.27   Enforcement




Compression Brakes




   70.40   Compression brakes



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Oversize vehicle regulations, see Ch. 73



   Speed limits, see Ch. 72



   Traffic schedules, see Ch. 75



TRAFFIC PLAN



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS PARKING AREA. Any private property adjacent to a business
establishment (or separated from a business establishment only by a street,
highway, a private road or driveway) which is intended by the owner or lessee
of such property to be used for the parking of motor vehicles or motorcycles
while the operator thereof or passengers therein conduct or attempt to
conduct bona fide business transactions in such business establishment.



   CROSSWALK. That portion of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the
edges of the traversable roadway; also, any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface.



   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, except a motorcycle or motorized bicycle,
which is self-propelled.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a farm tractor or motorized bicycle.



   MOTORIZED BICYCLE. A bicycle with operable peddles which may be
propelled by human power or by an internal combustion engine or a battery
powered motor, or by both, and when powered by an internal combustion engine
having a rating of not more than one and five tenths brake horsepower and a
cylinder capacity not exceeding 50 cubic centimeters, an automatic
transmission and a maximum design speed of no more than 25 mph on a flat
surface.



   OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or in the event
a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated
in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner of the vehicle for the purpose of this title.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.



   PERSONS. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having expressed or implied
permission from the owner but not by other persons.



   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.



   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or
is carried by another vehicle.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of retail outlets in the town, planned and
developed as a unit, or managed as a unit, and containing:



      (1)   A total floor area designated for retail occupancy of
25,000 square feet or more;



      (2)   At least three tenants; and



      (3)   On-site parking.



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, streetcars, vehicles and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any highway (or other traveled surface) for
purposes of travel.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that very little of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-1)  (Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Local authorities to adopt local police regulations regarding traffic,
see I.C. 9-4-1-13



   State law definitions regarding traffic and parking regulations, see
I.C. 9-4-1-2



   Uniform Act Regulation Traffic on Highways, see I.C. 9-4-1-1 through
I.C. 9-4-1-139



§ 70.02  PARKING AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   (A)   A person commits a violation of this chapter who:



      (1)   Parks a motor vehicle, a motorcycle or a motorized
bicycle in a manner other than in substantial compliance with the general
parking scheme as indicated by lines or other markings on the surface of the
parking area, including, but not limited to, parking in a “no parking
zone” or other area clearly not intended for parking, parking in a
crosswalk, parking on a sidewalk, or parking in such a manner as to occupy
all or parts of substantially more than one parking space;



      (2)   Parks a motor vehicle, a motorcycle, a motorized
bicycle, a trailer or semitrailer in or otherwise unreasonably interferes
with the availability of use of or obstructs any portion of a private road,
business parking area, designated handicapped parking area or space or
driveway designated as a fire lane;



      (3)   Operates a motor vehicle, a motorcycle, a motorized
bicycle or tractor on a private road or driveway, a public parking lot or a
business parking area for a purpose other than going to and from a parking
place, looking for a parking place when all or nearly all parking spaces are
occupied, or entering or exiting such public parking lot or business parking
area without a bona fide intent to conduct business with the public facility
which is served by such public parking lot or with the merchant whose
business establishment is served by such private road or driveway or business
parking area;



      (4)   Parks a motor vehicle, a motorcycle, a motorized
bicycle, a tractor, a trailer or a semitrailer in a business parking area for
a purpose other than conducting business or making a bona fide attempt to
conduct business with a merchant whose business establishment is served by
such business parking area;



      (5)   Operates a motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorized
bicycle on a private road or driveway or business parking area in such a
manner as to unduly restrict or impede the movement of pedestrians or other
traffic;



      (6)   Litters or otherwise improperly disposes of trash or
refuse while on a street, highway, private road, driveway, public parking lot
or business parking area; or



      (7)   With the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, congregates with other
persons (including persons who congregate in motor vehicles) in a public
place or on a private road or driveway of in a business parking area and
refuses to comply with a lawful order of the police to disperse.



   (B)   This chapter may be enforced by any police officer or the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-2)  (Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 70.03  CONTRACTS WITH SHOPPING CENTER.



   The town is authorized to contract with the owner or lessee of a
shopping center to empower the town to regulate by ordinance the parking of
vehicles and the traffic at the shopping center. In addition to any other
provisions contained in any contract with any shopping center, the parking
and traffic regulations established by this chapter are hereby incorporated
by this reference into each and every such contract with any shopping center
owner or lessee. The parking and traffic regulations established by this
chapter or pursuant to any contract entered into with any shopping center
owner or lessee pursuant to this chapter may be enforced by any police
officer of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-3)  (Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988)



Statutory reference:



   Contracts with the owner or lessee of shopping centers or private
business property, and the town, see I.C. 9-4-14-1



§ 70.04  TRAFFIC PLANS.



   (A)   There shall be appointed by the Town Council an agent to
represent the town who shall be responsible for working with the owner or
lessee of any shopping center who enters into a contract with the town to
design the appropriate traffic controls to regulate both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, its movement and parking. These traffic controls are to
constitute a traffic plan for the area of the shopping center and any public
areas abutting the shopping center.



   (B)   In addition to the parking and traffic regulations established
by this chapter which shall be included in the traffic plan, said traffic
plan may include, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The erection of stop signs, flashing signals or yield
signs at specified locations in parking area and the adoption of appropriate
regulations, for the designation of any intersection in the parking area as a
stop intersection or as a yield intersection and the ordering of like signs
or signals of one or more entrances to that intersection;



      (2)   The prohibition or regulation of the turning of vehicles
or specified types of vehicles at intersections or other designated locations
in the parking areas;



      (3)   The regulation of a crossing of any roadway or
designated roadway in the parking area by pedestrians;



      (4)   The designation of any separate roadway or designated
separate roadway in the parking area for one-way traffic;



      (5)   The establishment and regulation of loading zones;



      (6)   The prohibition, regulation, restriction or limitation
of the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified areas of the
parking area;



      (7)   The designation of safety zones in the parking area and
fire lanes;



      (8)   The removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned
in the parking area during snow storms, floods, fire or other public
emergencies, or found unattended in the parking area where they constitute an
obstruction to traffic, or where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited,
and for the payment of reasonable charges for such a removal and storage by
the owner or operator of such vehicle;



      (9)   The prohibition, regulation, restriction or limitation
of the stopping, standing or congregation or pedestrians or individuals in
specified areas of the shopping center;



      (10)   The removal and storage of vehicles parked or abandoned
in the parking area during certain posted hours that the parking area is
closed or in violation of any other rules or regulations adopted as a part of
the “traffic plan”, and for the payment of reasonable charges for such
removal and storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle; and



      (11)   Such additional reasonable rules and regulations with
respect to traffic, parking in a parking area and pedestrians as local
conditions may require for the safety and convenience of the public or of the
users of the parking area and shopping center.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-4)  (Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988)



§ 70.05  ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   Proceedings to enforce this title shall be subject to and in compliance
with the applicable portions of I.C. 34-4-32-1 through I.C. 34-4-32-5, and
any and all amendments thereto.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-6)  (Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988)



§ 70.06  ENFORCEMENT OF ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with the one-way traffic signs directing the flow of traffic on public
streets within the town for the protection of public health, safety and
welfare.



   (B)   Authority. For any street or alley designated as a one-way
street or alley within the town, the town place and maintain or cause to be
placed and maintained, as it deems essential to the traffic conditions
thereon, signs giving notice of such portions that shall be used for one-way
traffic.  Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.



   (C)   Enforcement.



      (1)   A person who operates a motor vehicle must obey the
one-way traffic signs directing the flow of traffic on public streets within
the town.



      (2)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a one-way traffic sign
within the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 42-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  ENFORCEMENT OF NO PASSING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to enforce compliance
with the no passing regulations directing the flow of traffic on public
streets within the town for the protection of public health, safety and
welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   A driver shall not attempt to pass another vehicle if:



         (a)   A yellow solid line is marked on the driver’s
side of the centerline of the road;



         (b)   A sign indicating “No Passing Zone” is posted
on the left-hand side of the road;



         (c)   A sign indicating “Do Not Pass” is posted on
the right-hand side of the road;



         (d)   The driver is approaching a curve, crest of a hill
or grade;



         (e)   The driver is within 100 feet of an intersection
or railroad crossing; or



         (f)   The driver is within 100 feet of a bridge, viaduct
or tunnel.



      (2)   A driver shall obey this section unless traffic is
controlled by a police officer, in which event every driver shall comply with
the direction of the police officer.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a yield sign within the
corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 44-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  ENFORCEMENT OF YIELD SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with the yield signs directing the flow of traffic on public streets within
the town for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   A  driver approaching a yield sign, in obedience to
such sign, shall slow down to a reasonable speed and be prepared to come to a
complete stop if a vehicle or pedestrian with the right-of-way is approaching
from another direction or is in the intersection so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard.



      (2)   A driver shall obey a yield sign unless traffic at such
intersection is controlled by a police officer, in which event every driver
shall comply with the direction of the police officer.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a yield sign within the
corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 40-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS



§ 70.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the establishment and
operation of automatic traffic signals and other traffic regulations to
regulate the flow of traffic within the town for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens and those persons traveling within
the town.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 70.21  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by the feet acting upon pedals, having
a seat, two or more wheels, and propelled by human power.



   CROSSWALK. That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation
of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.



   CURB. The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked
by curbing construction, or not so marked.



   DECELERATION LANE. A speed change lane, including tapered areas, for
the purpose of enabling a vehicle that is to make an exist turn from a
roadway to slow to the speed that is safe on the ramp ahead after it has left
the mainstream of faster moving traffic.



   DRIVER. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire Department,
ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer employee
in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporations on an emergency call.



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the property
lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not such
streets cross.



   LANED ROADWAY. A street, the roadway of which is divided into two or
more marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.



   STOP. When required, complete cessation of movement.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way
or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden animals, vehicles and other conveyances
whether single or together while using any street or highway for the purpose
of travel.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moving by human
power or used exclusively upon stationery rails or tracks.



   YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY. When required by an official sign, means the act of
granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or
left provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)



§ 70.22  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.



   Members of the Police Department, and special officers assigned traffic
duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter, or in emergencies as public safety or
convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or
refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a law
enforcement officer or special officer.  Except in case of emergency, it
shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt
to direct traffic.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.23  SCENE OF FIRE.



   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated
by him or her, may exercise the powers and authority of a law enforcement
officer in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire
Department has responded to an emergency call for so long as Fire Department
equipment is on the scene, in the absence of, or in assisting the police.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.24  AUTOMATIC TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any automatic traffic signal placed in service by authority
of the Town Council, except on direction of a police officer.



   (A)   “Green” indications shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a circular green may
proceed straight through or turn right or left except as such movement is
modified by lane use signs, turn prohibition signs, land markings or roadway
design.  But, vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles, and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk, at the time such signal
indication is exhibited.



      (2)   Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a green arrow, shown
alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other
movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time.  Such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within
an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal,
pedestrians facing any green indication, except when the sole green
indication is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked
or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   “Steady yellow” indications shall have the following
meanings.



      (1)   Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a steady circular
yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green
movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited
immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.  The driver must be through the intersection or have completed
a turn and be through the intersection to the right or left before the yellow
signal ends and the red signal begins.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal, are thereby
advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red
indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.



   (C)   “Steady red” indications shall have the following meanings.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain stopped until an indication to
proceed is shown except as provided in division (C)(3) below.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall
not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and,
unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another
signal, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain stopped until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown except as
provided in division (C)(3) below.



      (3)   Except when the sign is in place prohibiting a turn,
vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to turn right after stopping as required by divisions (C)(1) and
(C)(2) above.  Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.



      (4)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian’s signal,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall not
enter the roadway.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.25  FLASHING SIGNAL INDICATIONS.



   Flashing signal indications shall have the following meanings.



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal): when a red lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or if none, at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal): when a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution.  (Ord.
43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.26  OTHER SIGNS AND SIGNALS.



   Each driver or operator of any type of a vehicle, whether motorized or
not, and where it applies, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, mopeds
and bicycle operators shall obey all signs and signals directing traffic,
giving information about special speed zones, hazardous conditions, roadwork
and any other special directions.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.27  ENFORCEMENT.



   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department may issue a
citation for a failure to comply with an automatic traffic control signal or
any other regulation set forth in this subchapter that occurs within the
corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 43-2005, passed 7-25-2005)



COMPRESSION BRAKES



§ 70.40  COMPRESSION BRAKES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or
operate or cause to be used or operated within the town any compression
release or other engine braking device designed to aid in braking or
deceleration of any vehicle.



   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to public safety
vehicles.



(Ord. 03-2012, passed - -2012)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person or persons who violate the parking and traffic
regulations established by § 70.02 of this chapter or as part of the traffic
plan of any shopping center that has entered into an agreement with the town
is guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be fined in an amount of
not less than $10 and not more than $100 for each violation.



   (C)   Any person who, within a 12-month period, accumulates
judgments or the number and type specified in the following divisions (C)(1),
(C)(2) and (C)(3) below shall be fined in accordance with division (C)(5)
below.



      (1)   This division (C) applies whenever a person accumulates
two or more judgments, singularly or in combination, not arising out of the
same incident, for violations of § 70.02(A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5).



      (2)   This division (C) applies whenever a person accumulates
three or more judgments, singularly or in combination, not arising out of the
same incident, for violations of § 70.02(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(6) or (A)(7).



      (3)   This division (C) applies whenever a person accumulates
three or more judgments, singularly or in combination, not arising out of the
same incident, for violations of § 70.02(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5), (A)(6) or (A)(7).



      (4)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         JUDGMENT. A judgment against the defendant for violation of
this chapter.



         VIOLATION. A violation of this chapter.



      (5) Any person or persons who have a judgment entered against
them under divisions (C)(1), (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section shall be fined
in an amount of not less that $30 and not more than $300.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-5)



   (D)   Any person who violates § 70.06 shall be fined not less than
$25 for each offense or more than $2,500 for a single offense.



   (E)   Any person who violates § 70.07 shall be fined not less than
$25 for each offense or more than $2,500 for a single offense.



   (F)   Any person who violates § 70.08 shall be fined not less than
$25 for each offense or more than $2,500 for a single offense.



   (G)   Any person who violates §§ 70.20 through 70.27 shall be
fined not less than $25 and no more than $100 for each offense.



   (H)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating § 70.40 shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for the first offense, and shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each subsequent offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988; Ord. 44-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 40-2005,
passed 6-27-2005; Ord. 42-2005, passed 6-27-2005; Ord. 43-2005, passed
7-25-2005; Ord. 03-2012, passed - -2012)



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Seventy-two hour parking limits



   71.02   Stopping, standing and parking regulations



   71.03   Enforcement of stop sign regulations



   71.04   Enforcement of parking sign regulations



   71.05   Enforcement of emergency vehicle parking regulations



   71.06   Enforcement of handicap parking regulations



   71.07   Regulation of parallel parking and motorcycle parking



   71.08   Regulation of snow emergency conditions and routes



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  SEVENTY-TWO HOUR PARKING LIMITS.



   (A)   Except where parking is prohibited or otherwise regulated by
an ordinance of the town, no vehicle shall be parked or permitted to remain
on any street or alley within the corporate limits of the town for a period
longer than 72 consecutive hours.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle which has been
parked or permitted to remain upon any street or alley in violation of the
provisions of this section, such officer is authorized to provide for the
removal and storage of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place
designated by the Police Department of the town.



   (C)   The garage or other place of storage shall before releasing
said vehicle require evidence of payment of said fine and shall collect the
towing and storage charges.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-17)  (Ord. passed 11-12-1956)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.02  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING REGULATIONS.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or the directions of a police officer of
traffic control device in any of the following places:



   (A)   Upon a road within the town which results in obstructing
traffic;



   (B)   On a sidewalk;



   (C)   In front of a public or private driveway;



   (D)   Within an intersection;



   (E)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (F)   On a crosswalk;



   (G)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



   (H)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance when properly posted;



   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street; and



   (J)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-18)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  ENFORCEMENT OF STOP SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with the stop signs directing the flow of traffic on public streets within
the town for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Prior to cautiously entering into the intersection,
unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer, in
which event every driver shall comply with the direction of the police
officer, whenever a stop sign is erected at or near an intersection, every
driver of a vehicle shall come to a complete stop:



         (a)   Parallel to the stop sign;



         (b)   Before a marked stop line; or



         (c)   Before a marked crosswalk.



      (2)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a stop sign within the
corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 41-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  ENFORCEMENT OF PARKING SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with posted signs limiting or restricting the parking of vehicles on public
streets within the town for the protection of public health, safety and
welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Every driver of a vehicle shall abide by signs posted on
public streets that limit or prohibit the parking of vehicles within the town.



      (2)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a posted parking sign on
public streets within the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 13-2005, passed 4-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  ENFORCEMENT OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with areas designated for use by emergency vehicles on public streets within
the town for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Every driver of a vehicle shall abide by:



         (a)   Posted signs; and



         (b)   Painted areas to designate that a space or curb is
restricted for exclusive use by emergency vehicles within the town.



      (2)   Emergency vehicles shall include all vehicles of the
fire and police forces, ambulances, municipal departments and governmental
units.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a posted sign designating
an area reserved for exclusive use by an emergency vehicle within the
corporate boundaries of the town.



      (4)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a painted space or curb
designating an area reserved for exclusive use by emergency vehicles within
the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 14-2005, passed 4-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.06  ENFORCEMENT OF HANDICAP PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with areas designated for use as handicap parking within the town for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Every driver of a vehicle shall abide by:



         (a)   Posted signs; and



         (b)   Painted areas  to designate that a space or area
is restricted for exclusive as handicap parking within the town.



      (2)   No vehicle shall be parked in an area designated for
handicap parking use unless:



         (a)   The vehicle has a current handicap parking permit
visibly displayed from the rear-view mirror; or



         (b)   The vehicle has a current official vehicle license
plate displayed and designated for handicap parking use.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a space or area designated
for exclusive use as handicap parking within the corporate boundaries of the
town.



(Ord. 15-2005, passed 4-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  REGULATION OF PARALLEL PARKING AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate parallel
parking and motorcycle parking on public streets within the town for the
protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   For vehicles stopped or parked upon a roadway having an
adjacent curb:



         (a)   The right-side wheels of the vehicle (located on
the passenger side of the vehicle) shall be no more than 12 inches from the
adjacent right-hand curb; and



         (b)   Motorcycles shall be stopped or parked with the
rear wheel to the curb and the front tire facing the flow of traffic.



      (2)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with parallel parking
regulations within the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 17-2005, passed 4-11-2005)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  REGULATION OF SNOW EMERGENCY CONDITIONS AND ROUTES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ROADWAY.  That portion of a street or highway, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.



      SNOW EMERGENCY.  A condition to be declared to be such by the
Superintendent of Public Works upon consultation with the President of the
Town Council and Town Metropolitan Police Department.



      SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE.  Those public streets or roadways marked
as such in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Declaration of parking prohibition on snow emergency routes.



      (1)   Whenever the Superintendent of Public Works, upon
consultation with the President of the Town Council and Town Metropolitan
Police Department, finds, on the bases of falling snow, sleet or freezing
rain or on the basis of a forecast by the U. S. Weather Bureau or other
weather service of snow, sleet or freezing rain, that weather conditions will
make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on
designated town streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and
other purposes, the Superintendent of Public Works shall put into effect a
parking prohibition on parts of, or all snow emergency routes as necessary by
declaring it in a manner prescribed by this section.



      (2)   Once in effect, a prohibition under this section shall
remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Superintendent of
Public Works, upon consultation with the President of the Town Council and
Town Metropolitan Police Department, in accordance with the provisions of
this section; however, any street area which has become substantially clear
of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be
automatically excluded therefrom. While the prohibition is in effect, no
person shall park or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any portion of a
snow emergency route to which it applies. However, nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is
forbidden by any other provision of law.



      (3)   Any provision of this section which becomes effective by
declaration of the Superintendent of Public Works or upon occurrence of
certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take
precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect.
However, it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to
traffic accidents, emergency travel, authorized emergency vehicles or
emergency traffic directions by a police officer.



   (C)   Announcement of declaration.  The Superintendent of Public
Works, upon consultation with the President of the Town Council and Town
Metropolitan Police Department, shall cause each declaration made by him or
her pursuant to this section to be publicly announced by means of broadcasts
with a normal operating range covering the town, and he or she may cause the
declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation when
feasible. Each announcement shall describe the action taken by the
Superintendent of Public Works, including the time it became or will become
effective, and shall specify the streets or areas affected. A parking
prohibition declared by the Superintendent of Public Works shall go into
effect when designated. The Superintendent of Public Works shall make or
cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration is
announced to the public in accordance with this section.



   (D)   Termination of parking prohibition.  Whenever the
Superintendent of Public Works finds upon consultation with the President of
the Town Council and Town Metropolitan Police Department that some or all of
the conditions which give rise to a parking prohibition in effect pursuant to
the provisions of this section no longer exist, he or she may declare the
prohibition terminated, in whole or in part, in a manner prescribed by this
section, effective immediately upon announcement or such other time
thereafter.



   (E)   Signs to mark snow emergency routes.  On each street
designated by this section as a snow emergency route, the Superintendent of
Public Works shall cause to be posted appropriate special signs. These signs
shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be plainly readable
to persons traveling on the street or highway.



   (F)   Stalled vehicle on snow emergency route.  Whenever a vehicle
becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this section,
on any part of a snow emergency route on which there is a covering of snow,
sleet, or ice, or on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the
person operating the vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle
towed or pushed off the roadway of the snow emergency route, either into the
first cross street which is not a snow emergency route, or onto the public
space of a nearby driveway. No person shall abandon or leave his or her
vehicle in the roadway of a snow emergency route (regardless of whether he or
she indicates by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled),
except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time
necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline
station, or other place of assistance and return without delay.



   (G)   Removal and impoundment of vehicles.



      (1)   Members of the Town Metropolitan Police Department are
hereby authorized to remove or have removed a vehicle from a street to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, including another place on a street,
or to a garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or otherwise
maintained by the town, under the following circumstances or conditions:



         (a)   The vehicle is parked on a part of a snow
emergency route on which a parking prohibition is in effect;



         (b)   The vehicle is stalled on a part of a snow
emergency route on which there is a covering of snow, sleet, or ice or on
which there is a parking prohibition in effect and the person who was
operating the vehicle does not appear to be removing it in accordance with
the provisions of division (F) of this section; or



         (c)   The vehicle is parked in violation of any parking
ordinance or provision of law and is interfering or about to interfere with
snow removal operations.



      (2)   Whenever a police officer removes or has removed a
vehicle from a street as authorized in this section, and the officer knows or
is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name
and address of the owner thereof, the police officer shall immediately give
or cause to be given notice in writing to the owner of the fact of the
removal, the reasons therefore, and the place to which the vehicle has been
removed. In the event the vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the
notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage.



      (3)   Whenever a police officer removes or has removed a
vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give
the notice to the owner as provided in subsection (2) above, and in the event
the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period three days, then the
officer shall immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the
removal by mail to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles whose duly it is to register
motor vehicles, and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of
any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall
include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from
which it was removed, the reasons for the removal, and the name of the garage
or place where the vehicle is stored.



      (4)   It shall be the duty of the Town Metropolitan Police
Department to keep a record of each vehicle removed in accordance with this
section. The record shall include a description of the vehicle, its license
number, the date and time of its removal, the place from where it was
removed, its location after removal, the name and address of its owner and
last operator, if known, its final disposition, and the parking violation
involved.



      (5)   This section shall be supplemental to any other
provisions of law granting members of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
authority to remove vehicles.



   (H)   Recovery of impounded vehicles.



      (1)   No person shall recover any vehicle removed in
accordance with division (G) except as provided in this subsection (1).
Before the owner or person in charge of the vehicle shall be allowed to
recover it from the place where it has been placed or impounded, he or she
shall present to a member of the Town Metropolitan Police Department evidence
of his or her identity and right to possession of the vehicle; sign a receipt
for its return; and pay the reasonable towing and storage charges.



      (2)   If the vehicle is not recovered within 15 days,
abandoned vehicle regulations shall apply.



   (I)   Citation on vehicles in violation.  Whenever any motor
vehicle without a driver is found parked or left in violation of any
provision of this section and is not removed and impounded as provided for in
this section, the police officer finding the vehicle shall take its
registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which
may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix a traffic summons.



   (J)   Evidence that vehicle was in violation.  In any prosecution
with regard to a vehicle parked or left in a place or in a condition in
violation of any provision of this section, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a provision of
this section, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint
was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima
facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or left the
vehicle in violation of this section.



   (K)   Citation.  An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police
Department may issue a town ordinance violation citation to a person who
violates this section.



(Ord. 28-96, passed 12-9-1996) Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
71.01 shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined in the sum of $10, and shall be liable for the payment of the towing
and storage cost incurred in removing and storing said vehicle.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-17)



   (C)   Any person who violates § 71.03 shall be fined not less than
$25 for each offense or more than $2,500 for any single offense.



   (D)   Any person who violates § 71.04 shall be fined not less than
$40 for each offense or more than $100 for a single offense.



   (E)   Any person who violates § 71.05 shall be fined not less than
$40 for each offense or more than $100 for a single offense.



   (F)   Any person who violates § 71.06 shall be fined not less than
$75 for each offense or more than $100 for a single offense.



   (G)   Any person who violates § 71.07 shall be fined not less than
$40 for each offense or more than $100 for a single offense.



   (H)   Any person who violates § 71.08 shall be fined not less than
$50 for each offense or more than $2,500 for any single offense.



(Ord. passed 11-12-1956; Ord. 11-90, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 28-96, passed
12-9-1996; Ord. 13-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 41-2005, passed 6-27-2005;
Ord. 14-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 15-2005, passed 4-11-2005; Ord. 17-2005,
passed 4-11-2005)



CHAPTER 72:  SPEED LIMITS



Section



   72.01   Speed limits in alleys, parks and schools



   72.02   Speed limits of emergency motor vehicles



   72.03   Enforcement of posted speed limit sign regulations



   72.04   Speed limits for residential and neighborhood streets



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  SPEED LIMITS IN ALLEYS, PARKS AND SCHOOLS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any alley, public
park or any school area at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards
then existing. In every event speed shall be so restricted as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or other conveyance
on or near or entering said alley, public park or school area in compliance
with legal requirements and with the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (B)   No person shall drive an emergency motor vehicle within the
town at a speed greater than 55 mph.



   (C)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any school area at a
speed greater than 15 mph. The boundary of said school area shall be
determined by the Town Council in each individual school area and signs
indicating the maximum speed permitted by this section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-31)  (Ord. 1,1959, passed 9-14-1959)  Penalty, see
§ 72.99



§ 72.02  SPEED LIMITS OF EMERGENCY MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      EMERGENCY MOTOR VEHICLE. Includes, but is not limited to the
following when on emergency runs:



         (a)   Ambulances;



         (b)   Law enforcement cars and motorcycles;



         (c)   Fire engines and fire equipment; and



         (d)   Civil defense vehicles.



   (B)   No person shall drive an emergency motor vehicle within the
town at a speed greater than 55 mph.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-32)  (Ord. 3-78, passed 3-30-1978)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.03  ENFORCEMENT OF POSTED SPEED LIMIT SIGN REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate compliance
with posted speed limit signs directing the flow of traffic on public streets
within the town for the protection of public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Every driver of a vehicle shall be aware of and shall
not exceed the maximum speed limit designated by any posted speed limit sign.



      (2)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a citation for a failure to comply with a posted speed limit sign
within the corporate boundaries of the town.



(Ord. 39-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  SPEED LIMITS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND NEIGHBORHOOD STREETS.



   (A)   A speed limit of 25 mph is hereby adopted as the speed limit
for residential and neighborhood streets serving local traffic, except in
areas of schools and parks, and along alleys where lower posted speed limits
are allowed by Indiana Code.



   (B)   All recommendations included within the Speed Limit Study,
attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit B, are hereby adopted
and they shall be signed appropriately in accordance with any and all
regulatory standards required for signage.



   (C)   The speed limits adopted by this section shall become
effective upon the proper speed limit signage being posted on the street.



   (D)   Requests to alter posted speed limits shall follow the
sequence and procedures as set forth in the town’s Guideline for Posted
Speed Limit Change Requests, attached to the ordinance codified herein as
Exhibit C.



   (E)   Recommendations by the Engineering and Traffic Investigation
to revise the posted speed limit shall be subject to the approval fo the Town
Council or its appointed designee.



(Ord. 07-2017, passed 6-26-2017)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 72.01 shall
be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $18.75 nor more than $25 and costs.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-31)



   (C)   Any person violating § 72.02 shall be fined and any sum not
less than $10 but not more than $25 for each and every violation thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-32)



   (D)   Any person who violates § 72.03 shall be fined not less than
$25 and no more than $2,500 for each offense. A court appearance shall be
required for any person issued a citation for exceeding the maximum speed
limit by at least 31 mph.



(Ord. 1,1959, passed 9-14-1959; Ord. 3-78, passed 3-30-1978; Ord. 39-2005,
passed 3-27-2005)



CHAPTER 73:  OVERSIZE VEHICLE REGULATIONS



Section



   73.01   Truck parking



   73.02   Loading restrictions



   73.03   Vehicles exceeding five tons



   73.04   Obligation to use state or federal routes



   73.05   Removal of vehicles



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  TRUCK PARKING.



   All motor trucks, tractors, trailers, buses, house trailers,
semitrailers, farm machinery and equipment having a load capacity in excess
of one and one-half tons, or a length in excess of 19 feet, or a height in
excess of seven feet or a width in excess of seven feet shall not park or
partially park upon the public streets, alleys and highways of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-70)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  LOADING RESTRICTIONS.



   In places and at hours when stopping for the loading or unloading of
merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation
of merchandise or materials may back into a curb to take or discharge loads.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-71)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 73.03  VEHICLES EXCEEDING FIVE TONS.



   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any vehicle used for the transportation of goods or property, the gross
weight of which, with load, exceeds five tons, upon the streets, bridges and
culverts within the town except on designated and marked state and federal
routes, temporary or permanent.  Drivers of such vehicles whose gross
weight, with load, exceeds weight limits prescribed by this section may
deliver or pick up goods or property at places not located on state or
federal routes provided such vehicles are only operated by the shortest way
possible between the state or federal route and the place of delivery or
pickup.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-72)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  OBLIGATION TO USE STATE OR FEDERAL ROUTES.



   (A)   All streets and highways leading into the town shall be
properly posted warning operators of vehicles used for transportation of
goods and property and exceeding weight limits prescribed by this chapter
that they must follow state or federal routes.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle exceeding such weight limits upon
entering the town on a street other than a state or federal route shall
proceed immediately by the shortest way possible to the nearest state or
federal route to continue its journey.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-73)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   In addition to the fine provided for in § 73.99 for the
violation of this chapter, if any vehicle is found parked in such a manner as
to constitute a violation of this chapter, and if it is further determined
that such vehicle as parked:



      (1)   Constitutes a safety hazard;



      (2)   Interferes with the normal flow of traffic; or



      (3)   Blocks a street, alley or highway of the town; then and
in that event, the town police authorities shall have the right to move or
remove said vehicle from its location by any reasonable means, including, but
not limited to, towing said vehicle to a storage facility.



   (B)   Any costs and expenses incurred as a result of the moving or
removal of a vehicle pursuant to this section, including any storage costs,
shall be charged to the owner of said vehicle.



   (C)   If the removal of the vehicle results in storage of the
vehicle, the vehicle shall not be removed and released from storage until
full payment is received by the town for the costs and expenses provided for
by this section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-75)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $50 and not more than $100 for the first offense, and shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $200 for each subsequent violation of
the chapter that occurs within 12 months of the prior violation.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-74)  (Ord. 24-96, passed 10-14-1996; Ord. 36-2003,
passed 11-24-2003; Ord. 15-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



CHAPTER 74:  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section




Recreational Motor Homes




   74.01   Purpose



   74.02   Recreational motor vehicles defined



   74.03   Operation



   74.04   Exclusions for police, municipal purposes and farm operations



   74.05   Jurisdiction




Bicycle Regulations




   74.20   Motor vehicles laws applicable



   74.21   Equipment



   74.22   Parent or guardian responsibility



 



   74.99   Penalty



RECREATIONAL MOTOR HOMES



§ 74.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish reasonable and
responsible regulations for the use of recreational motor vehicles. This
subchapter is not intended to allow what state law prohibits. This subchapter
seeks to improve the safety of individuals living in residential areas, the
safety of persons operating recreational motor vehicles and to eliminate
noise incident to the operation of recreational motor vehicles on property
zoned residential and agricultural within the town limits. This subchapter is
desirable to achieve a decrease in the overall level of noise in such areas,
and is intended to prevent a public nuisance.



(Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)



§ 74.02  RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV. Any motorized vehicle with three wheels or
four wheels designed for use off of paved roads.



   MOTOR SCOOTER. A vehicle that has motive power, a seat, but not a
saddle, for the driver, two wheels and a floor pad for the driver’s feet.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled motorized vehicle used
for recreational purposes, including a trail bike or other all-terrain
vehicle, motor scooter or moped being used for off-road recreational purposes.



(Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)



§ 74.03  OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle in any
area that is zoned residential or agricultural within the town limits, except
as set forth in § 74.04.



   (B)   No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle
carelessly or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or the safety of others
or in any manner which endangers or is likely to endanger any person or
property.



   (C)   No person shall enter and operate a recreational motor vehicle
on land not his or her own without the written permission of the owner,
occupant or lessee of the land, except where otherwise allowed by law. 
Written permission may be given by posted notice which specifies the kind of
vehicles allowed, such as “Recreational Vehicles Allowed”, “Trail Bikes
Allowed”, “All-Terrain Vehicles Allowed” or other similar language.



   (D)   No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle in excess
of 25 mph on publicly owned land.



   (E)   No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle on any
public property, including public school grounds, park property, playgrounds
and recreational areas, except in areas specifically designated for use of
such vehicles, and except as specifically set forth in § 74.04.



   (F)   No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle in a
manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.



(Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)  Penalty, see § 74.99



§ 74.04  EXCLUSIONS FOR POLICE, MUNICIPAL PURPOSES AND FARM OPERATIONS.



   Specifically excluded from this chapter are all off-road and
recreational vehicles used by the Town Metropolitan Police Department for law
enforcement purposes; used by the town for carrying out the functions of town
government; and used by a farming operation in the normal course of its
business.



(Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)



§ 74.05  JURISDICTION.



   Any violation of this chapter shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Town Court.



(Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)



BICYCLE REGULATIONS



§ 74.20  MOTOR VEHICLES LAWS APPLICABLE.



   All motor vehicle laws of the state in so far as applicable, shall
govern the operation of bicycles in the town, particularly with reference to
traffic control devices, signals, signs and orders, riding on roadways,
speed, parking and right-of-way.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-21)  (Ord. 1-54, passed 3-8-1954)



§ 74.21  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Lights. Every bicycle when in use during the night time shall
be equipped with a white light visible from the front for a distance of 500
feet; and with a red lamp or reflector on the rear visible for at least 300
feet. No other lights shall be permitted.



   (B)   Bell. All bicycles shall be equipped with a serviceable bell
capable of being heard for a distance of 100 feet. No siren or whistle shall
be permitted.



   (C)   Brakes. Every bicycle shall be equipped with good brakes
capable of stopping and holding brake wheel on dry, level and clean pavement.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-22)  (Ord. 1-54, passed 3-8-1954)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.22  PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY.



   No parent or guardian shall knowingly permit any minor child or ward to
operate any bicycle within the corporate limits of the town in violation of
the requirements of this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-23)  (Ord. 1-54, passed 3-8-1954)  Penalty, see §
74.99



§ 74.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Recreational motor homes.  Any person violating any provision
of §§ 74.01 through 74.05 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$75 for his or her first offense, and shall be fined not less than $75 nor
more than $150 for each subsequent offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (B)   Bicycle.



      (1)   Operators. Every operator convicted of a violation of
any provisions of §§ 74.20 through 74.22 shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $5, or by removal and detention of the license plate from such
bicycle for a period not to exceed 180 days, or by impounding of such bicycle
for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by any combination of the foregoing
penalties.



      (2)   Parents and guardians. For knowingly permitting a minor
child or ward from violating any of the provisions of §§ 74.20 through
74.22 shall constitute an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-24)  (Ord. 07-2003, passed 5-12-2003)



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed limits



      II.   One-way streets and alley designations



      III.   Stop intersections



      IV.   Designation of preferential and controlled intersections



      V.   Designation of through and controlled streets



      VI.   Stop signs near schools and utility companies



      VII.   No passing zones



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   Forty mph on South Center Street. From the south edge of
Springcrest Street to the south corporate limit of the town the speed limit
shall be 40 mph for all vehicles.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-25)



   (B)   Thirty-five mph on Stafford Road. The speed limit is 35 mph on
Stafford Road from State Road 267 to Center Street.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-26)



   (C)   Thirty mph on Stafford Road. A speed limit of 30 mph is
established for Stafford Road, said road running east to west in the town.
Said speed limit shall run from Brookside Lane to the west boundary of State
Highway No. 267 as now situated.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-27)



   (D)   Thirty mph on Stanley Road. A speed limit of 30 mph is
established for Stanley Road, said road running east to west in the town.
Said speed limit shall run from Center Street to the west boundary of State
Highway No. 267 as now situated.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-28)



   (E)   Twenty mph on Omega Lane. The speed limit on Omega Lane shall
be reduced to 20 mph.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-29)



   (F)   Twenty mph on Clarks Creek Road and load limits thereon.



      (1)   The speed limit on that portion of Clarks Creek Road
described herein shall be reduced to 20 mph.



      (2)   Trucks licensed in excess of nine tons shall be allowed
on that portion of Clarks Creek Road commencing at the south edge of U.S.
Highway 40 and running south to the entrance to Rhoades Beverage Company in
the town, except for local deliveries.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-30)



   (G)   (1)   In accordance with I.C. 9-21-5-11, the town may
establish increased speed limits for specific streets where determined to be
appropriate.



      (2)   Speed limits to be changed as noted for the following
streets:



 


Street or Road

 

Restricted Area

 

Speed Limit

 

Ord.

 

Date Passed





American Avenue
 
Within the Providence Estates Subdivision
 
25 mph established
 

14-2010

 

10-25-2010



Andrews Boulevard
 
To the intersection of Andrews Boulevard and Andrews Boulevard East Drive
 
25 mph established
 

02-2008

 

2-25-2008



Center Street
 
From Hadley Rd (CR600S) to south corporate limits
 
Increase from 35 mph to 40 mph
 

10-2003

 

7-14-2003



Chad Court
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

17-2007

 

7-9-2007



Clarks Creek Road
 
From U.S. 40 south to SR 267
 
Increased from 25 mph to 30 mph
 

10-2003

 

7-14-2003



Claymont Boulevard
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Connaught East Drive
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Connaught West Drive
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Corey Lane
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

17-2007

 

7-9-2007



Creekside Court
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

17-2007

 

7-9-2007



Creekside Lane
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

17-2007

 

7-9-2007



Dan Jones Road
 
From U.S. 40 northerly 4,380 feet or to the town boundaries which ever
distance is greater
 
40 mph established
 

54-2005

 

11-14-2005



Independence Boulevard
 
Within the Providence Estates Subdivision
 
25 mph established
 

14-2010

 

10-25-2010



Patriot Place
 
Within the Providence Estates Subdivision
 
25 mph established
 

14-2010

 

10-25-2010



Porchester North Lane
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Portman Place
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Providence Pass
 
Within the Providence Estates Subdivision
 
25 mph established
 

14-2010

 

10-25-2010



Redcliff North Lane
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Redcliff South Lane
 
 
 
25 mph established
 

19-2014

 

6-9-2014



Smith Road (CR 900 East)
 
From the intersection of Township Line Road (CR 300 South)/North Perry Road
northerly to CR 200 South
 
Increased from 30 mph to 40 mph
 

13-2004

 

5-24-2004



Stafford Road
 
From SR 267 to Six Points Road (CR1050E)
 
Increased from 35 mph to 45 mph
 

10-2003

 

7-14-2003



Vestal Road
 
From U.S. 40 to Hanna Road (CR 350 South)
 
30 mph established
 

13-2004

 

5-24-2004





 



      (3)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post traffic control signs notifying the traveling public of
the maximum speed limits established for each specific street.



      (4)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a
town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this division (G).



   (H)   Penalty.



      (1)   Violation of division (A) above is declared an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-25)



      (2)   Violation of division (B) above by the operator of any
vehicle shall be declared an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than
$5 or more than $50 for each offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-26)



      (3)   It is declared to be an infraction for any motor vehicle
to be operated on or upon Stafford Road in a speed in excess of 30 mph and
each violation of division (C) above is declared to be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and not more than $25 for each
offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-27)



      (4)   It is declared to be an infraction for any motor vehicle
to be operated on or upon Stanley Road in a speed in excess of 30 mph and
each violation of division (D) above is declared to be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and not more than $25 for each
offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-28)



      (5)   For division (E) above, the Chief of Police or any other
person designated by the Town Council shall post or cause to be posted
suitable traffic control signs for said reduced speed limit on said street.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-29)



      (6)   For division (F) above, the Chief of Police, or any
other person designated by the Town Council, shall post or cause to be posted
suitable traffic control signs for said reduced speed limit and truck
restrictions on said portion of said street.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-30)



      (7)   For division (G) above:



         (a)   Any person who violates Ord. 13-2004 shall be
fined not less than $50 for each offense or more than $100 for any single
offense;



         (b)   Any person who violates Ord. 10-2003 shall be
fined not less than $50 for each offense or more than $2,500 for any single
offense; and



         (c)   Any person who violates the remainder of division
(G) above shall be fined in accordance with § 72.99(D).



(Ord. 3-76, passed 6-28-1976; Ord. 4-76, passed 7-12-1976; Ord. 1, 1981,
passed 4-27-1981; Ord. 5-81, passed 11-9-1981; Ord. 1-88, passed 2-22-1988;
Ord. 4-88, passed 7-11-1988; Ord. 88-3, passed 7-25-1988; Ord. 10-2003,
passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 13-2004, passed 5-24-2004; Ord. 54-2005, passed
11-14-2005; Ord. 17-2007, passed 7-9-2007; Ord. 02-2008, passed 2-25-2008;
Ord. 14-2010, passed 10-25-2010; Ord. 19-2014, passed 6-9-2014)



Statutory reference:



   Local authorities to determine on the basis of engineering and traffic
investigation the maximum speed limits which would be reasonable and safe,
see I.C. 9-4-1-58



SCHEDULE II.  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEY DESIGNATIONS.



   (A)   One-way alleys.



      (1)   The following one-way alleys are designated:



         (a)   The first alley south of United States Highway 40,
also known as Main Street in the town, between the streets of Carr Road and
Simmons Street is established as a one-way alley east with traffic traveling
only in an easterly direction on said one-way alley, and the appropriate
traffic signs creating a one-way alley are authorized;



         (b)   The first alley south of Main Street of the town,
from the west boundary of Vine Street to the east boundary of Center Street
shall be a one-way street, traffic flow to run from east to west;



         (c)   There shall be one-way traffic west on the second
alley south of U.S. 40 between Vine Street and Center Street in the town;



         (d)   For the control of traffic the alley being the
extension of Krewson Street, from Center Street to Mill Street, be
established as a one-way alley, traffic to move from east to west on and
along said alley, and be establishing a stop sign at the intersection of said
alley and Mill Street, requiring traffic entering Mill Street from said alley
to come to a full stop before entering said Mill Street from said alley; and



         (e)   The first alley north of United States Highway 40,
also known as Main Street, Plainfield, Indiana, from the west boundary of
Center Street to the east boundary of Mill Street shall be a one-way alley,
traffic flow to run from east to west.



      (2)   The Chief of Police or any other person designated by
the Town Council shall post or caused to be posted suitable traffic control
signs for such alley and affected streets.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-40)



   (B)   One-way street designations.



      (1)   (a)   Vine Street, from U.S. Highway No. 40 to North
Street, shall be, and is established as a one-way street, with the flow of
traffic on said street to be north bound;



         (b)   East Street is established as a one-way street,
south from North Street to Highway No. 40, the flow of traffic on said street
to be south bound; and



         (c)   The flow of traffic on Harding Street from the
south side right-of-way of Park Street to the north right-of-way of Stafford
Road shall be one-way traffic direction being from north to south.



      (2)   The Street Commissioner, and/or his or her agents, are
authorized to effect the necessary posting of said streets



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-41)



   (C)   Penalty.



      (1)   Violation of division (A) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $50.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-40)



      (2)   Violation of division (B) above shall be declared to be
an infraction, subject to a penalty of not less than $1 or more than $10 for
each and every violation.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-41)



(Ord. 8, 1965, passed 12-13-1965; Ord. 8, 1967, passed 10-23-1967; Ord. 2-71,
passed 2-11-1971; Ord. 2-76, passed 2-23-1976; Ord. 2-78, passed 3-30-1978;
Ord. 485, passed 3-25-1985; Ord. 4-87, passed 10-12-1987)



SCHEDULE III.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Four-way stop intersections involving Stafford Road.



      (1)   The intersection of Stafford Road and Brookside Lane
shall be established as a four-way stop intersection, and stop signs shall be
erected.



      (2)   The intersection of Stafford Road and Simmons
Street/Gary Drive shall be established as a four-way stop intersection, and
stop signs shall be erected.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-48)



   (B)   Four-way stop at Oliver Street and Kentucky Street; and
Raymond and Lawndale Streets.



      (1)   The intersection of Oliver Street and Kentucky Street in
the civil town limits is declared and made a four-way stop for the control of
vehicular traffic at that intersection.



      (2)   There shall be a four-way stop at the intersection of
Raymond and Lawndale Streets.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-49)



   (C)   Stop signs for intersections of Craigwood Court and Oakwood
Court at Keller Avenue.



      (1)   For the control of traffic, all traffic entering Keller
Avenue from Craigwood Court shall be required to come to a full and complete
stop before entering the intersection of said Craigwood Court and Keller
Avenue and stop signs for the control of traffic shall be placed at the
southwest corner of said intersection.



      (2)   For the control of traffic, all traffic entering Keller
Avenue from Oakwood Court shall be required to come to a full and complete
stop before entering the intersection of Oakwood Court and Keller Avenue and
stop signs for the control of traffic shall be placed at the northeast corner
of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-50)



   (D)   Stop sign for the intersection of Butler Drive and Omega Lane.
For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling south on Omega Lane shall
be required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the
intersection of Butler Drive and Omega Lane and a stop sign to control the
traffic shall be placed at the northwest corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-51)



   (E)   Stop sign for the intersection of Glenda Drive and Omega Lane.
For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling west on Glenda Drive shall
be required to make a full and complete stop before entering the intersection
of Glenda Drive and Omega Lane and a stop sign for the control of traffic
shall be placed at the northeast corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-52)



   (F)   Stop sign for the intersection of Locust Drive and Omega Lane.
For the control of traffic, that all traffic traveling west on Locust Drive
shall be required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the
intersection of Locust Drive and Omega Lane and a stop sign for the control
of traffic shall be places at the northeast corner of said intersection; and
for the control of traffic that all traffic traveling east on Omega Lane
shall be required to come to a full and complete stop before entered the
intersection of Locust Drive and Omega Lane and a stop sign for the control
of traffic shall be placed on at the southwest corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-53)



   (G)   Stop sign for the intersection of Locust Drive and Elm Drive.
For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling west on Locust Drive shall
be required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the
intersection of Locust Drive and Elm Drive and a stop sign for the control of
traffic shall be placed at the northeast corner of said intersection; and for
the control of traffic that all traffic traveling east on Elm Drive shall be
required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersection
of Locust Drive and Elm Drive and a stop sign for the control of traffic
shall be placed on at the southwest corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-54)



   (H)   Stop sign for the intersection of Beach Drive and Elm Drive.
For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling south on Elm Drive shall be
required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersection
of Beech Drive North and Elm Drive and a stop sign for the control of traffic
shall be placed at the northwest corner of said intersection; and for the
control of traffic that all traffic traveling north on Elm Drive shall be
required to come to a full and complete stop before entering the intersection
of Beech Drive North and Elm Drive and a stop sign for the control of traffic
shall be placed at the southeast corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-55)



   (I)   Stop sign for the intersection of Birch Court, Birch Drive and
Elm Drive. For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling south on Elm
Drive shall be required to come to a full and complete stop before entering
the intersection of Birch Court, Birch Drive and Elm Drive and a stop sign
for the control of traffic shall be placed at the northwest corner of said
intersection; and for the control of traffic that all traffic traveling north
on Elm Drive and a stop sign for the control of traffic shall be placed at
the southeast corner of said intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-56)



   (J)   Stop sign for the intersection of Section Street and Hancock
Street. For the control of traffic, all traffic traveling north on Hancock
Street shall be required to come to a full and complete stop before entering
the intersection of Section Street and Hancock Street and stop signs for the
control of traffic shall be placed at the southeast corner of said
intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-57)



   (K)   Four-way stop at Lincoln Street and North Center Street.



      (1)   The intersection of Lincoln Street and North Center
Street, in the corporate limits of the town, is established as an
intersection to be controlled with a four-way stop.



      (2)   Traffic control and the appropriate traffic signs
creating a four-way stop at the intersection of Lincoln Street and North
Center Street is authorized.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-58)



   (L)   Four-way stop at the intersection of Brookside Lane and
Jonathan and Brendon Drives.



      (1)   The intersection of the streets of Brookside, Jonathan
and Brendon, in the corporate limits of the town, is established as and
intersection to be controlled with a four-way stop.



      (2)   Traffic control and the appropriate traffic signs
creating a four-way stop at the intersection of Brookside Lane and Jonathan
and Brendon Drives is authorized.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-59)



   (M)   Three-way stop at the intersection of the southern and
northern approaches of Clarks Creek Road.



      (1)   The intersection of the southern and northern approach
of Clarks Creek Road where it meets the eastern approach of Clarks Creek
Road, in the corporate limits of the town, is established as an intersection
to be controlled with a three-way stop.



      (2)   Traffic control and the appropriate traffic signs
creating a three-way stop at the intersection of the southern and northern
approaches of Clarks Creek Road where it meets the eastern approach of Clarks
Creek Road is authorized.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-60)



   (N)   Four-way stop at the intersection of Lawndale Street and
Buchanan Street. Each and every corner of the intersection of Lawndale Street
and Buchanan are hereinafter designated as a stop street and that all
vehicles must stop before entering or crossing the entrance to such
intersection.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-63)



   (O)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



      (2)   Violation of division (A) above by the operator or any
vehicle shall be declared an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than
$5 or more than $50 for each offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-48)



      (3)   Violation of division (C) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-50)



      (4)   Violation of division (D) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-51)



      (5)   Violation of division (E) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-52)



      (6)   Violation of division (F) above is an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and not more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-53)



      (7)   Violation of division (G) above in an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 and not more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-54)



      (8)   Violation of division (H) above is an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-55)



      (9)   Violation of division (I) above is an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-56)



      (10)   Violation of division (J) above is an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-57)



      (11)   Persons, firms, corporations, their agent or agents
operating a vehicle in violation of division (N) above shall be deemed guilty
of an infraction, and upon conviction shall be fined a sum of not less than
$1 or more than $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-63)



(Ord. 3-68, passed 6-10-1968; Ord. 5-1977, passed 9-26-1977; Ord. 6-77,
passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 7-77, passed 10-17-1977; Ord. 8-77, passed
11-28-1977; Ord. 9-77, passed 11-28-1977; Ord. 10-77, passed 11-28-1977; Ord.
11-77, passed 11-28-1977; Ord. 4-78, passed 6-26-1978; Ord. 5-80, passed
9-8-1980; Ord. 5-81, passed 11-9-1981; Ord. 7-88, passed 9-26-1988; Ord.
6-88, passed 9-26-1988; Ord. 6-90, passed 2-28-1990)



SCHEDULE IV.  DESIGNATION OF PREFERENTIAL AND CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   Preferential intersections are established as hereinafter
defined, that four-way intersections are established as hereinafter defined
an that a no parking zone be established on the west side of Center Street,
north of U.S. Highway 40 as hereinafter defined.



   (B)   It is necessary to control the flow of traffic at certain
intersections in the town, and stop signs shall be located as follows, to
control traffic at the following described intersections, said stop signs and
intersections being described as follows:



      (1)   At the intersection of Charles Court and Stanley Road,
on Charles Court, Stanley Road to be the preferential road;



      (2)   At the intersection of Elm Drive and Stafford Road, on
Elm Drive, Stafford Road to be the preferential road;



      (3)   At the intersection of Birch Drive and Elm Drive, on
Birch Drive, Elm Drive to be the preferential street;



      (4)   At the intersection of Birch Court and Elm Drive, on
Birch Court, Elm Drive to the preferential street;



      (5)   At the intersection of Sycamore Drive South and Elm
Drive, on Sycamore Drive South, Elm Drive to the preferential street;



      (6)   At the intersection of Sycamore Drive North and Elm
Drive, on Sycamore Drive North, Elm Drive to be the preferential street;



      (7)   At the intersection of Beech Drive South and Elm Drive,
on Beech Drive South, Elm Drive to be the preferential Street;



      (8)   At the intersection of Beech Drive North and Elm Drive,
on Beech Drive North, Elm Drive to be the preferential street;



      (9)   At the intersection of Beech Court and Elm Drive, on
Beech Court, Elm Drive to be the preferential street; and



      (10)   At the intersection of Swinford Park Drive and
Longfellow Drive, on Swinford Park Drive, Longfellow Drive to be the
preferential street.



   (C)   It is necessary to control the flow of traffic at the
intersections of Simmons Street and Raymond Street in the town, and at the
intersection of Brookside Lane and Oliver Avenue in the town, said
intersections shall be established as four-way stop intersections and stop
signs shall be erected on Simmons and Raymond Street at the intersection of
Simmons and Raymond Streets and stop signs erected on Brookside Lane and
Oliver Avenue at the intersection of Brookside Lane and Oliver Avenue said
stop signs to be erected for the flow of traffic at said intersections.



   (D)   It is necessary to control parking in the town, thus a no
parking zone shall be established on the west side of Center Street from a
point 12 feet north of the third alley north of U.S. Highway 40 said no
parking area to run to a point 30 feet south of the third alley north of U.S.
Highway 40 on the west side of Center Street in the town.



   (E)   Violation of the traffic control regulations and no parking
zone heretofore described by the operator of any motor vehicle shall be
declared to be an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more
than $25.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-61)  (Ord. 5-76, 1976, passed 8-9-1976)



SCHEDULE V.  DESIGNATION OF THROUGH AND CONTROLLED STREETS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign
at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances
thereto and shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so
obligated to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close
as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the direction of the
police officer shall be complied with.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or any other person designated by the Town
Council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through
streets and stop intersections.



   (C)   Violation of this schedule is declared to be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $25.



   (D)   The following named intersections be controlled by stop signs
in the following manner:



 


Through Street

 

At

 

Controlled Street





Beechwood
 
 
 
Hickory Lane


Beechwood
 
 
 
Linden


Brookside
 
 
 
Aubert


Brookside
 
 
 
Oliver


Brookside
 
 
 
Hardin Court


Brookside Lane
 
 
 
Rose Court


Brookside Lane
 
 
 
Sheri Circle


Brookside Lane
 
 
 
Sabrina Circle


Buchanan
 
 
 
Vine


Buchanan
 
 
 
Wabash


Buchanan
 
 
 
Shaw


Buchanan
 
 
 
St. Luke


Buchanan
 
 
 
Dunn


Buchanan
 
 
 
Southmore


Buchanan
 
 
 
Kentucky


Buchanan
 
 
 
Wayside


Carr Road
 
 
 
Oliver


Carr Road
 
 
 
Hess


Carr Road
 
 
 
Poplar


Carr Road
 
 
 
Spruce


Carr Road
 
 
 
Harlan


Carr Road
 
 
 
Alley-Phillips


Center
 
 
 
Broadway S. Drive


Center
 
 
 
Broadway N. Drive


Center Street
 
 
 
Stevedon Court


Center Street
 
 
 
Pamela Court


Center Street
 
 
 
Cedar Glen Drive North


Center Street
 
 
 
Cedar Glen Drive South


Center Street
 
 
 
Parkside Court North


Center Street
 
 
 
Parkside Court South


Dallas Drive
 
 
 
Lawndale


Dallas Drive
 
 
 
Kentucky Street


Dallas Drive
 
 
 
Lawndale


Dan Jones Road
 
 
 
Hawthorn


Dan Jones Road
 
 
 
Beechwood


Duffy
 
 
 
Spruce


Duffy
 
 
 
Tucker


Dunn
 
 
 
Oliver


East
 
 
 
Carter


East
 
 
 
Fremont


East
 
 
 
South


East
 
 
 
Ash


East
 
 
 
Belle


East
 
 
 
Maple


East
 
 
 
Park


Eastern
 
 
 
Sleepy Hollow


Eastern
 
 
 
Green


Eastern Avenue
 
 
 
Hill Avenue


Ellis
 
 
 
Kain


Elm Drive
 
 
 
Michael Drive N. (Omega Lane)


Elm Drive
 
 
 
Michael Drive S. (Omega Lane)


French
 
 
 
Raines


French
 
 
 
Hanley


French Street
 
 
 
Hanley Street


Gary Drive
 
 
 
Rogers Drive


Green
 
 
 
Indiana


Hancock
 
 
 
Aubert


Hancock
 
 
 
Franklin


Hancock
 
 
 
Forest


Hanley
 
 
 
Poplar


Hanley
 
 
 
Spruce


Hanley
 
 
 
Tucker


Harding
 
 
 
Maple Hill


Harding
 
 
 
Park


Harding Street
 
 
 
Belle Street


Harlan
 
 
 
Pickett


Harlan
 
 
 
Hanley


Harlan
 
 
 
Raines


Harlan
 
 
 
Gibbs


Hawthorne
 
 
 
Beechwood


Hawthorne
 
 
 
Magnolia


Hemlock
 
 
 
Magnolia


Highlander
 
 
 
Hunter


Holiday
 
 
 
Aubert


Holiday
 
 
 
Forest


Holiday
 
 
 
Section


Hunter
 
 
 
Harding


Kentucky
 
 
 
Hess


Kirkwood Drive
 
 
 
Gary Drive


Lawndale
 
 
 
Denver Drive


Lawndale
 
 
 
Aubert


Longfellow
 
 
 
Hunter


Longfellow
 
 
 
Highlander


Magnolia
 
 
 
Hickory Lane


Maple Hill
 
 
 
Roosevelt


Maston
 
 
 
Gibbs Court


Maston
 
 
 
Oliver


Michael Drive N.
 
 
 
Stevens Drive (Omega Lane)


Michael Drive S.
 
 
 
Craig Street (Omega Lane)


Mill
 
 
 
Carter


Mill
 
 
 
Fremont


Mill
 
 
 
Alley at south end of Mill Street


Mill
 
 
 
North


Mill
 
 
 
Park


Mill Street
 
 
 
Krewson Avenue


North
 
 
 
Mill


Oliver
 
 
 
Lawndale


Oliver
 
 
 
Mark Lane


Oliver
 
 
 
Southmore Street


Oliver
 
 
 
Wayside


Park
 
 
 
Roosevelt


Pickett
 
 
 
Spruce


Pickett
 
 
 
Sleepy Hollow


Pickett Street
 
 
 
Hill Avenue


Pierce Drive
 
 
 
Christina Court


Pierce Drive
 
 
 
Brookside Lane


Raines
 
 
 
Poplar


Raines
 
 
 
Spruce


Raymond
 
 
 
St. Luke


Raymond
 
 
 
Southmore


Raymond
 
 
 
Kentucky


Raymond
 
 
 
Maston


Raymond
 
 
 
Dunn


Raymond
 
 
 
S. Carr Road


Ridgewood
 
 
 
Kirkwood


Ridgewood
 
 
 
Cambridge


Roosevelt Street
 
 
 
South Street


Roosevelt Street
 
 
 
Belle Street


Roosevelt Street
 
 
 
Maple Hill Street


Section
 
 
 
Kentucky


Section
 
 
 
Lawndale


Section
 
 
 
Holiday


Section
 
 
 
Southmore


Section Street
 
 
 
Hancock Road


Section Street
 
 
 
Southmore


Shaw
 
 
 
Walnut


Simmons
 
 
 
Oliver


Simmons
 
 
 
Section


Simmons
 
 
 
Hess


Simmons
 
 
 
Alley-Cleaners


Simmons Street
 
 
 
Dallas Drive


South
 
 
 
Vine


Southmore
 
 
 
Aubert


Springcrest
 
 
 
Eldin Drive


Springcrest
 
 
 
Almond Drive


Springcrest
 
 
 
Almond Court


Springcrest
 
 
 
Bluff Road


Springcrest
 
 
 
Crest Court


Stafford Road
 
 
 
Brookside Lane


Stafford Road
 
 
 
Wayside Drive


Stafford Road
 
 
 
East


Stafford Road
 
 
 
Roosevelt


Stafford Road
 
 
 
Harding


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Pierce Drive


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Brookside Lane


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Ridgewood


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Eldin Drive


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Terry Drive


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Bluff Road


Stanley Road
 
 
 
Almond Drive


Tarpon
 
 
 
Hancock


Tucker
 
 
 
Gibbs


Vine
 
 
 
Carter


Vine
 
 
 
Fremont


Wabash
 
 
 
Pike Place


Wabash
 
 
 
Walnut


Walton Drive
 
 
 
Keller Avenue


Walton Drive
 
 
 
Rogers Drive


Wayside
 
 
 
Aubert


Wayside
 
 
 
Section




 



 


Preferential





Brookside Lane and Dallas Street


Brookside Lane and Denver Street


Brookside Lane and Hardin Court


Brookside Lane and Miami Street North


Brookside Lane and Miami Street South


Brookside Lane and Raymond Street


Center Street and Deport Street


Center Street and Krewson


Center Street and Lincoln


Center Street and North Street


East Street and Carter Street


East Street and Lincoln Street


East Street and North Street


East Street at Elm Street


East Street at Krewson Street


Kirkwood Drive and Gary Drive


Lawndale Street at Section Street


Raymond Street and Mark Lane


Raymond Street and Simmons Street


Raymond Street at Brookside Lane


Vine Street and Deport Street


Vine Street and Lincoln Street


Vine Street and North Street


Vine Street at Krewson Street


Walton Drive and Kirkwood Drive


Walton Drive and Rogers Drive


Walton Drive and Stanley Road




 



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-62)  (Ord. 9,1965, passed 12- -1965; Ord. 2,1966,
passed 2-28-1966; Ord. 1-67,1967, passed 2-27-1967; Ord. 8-68, passed
8-12-1968; Ord. 12-68, passed 11-25-1968; Ord. 6-69, 1969, passed 9-8-1969;
Ord. 4-71,1971, passed 3-22-1971; Ord. 2-72,1972, passed 4-10-1972; Ord.
12-89, passed 5-22-1989)



SCHEDULE VI.  STOP SIGNS NEAR SCHOOLS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.



   (A)   The exits to the premises and parking lot of Guilford Township
Junior and Senior High School on the aforesaid Stafford Road and Longfellow
Drive in the town are established as a stop intersection. The driver of motor
vehicles exiting said premises and parking lot shall stop in obedience to
stop signs erected at said parking lot and premises for the control of
traffic and shall proceed cautiously out of said premises and parking lot
after first coming to a full stop at said sign, unless traffic at said
intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the
directions of the police officer shall be complied with.



   (B)   The exit to the premises and parking lot of Public Service of
Indiana, Inc., on the aforesaid Carr Road in the town, is established as a
stop intersection. The driver of motor vehicles exiting said premises and
parking lot shall stop in obedience to stop signs erected at said parking lot
and premises for the control of traffic and shall proceed cautiously out of
said premises and parking lot after first coming to a full stop at said sign,
unless traffic at said intersection is controlled by a police officer on
duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be complied
with.



   (C)   The Chief of Police of the town, or any other person
designated by the Town Council, shall post or cause to be posted signs at the
aforesaid premises an parking lot of Guilford Township Junior and Senior High
School and premises and parking lot of Public Service Company of Indiana,
Inc. for the purpose of controlling the traffic exiting said premises and
parking lot.



   (D)   Violation of this schedule is declared to be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $1 or more than $25.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-64)  (Ord. 1-72, passed 1-24-1972)



SCHEDULE VII.  NO PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   A “no passing” zone shall be established on Center Street
between Stafford Road and County Road 600 South, in the corporate limits of
the town. Traffic control and the appropriate traffic signs and pavement
markings creating a “no passing” zone on Center Street between Stafford
Road and County Road 600 South is authorized.



   (B)   Starting at a point 50 feet south of the intersection of
Stafford Road and Center Street, “no passing” traffic control signs shall
be placed on the west side of Center Street at intervals of 950 feet to the
intersection of Center Street and County Road 600 South.



   (C)   Starting at a point 50 feet north of the intersection of
Center Street and County Road 600 South, “no passing” traffic control
signs shall be placed on the east side of Center Street at intervals of 950
feet to the intersection of Center Street and Stafford Road.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-80)  (Ord. 9-88, passed 10-24-1988)



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Limited parking areas



      II.   No parking areas



      III.   Police parking only



      IV.   Town lot parking regulations



      V.   Snow emergency routes



SCHEDULE I.  LIMITED PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Fifteen minute parking areas.



      (1)   There is established two 15 minute public parking spaces
at the business location of 119 North Vine Street of the town.



      (2)   Appropriate signs may be placed at said location
designating these two parking spaces as notice to the public.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-10)



   (B)   Two-hour parking areas on U.S. 40.



      (1)   Two-hour parking will be permitted on the south side of
U.S. 40 from a point 40 feet from the east side of South East Street to a
point 136 feet from the east side of South East Street, a distance of 96 feet.



      (2)   The above established area shall be properly marked and
such necessary signs as may be required to establish a two-hour parking
limitation in the area above designated may be erected by the Town Street
Department.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-11)



   (C)   Two-hour parking on Hunter Drive, Highlander Drive, Harding
Street, Teakwood Drive, Hillside Court and Sycamore Court.



      (1)   On Mondays through Fridays between the hours of  9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m. vehicle parking is limited to two hours for the following
streets:



         (a)   Hunter Drive;



         (b)   Highlander Drive;



         (c)   Harding Street between Hunter Drive and Stafford
Road;



         (d)   Teakwood Drive



         (e)   Hillside Court; and



         (f)   Sycamore Court.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post two hour parking limit signs for each specific street.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a
town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this division (C).



   (D)   Penalty.



      (1)   Violations of division (A) above shall be punishable as
provided by separate ordinance of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-10)



      (2)   Violation of division (B) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-11)



      (3)   Any person who violates division (C) above shall be
fined not less than $25 for each offense or more than $2,500 for any single
offense.



      (4)   Any person violating any provision of division (D) above
commits an ordinance violation and shall be fined not less than $50 and not
more than $100 for the first offense and shall be fined not less than $100
nor more than $200 for each subsequent violation of division (D) above that
occurs within 12 months of the prior violation.



(Ord. 5, 1963, passed 6-24-1963; Ord. 1-77, passed 6-27-1977; Ord. 6-83,
passed 11-14-1983; Ord. 11-90, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 21-2000, passed
11-13-2000; Ord. 34-2013, passed 12-19-2013)



SCHEDULE II.  NO PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   No parking areas on Mill Street.



      (1)   A no parking zone is established at 164 North Mill
Street on the west side of said North Mill Street.



      (2)   The Chief of Police or any other person designated by
the Town Council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for no
parking.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-13)



   (B)   No parking east of Carr Road. For the control of traffic, the
south side of U.S. Highway No. 40, otherwise known as East Main Street in the
town, be established as a no parking zone from the east side of Carr Road to
a point 250 feet east of Lawndale Drive and that no parking be permitted at
anytime of said section of said East Main Street.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-14)



   (C)   Parking prohibited on Stafford Road. Parking is prohibited on
both sides of Stafford Road from State Road 267 to Center Street.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-19)



   (D)   No parking on Airtech Parkway.



      (1)   No parking is established on Airtech Parkway from the
intersection of Airtech Parkway and Stafford Road thence northerly and
easterly to the intersection of Airtech Parkway and Six Points Road (CR 1050
East).



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post no parking signs for Airtech Parkway.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this
division (D).



   (E)   No parking on Vestal Road, Hanna Road (CR 350 South), Pike
Lane and Gladden Road.



      (1)   No parking is established on Vestal Road from the
intersection of U.S. 40 to Hanna Road (CR 350 South) and Hanna Road from the
intersection of Vestal Road to Willow Ridge Court, Pike Lane east of Vestal
Road and Gladden Road.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post no parking signs for Vestal Road, Hanna Road (CR 350
South), Pike Lane and Gladden Road.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this
division (E).



   (F)   No parking on Southfield Drive and Stanley Road.



      (1)   No parking is established on Southfield Drive between
Stanley Road and Stafford Road and Stanley Road between Quaker Boulevard (SR
267) and Perry Road.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post no parking signs for Southfield Drive between Stafford
Road and Stanley Road and Stanley Road between Quaker Boulevard (SR 267) and
Perry Road.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this
division (F).



   (G)   Parking enforcement on Dan Jones Road.



      (1)   No parking is established on Dan Jones Road from U.S. 40
northerly 4,380 feet or to the town boundaries which ever distance is greater.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post traffic control signs notifying the traveling public of
the maximum speed limits established as well as to post no parking signs for
the specified street.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a
town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this division (G).



   (H)   Parking enforcement on Cambridge Way, Manchester Drive, Clarks
Creek Road and Hartford Avenue.



      (1)   There shall be no parking on Clarks Creek Road south of
Hadley Road, Cambridge Way Drive, Hartford Avenue and Manchester Drive.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post no parking signs for specified streets as follows:



         (a)   Clarks Creek Road south of Hadley Road (CR 600
South);



         (b)   Cambridge Way Drive;



         (c)   Hartford Avenue; and



         (d)   Manchester Drive.



      (3)   Any violation of the provisions of this division (H)
shall constitute a town ordinance violation for which a citation to a person
who violates this division (H) may be issued by the Town Metropolitan Police
Department.



      (4)   This division (H) shall be enforced through § 71.04.



      (5)   For purposes of public safety, the Town Police Chief in
consultation with the Town Engineer, may designate specific areas of streets
described in division (H)(2) above for placement of no parking-vehicles will
be towed signage.



      (6)   The owner of any vehicle whose vehicle is towed for
violating the no parking-vehicles will be towed provisions of this division
(H) shall be responsible for paying all towing charges in addition to any
fees and costs imposed for violating this division (H).



   (I)   Parking enforcement on U.S. Highway 40.



      (1)   No parking is established on U.S. Highway 40 from Carr
Road to Vestal Road.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post traffic control signs notifying the traveling public
that “no parking” has been established on the north and south sides of
U.S. Highway 40 between Carr Road and Vestal Road and to post no parking
signs for area so designated.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a
town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this division (I).



   (J)   Parking enforcement on Plainfield Village Drive.



      (1)   No parking is established on Plainfield Village Drive.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post traffic control signs notifying the travailing public
that “no parking” has been established on the Plainfield Village Drive
and to post no parking signs for area so designated.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Police Department may issue a
town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this division (J).



   (K)   No parking on westside of Brookside Lane between Section
Street to Buchanan Street.



      (1)   No parking is established on the west side of Brookside
Lane from the intersection of Brookside Lane at Section Street north to the
intersection of Brookside Lane and Buchanan Street.



      (2)   The Superintendent of Public Works is authorized by the
Town Council to post no parking signs on the west side of Brookside Lane
between Section Street and Buchanan Street.



      (3)   An officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department
may issue a town ordinance violation citation to a person who violates this
division (K).



   (L)   No parking areas on Gibbs Street.



      (1)   No vehicle, as defined in this division (L), shall be
parked upon the paved portion of Gibbs Street from the north pavement line of
Tucker Avenue north to the private property line on the north, this section
of Gibbs Street sometimes referred to as the 500 block of Gibbs Street.



      (2)   No vehicle, as defined in this division (L), shall be
parked upon the following described areas of right-of-way abutting Gibbs
Street from the north pavement line of Tucker Avenue north to the private
property line on the north, this section of Gibbs Street sometimes referred
to as the 500 block of Gibbs Street:



         (a)   No parking area east #1:  Beginning on the east
edge of the pavement of Gibbs Street at a point that is one foot south of and
4.6 feet west of an existing sanitary sewer manhole found at the north end of
Gibbs Street; thence South along the existing east edge of pavement 12 feet
to the terminus.



         (b)   No parking area east #2:  Beginning at a point 46
feet south (along the east edge of pavement) of the terminus of the east #1
description; thence continue south along said east edge of pavement 56.5 feet
to the terminus.



         (c)   No parking area west:  Beginning on the west edge
of pavement of Gibbs Street at a point that is 8.6 feet south of an existing
sanitary manhole described in no parking area east #1; thence south along the
west edge of pavement 60.5 feet to the terminus.



      (3)   VEHICLE, for purposes of this division (L), shall
include, but not be limited to, all-terrain vehicles, antique motor vehicles,
bicycles, buses, farm tractors, farm trucks, farm trailers, farm
semi-trailers, farm wagons, motorboats, motor scooters, motor vehicles,
motorcycles, motorized bicycles, pole trailers, pop-up camper trailers,
recreation vehicle, road tractor, school buses, semi-trailers, tractors,
trailers, trucks, truck-tractors, truck-tractor-semi-trailer, wagons,
watercraft, boat trailer and yard tractors.



   (M)   Penalty.



      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this schedule, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



      (2)   Violation of division (A) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of not less than $10 or more than $25.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-13)



      (3)   Violation of division (B) above is declared to be an
infraction punishable by a fine of $10.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-14)



      (4)   Violation of division (C) above by the operator of any
vehicle shall be declared an infraction punishable by a fine of not less than
$10 or more than $50 for each offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-19)



      (5)   Any person who violates division (D) above shall be
fined not less than $50 for each offense or more than $100 for any single
offense.



      (6)   Any person who violates division (E) above shall be
fined not less than $25 for each offense or more than $35 for any single
offense.



      (7)   Any person who violates division (F) above shall be
fined not less than $25 for each offense or more than $50 for any single
offense.



      (8)   Division (G) above shall be enforced through § 71.04.



      (9)   Any person who violates division (H) above shall be
fined not less than $25 for each offense.



      (10)   Division (I) above shall be enforced through § 71.04.



      (11)   Division (J) above shall be enforced through § 71.04.



      (12)   Any person who violates division (K) above shall be
fined not less than $25 for each offense or more than $35 for any single
offense.



      (13)   (a)   Any person violating any provision of division
(L) above commits an ordinance violation and shall be fined not less than $50
and not more than $100 for the first offense and shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $200 for each subsequent violation of the ordinance that
occurs within 12 months of the prior violation.



         (b)   In addition to the fine for the violation of
division (L) above, if any vehicle is found parked in such a manner as to
constitute a violation of division (L) above, and if it is further determined
that such vehicle, as parked: constitutes a safety hazard; interferes with
the normal flow of traffic; or blocks a street, alley or access to a private
drive; then, and in that event, the Town Metropolitan Police Department shall
have the right to move or remove said vehicle from its location by any
reasonable means, including, but not limited to, towing said vehicle to a
storage facility. Any costs and expenses incurred as a result of the moving
or removal of a vehicle pursuant to division, including any storage costs,
shall be charged to the owner of said vehicle. If the removal of the vehicle
results in a storage of the vehicle, the vehicle shall not be removed and
released from storage until full payment is received by the town for the cost
and expenses incurred by town caused by enforcing this division.



(Ord. 2-68, passed 6-10-1968; Ord. GO-3, 1974, passed 5-28-1974; Ord. 5-81,
passed 11-9-1981; Ord. 11-90, passed 7-9-1990; Ord. 04-2004, passed
3-22-2004; Ord. 12-2004, passed 5-24-2004; Ord. 25-2004, passed 11-8-2004;
Ord. 54-2005, passed 11-14-2005; Ord. 26-2006, passed 8-26-2006; Ord.
44-2006, passed 5-14-2007; Ord. 22-2007, passed 9-24-2007; Ord. 09-2010,
passed 6-28-2010; Ord. 14-2014, passed 5-12-2014)



SCHEDULE III.  POLICE PARKING ONLY.



   (A)   Police parking only shall be permitted on the west side of
North Center Street from Main Street to the first alley north of Main Street.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or any other person designated by the Town
Council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for restricted
parking.



   (C)   Violation of this schedule is declared to be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not less than $10 or more than $25.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-15)  (Ord. GO-3, 1974, passed 5-28-1974; Ord. 11-90,
passed 7-9-1990)



SCHEDULE IV.  TOWN LOT PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person, corporation or agent shall park any vehicle on the
following described lot:




Lot #4 in Block 2 in the Original Town of Plainfield, Indiana, as shown in
the Plainfield Plat Book page 2 in the office of the Auditor of Hendricks
County, Indiana for a period of time longer than two hours between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day.




   (B)   Any vehicle parked on the above described lot for a period in
excess of two hours or over intervals between the hours specified shall be
declared to be parked in violation of this schedule and may be towed from
said lot by the Town Police Department and/or its agent and shall be declared
to be a violation of this schedule which violation is declared to be an
infraction.



   (C)   If any vehicle is removed from the above described lot by the
Town Police Department or its agent that the owner of said vehicle or his or
her representative shall pay any tow bill that might be incurred in the
removal of said vehicle and the Town Police Department or its agent be, and
is authorized to retain said vehicle until such tow bill is satisfied in full.



   (D)   Failure to comply with the above provisions shall constitute a
violation of this schedule and is declared to be an infraction punishable by
a fine of $10. It is further provided that each violation of this schedule is
to be a separate and distinct violation.



(1991 Draft Code, § 8-16)  (Ord. 2-67, passed 3-27-1967; Ord. 11-90, passed
7-9-1990)



SCHEDULE V.  SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.



   The following streets or portions of streets within the town are hereby
designated as snow emergency routes:



 



Agan Dr. from New 267 to Airwest Boulevard


Airwest Boulevard from Stanley Road to Whittaker Road


Brookside from Buchanan Street to Pierce Street


Buchanan Street from S. Mill to Dan Jones Road


Cambridge Way from Hartford Avenue to C.R. 600


Claymont Boulevard


Cody Lane


Connaught East Drive


Connaught West Drive


Culver Lane


Duffey from U.S. 40 to French Street


Eastern Avenue from U.S. 40 to Harlan Street


Elm Drive from U.S. 40 to Stafford Road


Fairfield Road


Gary Drive from Stafford Road to Kirkwood


Hadley Road from Clarks Creek Road to C.R. 675


Hancook from Tarpon to Section Street


Harlan Street from Eastern Avenue to N. Carr Road


Homestead Circle


Homestead Court


Homestead East


Homestead Lane


Kensington Way


Kensington Boulevard


N. Kensington Way


N. Carr Road from U.S. 40 to Township Line Road


N. Vine Street from U.S. 40 to Depot Street


N. East Street from U.S. 40 to Depot Street


N. Center Street from U.S. 40 to Township Line Road


Oakbrook Drive


Oliver Avenue from Elm Drive to Masten Street


Paddock Road


Perry Road from Airwest to Stafford Road


Pickett Street from U.S. 40 to Harlan Street


Porchester Place


Portman Place


Raines from U.S. 40 to dead-end


Redcliff South Lane


Redcliff North Lane


Reeves Road from S. Center Street to New 267


Ridgewood Drive from Gary to Stanley Road


S. Carr Road from U.S. 40 to dead-end


S. Vine Street from U.S. 40 to South Street


S. Kensington Circle


S. East Street from U.S. 40 to Stafford Road


S. Center Street from U.S. 40 to I-70 bridge


Saratoga Place


Saratoga Parkway from U.S. 40 to CR 350


Section Street from Hancook to Simmons


Shaw Street from U.S. 40 to Buchanan


Simmons Street from U.S. 40 to Stafford Rd.


Smith Road from U.S. 40 to Township Line Road


Springcrest from S. Center to Terry Drive


Stafford Road from S. Center Street to Six Points Road


Stanley Road from S. Center Street to New 267


Stanley from New 267 to Perry Road


Vestal Road from U.S. 40 to railroad tracks


W. Homestead Place


Wabash Street from U.S. 40 to Buchanan


Walton Drive from Stafford Road to Stanley Road




 



(Ord. 28-96, passed 12-9-1996)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      91.   ANIMAL REGULATIONS



      92.   NUISANCES



      93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      94.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      95.   FIRE PREVENTION



      96.   GARBAGE



      97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      98.   FAIR HOUSING



      99.   ALARM SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 90:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   90.01   Town’s authority to regulate



   90.02   Preservation of public peace and order



   90.03   Authority to regulate air and sound



   90.04   Authority to regulate public gatherings



   90.05   Authority to establish Fire Department



   90.06   Control over animals



   90.07   Offenses against public health, order and decency



   90.08   Resisting official action



§ 90.01  TOWN’S AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.



   The town may regulate the conduct, or use or possession of property
which might endanger the public health, safety or welfare of its citizens.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-1)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the regulation of conduct and property for reasons of
public health, safety and welfare, see I.C. 36-8-2-4



§ 90.02  PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER.



   The town may establish, maintain and operate a police and law
enforcement system to preserve public peace and order and may provide
facilities and equipment for that system.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to preserve the public peace and order, see I.C. 36-8-2-2



§ 90.03  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE AIR AND SOUND.



   The town may regulate the introduction of any substance or odor into
the air, or any generation of sound.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-3)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the regulation of air and sound, see I.C. 36-8-2-8



§ 90.04  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE PUBLIC GATHERINGS.



   The town may regulate public gatherings, such as shows, demonstrations,
fairs, conventions, sporting events and exhibitions.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-4)



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of public gatherings, see I.C. 36-8-2-9



§ 90.05  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The town may establish, maintain and operate a firefighting and fire
prevention system and may provide facilities and equipments for that system.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-5)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish a firefighting system, see I.C. 36-8-2-3



§ 90.06  CONTROL OVER ANIMALS.



   A town may regulate the control of animals and may establish animal
shelters.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-6)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing a unit to control animals and to establish, operate and
maintain animal shelters, see I.C. 36-8-2-6



§ 90.07  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH, ORDER AND DECENCY.



   All offenses against public health, order or decency not addressed by
this code shall be governed by applicable state statute.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-7)



Statutory reference:



   Addressing such offenses, see I.C. 35-45-1-1 et seq.



§ 90.08  RESISTING OFFICIAL ACTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to knowingly or
intentionally interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any town
official or employee in the performance of his or her official duties.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Resisting a law enforcement officer, see I.C. 35-44-3-3



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMAL REGULATIONS



Section



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Animal care regulations



   91.04   Sale of baby rabbits, chicks or fowl prohibited; exception



   91.05   Motor vehicle accidents involving animals



   91.06   Animals in motor vehicles



   91.07   Poisoning of animals



   91.08   Trapping of animals restricted



   91.09   Maximum number of dogs or cats per household



   91.10   Acreage requirements for certain domestic animals



   91.11   Animals in heat



   91.12   Animal wastes



   91.13   Animal bites and reports



   91.14   Vaccination of dogs required



   91.15   Wild animals, poisonous reptiles and attack dogs



   91.16   Keeping certain animals prohibited



   91.17   Keeping wild animals (ferae naturae)



   91.18   Attack dogs



   91.19   Humane Officer



   91.20   Inspection



   91.21   Interference with Humane Officer prohibited



   91.22   Impounding procedures



   91.23   Remedies



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable and responsible
animal regulations for those individuals who desire to own pets within the
corporate limits of the town. This chapter takes into consideration the
concerns of surrounding residents and their desire to have a quality of life
which is not impeded by potential animal nuisance problems.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-11)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT. To deposit, leave, drop off or otherwise dispose of any
domestic animal on any public or private property without providing immediate
human care.



   AGENT. Person(s) 18 years or older authorized by an owner to act in the
owner’s behalf.



   ALTERED ANIMALS. Any animal that has been operated on to prevent it
from procreating.



   ANIMAL. Any live non-human vertebrate creature, domestic, wild or
exotic.



   ANIMAL SHELTER. A facility operated by a humane society, the county or
a facility operated by authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.



   AT LARGE. Any animal that is not under restraint.



   AUCTIONS. Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought,
sold or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter
or state law.



   BREEDER. Any person who for compensation causes the breeding or selling
of any dog or cat or makes any dog or cat available for breeding purposes.



   CATTERY. Any person, group of persons, partnership, corporation or
association owning or harboring more than three cats.



   CIRCUS. Includes performances given by traveling companies on vacant
lots where tenants, or some other kind of temporary enclosure, where
performances are given for a fee. Performances may include, but are not
limited to: trained animal acts, races, feats of horsemenship, acrobatics,
strength, trapeze acting or clowns.



   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction,
riding school, stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition,
kennel or any display or show of wild or domestic animals in a shopping
center or mall, retail establishment or adjacent lot for the purpose of
promoting retail sales.



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal that is a member of one of the following
species:



      (1)   Dog (Canis Familiaris);



      (2)   Cat (Felis Cattus or Felis Domesticus);



      (3)   Cattle (Bos Domesticus or Bos Taurus or Bos Indicus);



      (4)   Horse (Equus Caballus);



      (5)   Donkey (Equus Asinus);



      (6)   Pig (Sus Scroffa);



      (7)   Sheep (Ovis Aries);



      (8)   Goat (Capra Hircus);



      (9)   Rabbit (Oryctolagus Cuniculus);



      (10)   Mouse (Mus Musculus);



      (11)   Rat (Rattus Rattus);



      (12)   Guinea pig (Cavis Procellus);



      (13)   Chinchilla (Chinchilla Langier);



      (14)   Hamster (Mesocriecetus Auratus);



      (15)   Gerbil (Gerbillus Gerbillus);



      (16)   Mink; and



      (17)   Cow or ox (bovine) and all domestic animals defined in
I.C. 15-17-2-26.



   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any animal whose normal native habitat is not indigenous
to the continental United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii, except fish
and fur bearing animals commercially bred for the furrier trade and birds
defined under federal regulations, and non-poisonous snakes and reptiles.



   EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any human or non-human warm blooded mammal that has
been bitten or in contact with any other animal known or reasonably suspected
to have been infected with rabies.



   FOWL. Any kind of wild or domestic bird.



   FRESH PURSUIT. The immediate following of any animal that is found to
be at large and not on the owner’s property.



   GROOMING SHOP. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.



   GUIDE DOGS. Dogs trained to assist the handicapped.



   HARBORING. The actions of any person that permits any animal habitually
to remain or lodge or to be fed within his or her home, store, enclosure,
yard or place of business or any premises on which such person resides or
controls. An animal shall be presumed HARBORED if it is fed or sheltered for
three consecutive days.



   HUMANE OFFICER. Any person(s) designated by the state, county or the
town, as an officer who is qualified to perform the duties required by the
law of this town and state regarding animals.



   KEEPERS. Veterinarians and operators of kennels, pet shops, boarding
kennels, grooming shops and stables temporarily keeping animals owned by or
held for sale to other persons.



   KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, letting or keeping more than three dogs for hire,
training for a fee or selling.



   OWNER. Any person age 18 years or older owning or harboring one or more
animals.



   PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   PET SHOP. Any person, group of persons, partnership or corporation
whether operated separately or in connection with another business
enterprise, that buys, sells or offers for sale any species of animal.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal or animals which:



      (1)   Interfere with passersby or passing vehicles;



      (2)   Attacks other animals or persons;



      (3)   Is at-large;



      (4)   Damages private or public property;



      (5)   Barks, whines, howls or makes other sounds common to its
species in excess; and



      (6)   Causes foul or noxious odors which offend residents in
the neighborhood.



   RABIES VACCINATION. The injection, by a licensed veterinarian, of a
dog, cat or other animal with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S.D.A. and
approved by the State Board of Health.



   RESTRAINT. The securing of an animal by leash or lead or confining it
within the real property limits of its owner or agent.



   RIDING SCHOOL or STABLE. Any place that has available for hire,
boarding and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burrow.



   RODEO. A performance featuring bronco riding, steer wrestling, calf
roping, greased pig contest or bull riding.



   STRAY. Any animal that is not under restraint and or upon reasonable
inquiry by a Humane Officer does not appear to have an owner.



   VETERINARIAN. Any person licensed and accredited to practice veterinary
medicine in the state.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has, without provocation, attacked a
human being or other animal, or an animal that by its behavior or physical
condition constitutes an immediate and serious physical or health threat to
human beings or animals, or any animal which has previously attacked or
bitten any human being or other animal on two or more occasions.



   WILD ANIMALS. Any animal not a domestic or exotic animal, with the
exception of small, nonpoisonous aquatic or amphibious animals and small cage
birds, which are normally found in the wild state.



   ZOOLOGICAL PARK. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals
operated by a person, partnership, corporation or governmental agency.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-12)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 91.03  ANIMAL CARE REGULATIONS.



   Every owner and or agent of an animal within the town shall see that
their animal:



   (A)   Is kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner and is not
confined as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement;



   (B)   Has sufficient and wholesome food and water, which is proper
and nutritional for that species of animal;



   (C)   Has a proper and adequate structure provided that will protect
that animal from all elements of the weather and will allow that animal to
stand, sit and lie down without restriction, and is kept in a sanitary manner;



   (D)   If ill, diseased or injured receives proper medical care as
necessary to prevent the transmittal of a disease to other animals or human
beings and is segregated from other animals;



   (E)   Is not beaten, cruelly ill-treated, overloaded, overworked or
otherwise abuse any animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dog fight,
cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and
humans;



   (F)   Is not physically altered in any manner by anyone other than a
veterinarian with the exception of tattooing and grooming;



   (G)   Is not abandoned, neglected or tortured;



   (H)   Does not become a public nuisance as defined in this title;



   (I)   Does not become a vicious animal;



   (J)   Is properly vaccinated and/or licensed if required by a local,
state or federal law; and



   (K)   Is properly restrained at all times on a short leash.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-13)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990; Ord. 45-2006,
passed 12-28-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Recklessly permitting a domestic animal to run at large, see I.C.
15-17-8-8



§ 91.04  SALE OF BABY RABBITS, CHICKS OR FOWL PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall display, offer for sale, barter or give away
baby rabbits, chicks, goslings, ducklings or other fowl as novelties.



   (B)   No rabbit, chick gosling, duckling or other fowl that has been
dyed or otherwise colored artificially may be sold or offered for sale;
raffled; offered or given as a prize, premium; or advertising device; or
displayed in any store, shop, carnival or other public place.



   (C)   Stores, shops, vendors and others offering chicks, ducklings,
or goslings for sale, raffle, or as a prize, premium, or advertising device,
or displaying chicks, ducklings, goslings to the public, shall provide and
operate brooders or other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain
the chicks, ducklings or goslings in good health, and shall keep adequate
food and water available to the birds at all times.



   (D)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or
display of natural chicks or ducklings in proper brooder facilities by
hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling them to be raised for
commercial purposes.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-14)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS INVOLVING ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any person operating a motor vehicle who knowingly hits, runs
over or causes injury to any animal shall stop at once, ascertain the extent
of the injury and notify to the nearest police station or police officer.



   (B)   The motorist shall report his or her name, address,
operator’s license, registration number, type of animal hit and the street
location of the animal.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-15)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.06  ANIMALS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No animal shall be left in a motor vehicle when the condition in that
vehicle would constitute a health hazard to the animal.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-16)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.07  POISONING OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any known
poisonous substance in any of the streets, alleys, parks, commons, yard or
other places, whether public or private, within the town so that the same
shall be liable to be consumed by any animal, provided that it shall not be
unlawful for a person to expose on his or her own property to common rat or
mouse poison, unmixed or mixed with vegetable substances.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-17)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.08  TRAPPING OF ANIMALS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to prevent the potential
harm that may be inflicted upon persons and to prevent the maiming,
unselective catching and destruction of wild animals or birds and domestic
animals which come in contact with traps.



   (B)   No person shall trap for animals or fowl within the town
limits unless such traps(s) are cage type live traps approved by the Humane
Society or similar animal care facility used for the control of nuisance
animals. This prohibition shall not apply to any trap specifically designed
to kill rats, mice, gophers or moles so long as the owner of the property is
aware of where the trap(s) are set.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-18)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.09  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS OR CATS PER HOUSEHOLD.



   (A)   No person shall keep more than a total of three dogs or cats
over the age of six months per household in any residential area zoned R-l,
R-2, R-3 or PUD residential.



   (B)   These restrictions mean a total of three animals, for example
dogs and one cat, or two cats and one dog, but in no event shall the total
number exceed three of such animals per household.



   (C)   This restriction shall not apply to property which is at least
one-half of an acre of land (21,780 square feet).



   (D)   Comply with other requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-19)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.10  ACREAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to raise any of the following domestic
animals or fowl must have a minimum of one-half acre of land (21,780 square
feet):



      (1)   Rabbits; and



      (2)   Pigeons.



   (B)   Any person desiring to raise any of the following named
domestic animals or fowl must have minimum of two acres of land:



      (1)   Cow, ox, cattle, calves or other livestock;



      (2)   Donkey, ass, burro, mule;



      (3)   Pig, swine, hog;



      (4)   Sheep;



      (5)   Goat;



      (6)   Chickens, roosters, geese, turkeys, ducks or other fowl;
and



      (7)   Bees.



   (C)   Any person desiring to raise horses must have a minimum of
five acres of land.



   (D)   In no event shall the shelter and feeding area for any of the
animals or fowl herein be closer than 75 feet from any family dwelling.



   (E)   Bees must be kept in accordance with the following provisions.



      (1)   If bee colonies are kept within 75 feet of any exterior
boundary of the property on which the hive, stand or box is located, a
barrier that will prevent bees from flying through it, no less than five feet
high, shall be installed and maintained along said exterior boundary. Said
barrier may be either a plant or artificial.



      (2)   Fresh, clean watering facilities for bees shall be
provided on the premises.



      (3)   The bees and equipment shall be kept in accordance with
the provisions of state statutes.



Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the keeping
of bees in a hive, stand or box located or kept within a zoological park,
school or university building for the purpose of study or observation.



   (F)   Comply with requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-20)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.11  ANIMALS IN HEAT.



   Every female animal in heat or rutting shall be confined within a
building or secure enclosure so that the animal cannot come into contact with
a male animal of the same species except for planned breeding.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-21)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.12  ANIMAL WASTES.



   Persons responsible for an animal shall immediately remove the
animal’s excrements from public or private property, excepting a
handicapped person working with a guide dog.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-22)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.13  ANIMAL BITES AND REPORTS.



   (A)   If any person is a victim of or witness to an animal bite, he
or she shall immediately notify the Town Police Department of the incident,
and provide a description of the animal and the identification, if possible,
of the owner. When an animal is determined to have bitten a person, the
animal shall be confined in quarantine for a period of not less than ten days.



   (B)   If the owner of an animal which has bitten a person has proof
of current rabies inoculation the animal may be left in the charge of the
owner under quarantine unless in the judgement of the Humane Officer and
based upon considerations of public safety he or she determines it should be
removed to an animal shelter or veterinary hospital for the period of
observation.



   (C)   The owner shall be liable for all costs incurred in the
quarantine of the animal and for any personal and property damage realized by
the incident.



   (D)   Humane Officers shall be empowered to enter onto private
property for the purpose of impounding animal(s) which are known to have
bitten a person and shall obtain legal process to do so if necessary.



   (E)   Unless otherwise provided, the town and any of its agents
shall comply with the standards set forth in I.C. 15-17-6-1 through I.C.
15-17-6-14 entitled “Rabies”.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-23)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.14  VACCINATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No owner of any dog shall keep or maintain a dog over the age
of six months unless it has been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with
anti-rabies vaccine.



   (B)   Proof of vaccination shall be maintained by the owner for
display if requested by the town or its agents.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-24)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



Statutory reference:



   State rabies quarantine procedures and other animal health care
requirements, see I.C. 15-17-6-1 et seq.



§ 91.15  WILD ANIMALS, POISONOUS REPTILES AND ATTACK DOGS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess with the intent
to sell or offer for sale, or buy or attempt to buy or own within the town
any of the following animals:



      (1)   All wild cats of the family felidae;



      (2)   Polar bear (thalarctos maritimus);



      (3)   Red wolf (canis niger);



      (4)   Vicuna (vicugna vicugna);



      (5)   Alligator;



      (6)   Caiman or crocodile of the order of corcodilia;



      (7)   Gray or timber wolf (canis lupus);



      (8)   Sea otter (enhydra lutris);



      (9)   Pacific ridley turtle (lepidochelys olivacea);



      (10)   Atlantic green turtle (chelonia mydas); or



      (11)   Mexican ridley turtle (lepidochelys kempi).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, sell or offer for
sale or own a native or foreign species or subspecies of mammal, bird,
amphibian or reptile, or the dead body or parts thereof, which appears on the
endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of Interior
and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered
Species Act of 1969 (Pub. L. No. 135, 91st Congress), being 16 U.S.C.A. §§
1531 et seq.



   (C)   No person shall import or cause to be imported into this town
any part of the plumage, skin or dead body of any species of hawk, owl or
eagle. This division (C) shall not be construed to forbid or restrict the
importation or use of the plumage, skin, body or any part thereof legally
collected for use by the American Indians for ceremonial purposes or in the
preservation of their tribal customs and heritage.



   (D)   This section shall not be deemed to prevent the importation,
possession, purchase or sale of any species by any institute of higher
learning, zoological park, persons holding federal permits, or to any person
or organization licensed to present a circus or carnival pursuant to this
code of ordinances.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-25)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.16  KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have
in his or her possession or under his or her control within the town any
poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or
reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any other animal or
reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have
in his or her possession or under his or her control within the town any of
the following animals:



      (1)   All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes;



      (2)   Apes: chimpanzees (Pan), gibbons, (Hylobates), gorillas,
(Gorilla), orangutans (Pongo) and siamangs (Symphalangus);



      (3)   Baboons (Papoi, Mandrillus);



      (4)   Bears (Ursidae);



      (5)   Bison (Bison);



      (6)   Cheetahs (acinonyx jubatus);



      (7)   Crocodilians (Crocodilia);



      (8)   Constrictor snakes;



      (9)   Coyotes (Canis latrans);



      (10)   Deer (Cervidae), includes all members of the deer
family, for example, white-tailed deer, elk, antelope and moose;



      (11)   Elephants (elephas and Loxodonta);



      (12)   Game cocks and other fighting birds;



      (13)   Hippopotami (Hippopotamidae);



      (14)   Hyenas (Hyaenidae);



      (15)   Jaguars (Panthera onca);



      (16)   Leopards (Panthera pardus);



      (17)   Lions (Panthera leo);



      (18)   Lynxes (Lynx);



      (19)   Monkeys, old world (Cercopithecidae);



      (20)   Ostriches (Stuthio);



      (21)   Piranha fish (Characidae);



      (22)   Pumas (Felis concolor); also known as cougars, mountain
lions and panthers;



      (23)   Rhinoceroses (rhinocero tidae);



      (24)   Sharks (class Chondrichthyes);



      (25)   Snow leopards (Panthera uncia);



      (26)   Spiders and insects which are poisonous;



      (27)   Tigers (Panthera tigris); and



      (28)   Wolves (canis lupus).



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to zoological
parks and circuses, if:



      (1)   Their location conforms to the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance;



      (2)   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors; and



      (3)   Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-26)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.17  KEEPING WILD ANIMALS (FERAE NATURAE).



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, own, or
permit to be kept on his or her premises any wild animal (ferae naturae).



   (B)   Wild animals are defined in and shall include, but not be
limited to, raccoons, skunks, foxes, squirrels, chipmunks, porcupines, wolves
and woodchucks.



   (C)   Zoological parks, animal care facilities, circuses or
carnivals properly licensed pursuant to this  code of ordinances and persons
possessing a valid wildlife permit from the State Department of Conservation
are exempt from this section.



   (D)   Any person who owns a wild animal and is not issued a wildlife
permit or whose wildlife permit is revoked may have the animal(s) confiscated
by the State Department of Conservation or by a Humane Officer.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-27)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.18  ATTACK DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall harbor, hold for sale, sell, keep or maintain
in the town any attack dog unless:



      (1)   The attack dog is at all times confined in an
escape-proof enclosure; or



      (2)   The attack dog, when not confined is reined or tethered
to its master, owner or keeper over the age of 18 years; and



      (3)   The owner of the attack dog(s) is the holder of a
currently valid permit issued by a proper state or federal authority
authorized to keep attack dogs.



   (B)   Duly authorized members of the police or other law enforcement
departments including, but not limited to, game wardens, conservation
officers and other law enforcement officers shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-28)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.19  HUMANE OFFICER.



   There shall be appointed by the Town Council a person to serve as a
Humane Officer who shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
Said Humane Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council. The
enforcement of this chapter shall include police officers of the Town
Metropolitan Police Department, Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector
or other agents of the town designated by the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-29)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 91.20  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this chapter or when
there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or
upon any premises any violations of the provisions of this chapter or state
law, the Humane Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector or
police officer is authorized at all reasonable times to inspect the same for
compliance with provisions of this chapter or any state law provided that:



      (1)   If the property is occupied, the officer shall first
present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the
reasons therefore; and



      (2)   If the property is unoccupied, the officer shall make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control of the
property and request entry explaining the reason therefore.



   (B)   In the event a Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector,
Police Officer or Humane Officer has reasonable cause to believe that keeping
or maintaining of an animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous or
constitutes a public nuisance as to require immediate inspection to safeguard
the animal or the public health or safety, the officer shall first present
proper credentials and request entry explaining the reasons therefore. If
entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person
having charge or control of the property cannot be found after reasonable
search, the officer shall have recourse to secure lawful entry and inspection
of the property.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-30)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 91.21  INTERFERENCE WITH HUMANE OFFICER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with or impede a
Humane Officer or other authorized agents of the town in the performance of
their duties as set forth in this chapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-31)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.22  IMPOUNDING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All animals found to be at large, stray or being a nuisance
may be taken by the Humane Officer, police or other authorized agents of the
town and impounded.



   (B)   If any dangerous, ferocious or vicious animal is found at
large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such animal may be
tranquilized or humanely euthanized to prevent undue suffering, by a police
officer, Humane Officer or other authorized agents of the town.



   (C)   Impounded dogs without town tags (licenses) must be kept for a
reasonable period of time but not less than three working days before being
adopted out or euthanized after their impoundment.



   (D)   Impounded dogs with town tags (licenses) shall be kept for not
less than three working days to permit their owners to claim them. After the
expiration period of time has elapsed, these dogs may be placed for adoption
or euthanized if their owners have not claimed and paid the required fees.



   (E)   All other impounded animals (except dogs which are
specifically covered herein) shall be under the authority of the animal
shelter. The animals shall be held at least one day, after which time the
animal shelter shall have the authority to take whatever action is necessary
with regard to adoption or euthanasia for such animals.



   (F)   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall be liable for
all animal shelter fees for each day the animal has been impounded for food,
board and related expenses.



   (G)   Immediately upon the impounding of dogs or other animals, the
agent of the town shall make every effort possible to notify the owner of the
animal being impounded and shall further notify the owner of the conditions
under which the owner may regain custody of the animal.



   (H)   In addition to, or in lieu of impounding an animal found at
large, the Humane Officer, police or other agent of the town may issue to the
owner of such an animal a warning notice of an ordinance violation. Said
warning notice shall state that the person is in violation of this chapter
and that he or she has seven days in which to comply. The warning notice
shall contain the date, time, name and address of the violator, the ordinance
section violated, nature of the violation, location of the violation, the
name of the officer issuing the warning notice and the telephone number of
the officer to contact for information. Additionally, a citation may be
issued which shall contain the date, time, name and address of the violator,
the ordinance section violated, the nature of the violation, location of the
violation, the name of the officer issuing the citation and instructions as
to disposition of the citation.



   (I)   No unlicensed dog shall be released from an animal shelter
without a license being issued in accordance with this chapter.



   (J)   Nothing contained herein shall limit the animal shelter’s
authority to take whatever action is reasonably necessary to deal with a sick
or injured animal.



   (K)   If upon release, any animal is again found to be at large, the
animal shall be impounded, and the owner shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 91.99, as well as the citation procedures set forth above.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-32)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.23  REMEDIES.



   The Humane Officer, police officers of the Town Metropolitan Police
Department, Code Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector or other agents
authorized by the Town Council shall, in the name of the town, bring actions
in the Town Court or the Circuit or Superior Courts of the county, for
mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure
compliance with any order or orders made by the Humane Officers, police
officers of the Town Metropolitan Police Department, Code Enforcement
Officer, Building Inspector or other agents authorized by the Town Council
and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an
action to recover the penalties provided in this chapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-34)  (Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified herein, any person who violates
this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 for the first offense, $35 for
the second offense and $50 for each offense thereafter; provided, in no
event, shall the fine exceed $2,500 for any single offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day during which or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-35)



   (B)   Any animal being offered for sale or owned in violation of §
91.15 may be seized by a Humane Officer and impounded. Any person violating
any of the provisions of § 91.15 shall be fined not more than $200 for the
first offense and no more than $500 for each subsequent offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-25)



   (C)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §
91.16 shall be fined not less than $200 but not more than $2,500 for the
first offense and not less than $500 but not more than $2,500 for each
subsequent offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during which or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-26)



   (D)   Persons in violation of § 91.17 shall be fined not less than
$100 but not to exceed $2,500 for the first offense, and not less than $150
but not to exceed $2,500 for each subsequent offense; and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each animal and for each day during which or on
which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-27)



(Ord. 1-90, passed 2-28-1990)



CHAPTER 92:  NUISANCES



Section




Removal of Weeds and Rank Vegetation




   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Removal required



   92.04   Written notice



   92.05   Service of notice



   92.06   Town action upon owner failure



   92.07   Written statement



   92.08   Time limitation for payment after service



   92.09   Appeal



   92.10   Complaint filed




Nuisance Abatement




   92.40   Nuisances in general



   92.41   Abatement of nuisances



   92.42   Inspection of premises



   92.43   Conditions defined as nuisances



   92.44   Notice to abate



   92.45   Abatement by owner



   92.46   Abatement by town



   92.47   Billing



   92.48   Test for nuisance



   92.49   Nuisances created by others



 



   92.99   Penalty



REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RANK VEGETATION



§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the removal of weeds
and rank vegetation in the town.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. The person or persons identified as the owner of real property
on the tax records for the subject property in the office of the County
Assessor.



   WEEDS and/or RANK VEGETATION. Any vegetable matter which exceeds the
height of 12 inches; provided however that such definition does not include:



      (1)   Trees, bushes or shrubs which have been planted or
cultivated by the landowner;



      (2)   Agricultural crops, such as hay and pasture; or



      (3)   Vegetable matter cultivated in plant beds.



   TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, a municipal corporation located in
Hendricks County, Indiana.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 92.03  REMOVAL REQUIRED.



   All owners of real property located within the corporate limits of the
town shall cut and remove weeds and other rank vegetation growing on the
property.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.04  WRITTEN NOTICE.



   Upon determination by the Town Council, Town Manager, Superintendent of
Public Works, Building Commissioner, Zoning Compliance Inspector or Chief of
Police that weeds and/or rank vegetation exist as defined in this subchapter,
the Town Manager or Zoning Compliance Officer shall issue a written notice to
the owner that the weeds and/or rank vegetation must be removed within five
days of service of the notice. Such notice shall advise the owner of the
penalty for removing such vegetation.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.05  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   The notice required by § 92.04 shall be served upon the owner either
by personal service or by certified mail return receipt requested. If notice
cannot be given by either personal service or certified mail, the notice
shall be given by first class mail and shall be deemed to be served four days
after mailing. Furthermore, after the initial notice of violation of this
subchapter has been provided to the owner pursuant to § 92.04, the town or
its designee may post a continuous abatement notice at the property at the
time of the removal of the weeds and/or rank vegetation and abatement of the
property rather than providing a subsequent notice(s) by certified mail. This
continuous abatement notice serves as notice to the owner that each
subsequent violation of this subchapter during the same calendar year for
which the initial notice of the violation was provided may be abated by the
town or its designee without further notice to the owner.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 92.06  TOWN ACTION UPON OWNER FAILURE.



   If the owner fails to remove the weeds and/or rank vegetation within
the time prescribed in the notice or any extension of that time granted to
the owner by the Town Council, the town or its designee(s) may enter the
property in order remove, or cause to be removed, such vegetation so as to
abate the violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.07  WRITTEN STATEMENT.



   In the event that the town removes, or causes to be removed, such weeds
and/or rank vegetation, the Clerk-Treasurer shall prepare a written statement
of the cost incurred, including administrative costs, by the town for the
removal and for abating the violation of this subchapter. The statement shall
be served upon the owner in the same manner as the service of notice detailed
in § 92.05.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.08  TIME LIMITATION FOR PAYMENT AFTER SERVICE.



   After the certified statement is served upon the owner as prescribed in
§ 92.07, the owner shall have ten days from service of such statement to pay
the same to the Clerk-Treasurer. If the owner fails to pay the same within
ten days of service, the cost shall become a lien upon the subject real
estate, and the Clerk-Treasurer shall file a certified statement of the cost
incurred for the removal with Auditor of the county for inclusion on the tax
duplicate against the property upon which the work was performed.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.09  APPEAL.



   Any appeal of the removal notice or statement for costs must be made
within ten calendar days of the date of the removal notice or statement of
costs, whichever is applicable. Any appeal must be in writing and shall be
made to the Town Council which shall set the matter for a hearing. The
hearing may be at a special or regular meeting of the Town Council. After the
hearing, the Town Council shall issue its written findings. Any appeal from
the written findings of the Town Council must be made to the Town Court
within ten calendar days of issuance of the Town Council’s written findings.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)



§ 92.10  COMPLAINT FILED.



   If the owner fails to give the town permission to be on their property
to remove the weeds and/or rank vegetation as provided in § 92.06, the town
may file a complaint against the owner in the Town Court seeking an order
from the court finding a violation of this subchapter and authorizing the
town to go onto the property for the purpose of cutting, mowing and removing
vegetation that constitutes a violation of this subchapter and imposing a
fine as provided for herein.



(Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012, passed 7-9-2012)



NUISANCE ABATEMENT



§ 92.40  NUISANCES IN GENERAL.



   In addition to what is declared in this subchapter to be a nuisance,
those offenses which are known to the common law and the statutes of the
state as public nuisances may, in case any thereof exist within the town
limits, be treated as such and be proceeded against as is provided in this
subchapter; or in accordance with any other provisions of law. Wherever the
word “nuisance” is used in this subchapter it refers to a public nuisance.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-57)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.41  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   (A)   In any case where any nuisance may be found to exist, it shall
be the duty of the Town Council to serve notice on the owner or occupant of
the premises where such nuisance exists, or on any other person so causing or
allowing such nuisance to exist, to abate such nuisance within a reasonable
time. In determining such reasonable time, the Council shall take into
consideration the degree of threat to the public health, safety and welfare,
and the means required to abate such nuisance. It shall not be necessary for
such Council to designate in the notice the manner in which any such nuisance
shall be abated unless such Council shall deem it advisable to do so;
however, the Council shall indicate in such notice the date within which the
nuisance must be abated.



   (B)   If the owner, occupant or other persons served with a notice
to abate the nuisance shall refuse or neglect to abate such nuisance within
the designated time after such notice is given, such person shall be subject
to the penalties provided in the fee schedule. In addition, the Council may
cause such nuisance to be abated in any manner authorized by law, including
the institution in the name of the town against the owner, occupant or other
person, of an action therefor and for the recovery of the amount of expense
of such abatement, the costs of such action and the attorneys’ fees
incurred by the town.



   (C)   In addition, the Council may cause such nuisance to be abated
by authorizing the proper officer of the town to remove the nuisance with the
employment of town employees, and charge the owner, occupant or other person
for the cost of the removal and abatement of the nuisance, the cost to be
determined by doubling the labor cost incurred by the town of abating the
nuisance.



   (D)   The Council shall notify the Clerk-Treasurer of the cost of
abatement of any nuisance. The Clerk-Treasurer shall notify the owner,
occupant or other person against whom the abatement proceedings were brought
as to the cost of abatement; and if the cost is not paid by the owner within
30 days, the proper town officers shall proceed to collect the same from the
owner, occupant or other person by causing the costs to be placed on the tax
duplicate, by placing a lien of the property or by suit.



   (E)   The requirements for service of notice under the provisions of
divisions (A) and (B) above may be complied with by mailing such notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
person sought to be notified, or by personal service of such notice on such
person by any police officer so directed.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-58)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.42  INSPECTION OF PREMISES.



   For the purpose of carrying the provisions of this subchapter into
effect, it is the duty of all officers and employees of the town to report
the existence of nuisances to the Town Council, and for this purpose the Town
Manager, Building Inspector, the Police Department and the Fire Department or
other employees designated by the Town Council shall be permitted to visit or
enter into or on any building, lot, grounds or premises within the town to
ascertain and discover the existence of any such nuisances and to make
examination thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-59)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of building standards, see I.C. 36-7-9-1 et seq.



§ 92.43  CONDITIONS DEFINED AS NUISANCES.



   The following conditions within the town as declared to be nuisances:



   (A)   Dangerous trees, or stacks. Any tree, stack or other object
adjoining a street or standing on premises in a condition that shall, if
allowed to continue, endanger the life, limb or property, or cause hurt,
damage or injury to persons or property adjacent thereto;



   (B)   Buildings. Any building if any of the following conditions
obtain:



      (1)   Such building has been damaged by fire or other casualty
to such extent that, following such fire or other casualty, it ceased to be
occupied and such building has remained unoccupied for a period of two years
from the date of said fire or other casualty;



      (2)   Such building has been unoccupied for a period of three
years; and



      (3)   However, no such building or premises shall be
considered a nuisance if the owner has obtained the necessary permits for the
repair of any existing structure which has been unoccupied because of damage,
for the demolition of any existing building its replacement with a new
building, or for the construction of a building on any vacation premises.



   (C)   Accumulation of rubbish. An accumulation on any premises of
filth, refuse, trash, garbage or other waste material which endangers the
public health, welfare or safety, or materially interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment by owners or occupants of adjacent property because of the danger
of its catching or communicating fire, its attracting and propagating vermin,
rodents or insects, or its blowing into any street, sidewalk or property of
another. It shall be the duty of persons owning or being in charge of those
business establishments whose patrons purchase goods or services from their
automobiles, commonly known as “drive-ins”, to furnish sufficient covered
receptacles for the deposit of wastes created in the operation of such
business, and to clean up such wastes as are not deposited in receptacles at
the close of business of each day (or if such business operates continuously,
at least once each day), and at such other times when weather conditions are
such that waste from the operation of such business is being blown to
adjoining premises;



   (D)   Noxious odors or smoke. Odors, smoke, dust or other matter
emitted from premises into the surrounding atmosphere and which render
ordinary use or physical occupation of other property in the vicinity
uncomfortable or impossible;



   (E)   Noxious noise. Sound emitted from premises which destroys the
enjoyment of dwelling houses or other uses of property in the vicinity by
interference with the ordinary comforts of human existence;



   (F)   Unsafe storage. The storage of explosives or combustible
material which will create a safety hazard to other property or persons in
the vicinity;



   (G)   Open wells. The maintenance of any open, uncovered or
insecurely covered cistern, cellar, well, pit, excavation or vault situated
on private premises in any open or unfenced lot or place;



   (H)   Trees and shrubbery, obstructing. The growing and maintenance
of trees with less than 14 feet clearance over streets, or less than eight
feet over sidewalks, or the growing and maintenance of shrubbery in excess of
three feet in height within the radius of 20 feet from the point where the
curb line of any street intersects the curb line of another street. No shrub
shall be planted between the curb line and the property line of any street
within a radius of 20 feet from the point where the curb line of any street
intersects with the curb line of another street; and



   (I)   Junk, scrap metal and motor vehicles. The storage within
public view of motor vehicles in an inoperative conditions, motor vehicles
unfit for further use, automobile parts or scrap metal within the town limits:



      (1)   Motor vehicle in an inoperative condition. Any style or
type of motor-driven vehicle used or useful for the conveyance of persons or
property which is unable to move under its own power due to defective or
missing parts, and which has remained in such condition for a period of not
less than ten consecutive days;



      (2)   Motor vehicles unfit for further use. Any style or type
of motor-driven vehicle used for the conveyance of persons or property which
is in a dangerous condition, has defective or missing parts, or is in such a
condition generally as to be unfit for further use as a conveyance;



      (3)   Automobile parts. Any portion or parts of any
motor-driven vehicle as detached from the vehicle as a whole; and



      (4)   Scrap metal. Pieces or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc,
copper, aluminum or any alloy thereof, whether covered with porcelain or any
other material, whether intact or in parts, which has served its usefulness
in its original form and can no longer be used for its original intended
purposes.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-60)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)  Penalty, see §
92.99



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see I.C. 9-9-1.1 through I.C. 9-9-1-16



§ 92.44  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   (A)   In the event any building or premises shall become a nuisance
as herein provided, the Town Council shall notify the owner of such real
estate of the existence of a nuisance on the real estate, and shall further
notify the owner that the owner must take steps to abate the nuisance within
30 days from the date of receipt of the notice, and that, if the owner fails
to do so, said Town Board shall itself abate the nuisance within 30 days from
the date of receipt of the notice and hold a lien against the real estate for
the cost involved.



   (B)   Such notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address appearing on the tax duplicates for said real
estate. In the event the owner is not at said address and the postal
authorities are not appraised of a new address, the Town Council shall take
reasonable measures to give notice to the owner.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-61)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.45  ABATEMENT BY OWNER.



   The owner of any real estate on which is situated a nuisance may abate
the same by entering into a contract for the repair or alteration of any
existing structure which has been unoccupied because of damage or by entering
into contracts for the demolition of any existing building and its
replacement with a new building or for the landscaping of the premises in a
manner which will remove any hazard to the safety of pedestrians and
motorists and which will remove all physical blight from the premises.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-62)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.46  ABATEMENT BY TOWN.



   In the event the owner of any real estate on which is situated a
nuisance has not abated such nuisance within 30 days of receipt of the
notice, the Council shall proceed to abate such nuisance and by landscaping
the premises in a manner which will remove any hazard to the safety of
pedestrians and motorists and which will remove all physical blight from the
premises. It shall be the duty of said Council of maintain such by
landscaping until the real estate is sold or otherwise alienated. However,
said Council may extend the aforesaid 30-day period by an additional 30 days
if the Council determines that the owner of the real estate involved is
making a good faith attempt to abate the nuisance on said real estate.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-63)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.47  BILLING.



   The Town Council shall submit a bill for the labor, equipment and
material used in said demolition or initial landscaping to the owner of the
real estate involved. Thereafter, said Council shall submit a bill annually
for the cost of maintaining any landscaping. If the bill is not paid within
90 days from the date of submission, the Council shall proceed to file a lien
against the property in the amount of the bill together with interest at the
rate of 12% per annum, plus costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-64)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.48  TEST FOR NUISANCE.



   Whether or not a particular annoyance constitutes a nuisance shall
depend on its effect on persons of ordinary health and average sensibilities,
and not its effect on persons who are delicate or abnormally sensitive, or
whose habits, tastes or conditions are different than persons or ordinary
sensibilities.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-65)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.49  NUISANCES CREATED BY OTHERS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, it shall not be essential that the
nuisance be created or contributed to be the owner or tenants, or his or her
agents or representatives, but merely that the nuisance is created or
contributed to by licensees, invitees, guests or other persons for whose
conduct the owner or operator is responsible, or by persons whose conduct the
owner or operator, by the exercise of reasonable care, should have become
aware of.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-66)  (Ord. 4-83, passed 7-25-1983)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Monetary fines for violations of §§ 92.01 through 92.10
shall be assessed as follows:



      (1)   If the owner cuts, mows and removes the offending
vegetation and agrees to enter a plea of guilty to the ordinance violation
before the initial hearing, the owner shall be assessed a fine of $50,
provided this is the owner’s first offense for violation of §§ 92.01
through 92.10. The following fines shall apply for subsequent violations
under the circumstances set forth in this division (B)(1):



         (a)   Second violation: minimum $100, not to exceed $250;



         (b)   Third violation: minimum $250, not to exceed $500;
and



         (c)   Fourth and subsequent violations: minimum $500,
not to exceed $2,500.



      (2)   If the owner fails to appear and the town takes a
default judgment against the owner, the monetary fine for the first violation
shall be $150. The following monetary fines shall apply for each subsequent
violation under this division (B)(2):



         (a)   Second citation: minimum $250, not to exceed $500;
and



         (b)   Third and subsequent violations: minimum $500, not
to exceed $2,500.



      (3)   If the ordinance violation case is tried and the owner
is found to have violated the ordinance, the monetary fine shall be not less
than $500.



      (4)   Where a violation of §§ 92.01 through 92.10 is proven
in a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs, including all court costs
and attorneys’ fees relating to such proof, shall be recoverable from the
violator in addition to any other fine, abatement or equitable relief imposed
by the court, and a lien against the violator’s property may be imposed for
failure to pay the fines, costs, and/or attorneys’ fees.



      (5)   Any and all costs billed to the owner in accordance with
§ 92.08 shall not be construed as a fine and shall be added as costs to any
fine imposed for a violation of §§ 92.01 through 92.10.



(Ord. 4-80, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. 01-2002, passed 2-11-2002; Ord. 11-2012,
passed 7-9-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the town to charge for the removal of weeds and rank
vegetation, and have the same collected as taxes, see I.C. 36-7-10-3



CHAPTER 93:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Obstructions Prohibited




   93.01   Obstructions to streets prohibited



   93.02   Removal



   93.03   Street Department




Access to Public Streets and Thoroughfares




   93.15   Title



   93.16   Purpose



   93.17   Authority



   93.18   Scope



   93.19   Standards and guidelines for permit reviews and approvals



   93.20   Application for access permits



   93.21   Other regulations



   93.22   Fees



   93.23   Records



   93.24   Traffic control



   93.25   Construction start procedures



   93.26   Permit life



   93.27   Access permit bonding




Mud and Debris on Town Streets




   93.40   Prohibition




Golf Carts




   93.50   Definitions



   93.51   Application



   93.52   Designated highways



   93.53   Prohibition against operation; time of operation; required
equipment



   93.54   Valid license required



   93.55   Public ways



   93.56   State and town traffic regulations



   93.57   Parking of golf carts



   93.58   State highways



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Drainage, see Ch. 54



   Minimum construction and maintenance requirements, see Ch. 55



   Subdivision Control Ordinance, see Ch. 153, App. A



   Zoning Ordinance, see Ch. 154, App. A



OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED



§ 93.01  OBSTRUCTIONS TO STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be an ordinance violation for any person, business,
corporation, his, her or its agents or employees, to place or affix to the
town streets including curbs and gutters any obstruction.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-70)  (Ord. 6-72, passed 11-13-1972)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.02  REMOVAL.



   On notice to remove said obstruction by the town, and failing to do so
within ten days of the receipt of said notice; each day’s violations
thereafter shall be considered to be a separate and distinct action.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-72)  (Ord. 6-72, passed 11-13-1972)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.03  STREET DEPARTMENT.



   All such obstructions may be removed without notice by the Street
Department, its agents or employees, of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-73)  (Ord. 6-72, passed 11-13-1972)



ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES



§ 93.15  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the “Access Permit Ordinance”.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.16  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote new access and access
modification uniformity throughout the town and establish the access permit
application procedures and review standards for obtaining permits to access
streets within the town.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.17  AUTHORITY.



   The Town Engineer is hereby authorized to administer and enforce all of
the provisions of this subchapter and is thereby authorized to determine and
establish such requirements and restrictions for driveway approaches as may
be necessary to provide for the drainage of the street, preservation of the
street and the safety and convenience of traffic on the street. A written
permit application shall be required by the town and, if such permit
application is found to be in accordance with the regulations and
requirements established pursuant to this subchapter, a permit may be granted
subject to appropriate conditions and provisions contained therein. All work
conducted under such permit shall be performed to the satisfaction of the
town.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.18  SCOPE.



   A new driveway access permit shall be required when a relocation,
alteration or remodeling of an access, approach and/or crossover is proposed.
The granting or denial of such application shall be governed by the same
regulations and judged by the same standards as an application for a permit
for a wholly new access, approach, and/or crossover.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES FOR PERMIT REVIEWS AND APPROVALS.



   The Indiana Department of Transportation, Driveway Permit Manual (1996
Version) and amendments thereto is hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this subchapter by reference and shall be used as the basis for the review
and approval of access permit applications except for those standards which
may have been modified and are specifically identified as town standards.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.20  APPLICATION FOR ACCESS PERMITS.



   (A)   Application to the town shall be made on the form as
prescribed by the town. The permit application form with accompanying
documentation as required shall be submitted containing the number of copies
as identified on the form.



   (B)   The application shall consist of the following items.



      (1)   Access permit form. This document shall serve as the
initial application and shall become the permit upon approval of the plans
for the proposed access approach work. The form will contain the basic
information on the front and list the standard general provisions on the
back. The form shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent.



      (2)   Permit bond. A performance bond shall be required to
guarantee that work performed on the right-of-way by the applicant will be
conditions and provisions of the permit. The bonding company shall be bound
by the bond to see that the permit is completed satisfactorily should the
permittee fail to perform properly. The bond shall cover all work to be
performed in the right-of-way. The minimum bond amount shall be $5,000. This
bond document shall be notarized.



      (3)   Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study shall be
required when warranted in accordance with the INDOT Traffic Impact Study
Guidelines and shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. The
traffic impact study shall evaluate the impact of present and future traffic
generated by the proposed development on the adjacent roadway network.



   (C)   Minimum information to be provided with each permit
application as documentation will be that as identified in the INDOT Driveway
Permit Manual and as noted on the application form.



   (D)   Upon the receipt of the application with all required
documentation and attachments, the Town Engineer shall have ten business days
to review the application. The applicant shall be notified within such ten
business days of the approval or denial of the submitted application.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.21  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be in full
compliance with this subchapter and all other ordinances pertaining thereto.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.22  FEES.



   In order to defray administrative costs associated with the review of
permit applications, the applicant shall, at the time of filing a permit
application, pay such fees as required by the fee schedule.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.23  RECORDS.



   All applications, descriptions, permits, certificates and other
supporting documents pertaining to the access permits shall become a
permanent record of the town.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.24  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   Traffic control shall be required for any encroachments that restrict
the natural flow of traffic. All temporary traffic control measures shall
conform to the latest addition of the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.25  CONSTRUCTION START PROCEDURES.



   The Town Engineer shall be notified 48 hours prior to the start of any
construction authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter. A
copy of the approved access permit shall be required to be on site at all
times.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.26  PERMIT LIFE.



   Construction start dates shall be provided on the access permit
application. If construction is not completed within one year from the date
of permit approval the applicant may request and the Town Engineer may grant
a one time extension up to six months or the permit shall otherwise be
considered void. The town may use performance bond proceeds to complete work
authorized by the permit. The Town Engineer shall be notified when all work
has been completed with a request for acceptance.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



§ 93.27  ACCESS PERMIT BONDING.



   The applicant shall be required to submit proof of insurance for
general liability and shall be bondable. A minimum performance bond of $5,000
shall be posted in favor of the town by the applicant. Single-family dwelling
access applications shall be exempt from the bonding requirements.



(Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997)



MUD AND DEBRIS ON TOWN STREETS



§ 93.40  PROHIBITION.



   (A)   A person or corporation who:



      (1)   Operates a motor vehicle on a road maintained by the
Town Street Department which drops or tracks mud, dirt or debris on a street
maintained by the Town Street Department;



      (2)   Owns, or directs the operation of a vehicle which drops
or tracks mud, dirt or debris on a street maintained by the Town Street
Department; or



      (3)   Owns real estate from which a vehicle drops or tracks
mud, dirt or debris on a street maintained by the Town Street Department
shall be subject to a fine.



   (B)   Any officer of the Town Metropolitan Police Department, town
police community service officers, Town Engineer, Superintendent of Public
Works, Town Manager or any other agents authorized by the Town Council may,
in the name of the town, file and pursue actions in the Town Court or any
other court of competent jurisdiction against a person or corporation who
commits an act in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 45-2005, passed 6-27-2005)  Penalty, see § 93.99



GOLF CARTS



§ 93.50  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DESIGNATED HIGHWAY.  A highway that the town has determined that golf
carts can be safely operated on if operated in compliance with this
subchapter and traffic signs approved by the town have been installed
designating the highways that are available for golf cart use.



   GOLF CART or CART.  A four-wheeled motor vehicle originally and
specifically designed and intended to transport one or more individuals for
the purpose of playing the game of golf on a golf course.



   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.  Pursuant to I.C. 9-25-2-3, proof
of ability to respond in damages for liability that arises out of the
ownership, maintenance or use of a golf cart in the following amounts:



      (1)   $25,000 because of bodily injury to or death of any one
person;



      (2)   Subject to the limit in subsection (1), $50,000 because
of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident; and



      (3)   $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property
in any accident.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



§ 93.51  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter applies to town highways and other public ways and
sidewalks. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to apply to or limit
the use of golf carts on golf courses, private property or the town’s use
of golf carts on the town’s municipal property for official purposes.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



§ 93.52  DESIGNATED HIGHWAYS.



   The following highways are designated for the operation of golf carts:
the highways in that portion of the Pulte Homes of Indiana, LLC development
rezoned as a PUD by the town on February 24, 2014 that is designated as Age
Restricted Housing (ARH Development).



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



§ 93.53  PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION; TIME OF OPERATION; REQUIRED 
EQUIPMENT.



   Golf carts shall be equipped with a rearview mirror and shall only be
operated on designated highways from sunrise to sunset unless such golf cart
is equipped with headlights, taillights, brake lights and turn signals.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.54  VALID LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Only persons possessing a valid driver’s license issued by the state,
another state of the United States of America or an international agency
shall be permitted to operate a golf cart on town highways.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.55  PUBLIC WAYS.



   Golf carts shall not be operated on town sidewalks, non-designated
public ways, highways or trails.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.56  STATE AND TOWN TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The operation of a golf cart as allowed by this subchapter shall at all
times be operated in accordance with all state and town traffic regulations.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



§ 93.57  PARKING OF GOLF CARTS.



   While not going to or from or being used on a golf course, all golf
carts shall be parked inside a garage or temporarily outside during the day
on a hard-surfaced driveway.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



§ 93.58  STATE HIGHWAYS.



   In accordance with I.C. 9-21-1-3.3(d), a violation of this subchapter
on a state highway by the operator of a golf cart is considered to be an
ordinance violation.



(Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Obstructions. Any person, business, corporation, their agents
or employees, who shall make or affix any such obstruction in or into or on
any street, including curbs and gutters, of the town, shall be guilty of an
ordinance violation and subject to a fine in an amount of not less than $1
and no more than $25 on conviction.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-71)



   (C)   Access to public streets and thoroughfares.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation, or any other entity who
shall be in violation of §§ 93.15 through 93.27 shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500 and costs. Each day an entry or cut is made without the
issuance of a proper permit under §§ 93.15 through 93.27 shall constitute a
separate offense, and each separate offense shall subject the violator to a
separate fine as provided herein.



      (2)   Any agency whose approval is required under §§ 93.15
through 93.27 or any interested person may seek an injunction against any
person who violates or threatens to violate any provision of §§ 93.15
through 93.27.



      (3)   In addition to any other sanction under §§ 93.15
through 93.27, a person who fails to install or to maintain the approved
controls in accordance with the approved permit shall be liable to the town
in a civil action, for damages in an amount equal to double the cost of
installing or maintaining the public improvements.



   (D)   Mud and debris on town streets. Any person violating § 93.40
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 and no more than $100 for
each offense.



   (E)   Golf carts.  Any person who violates §§ 93.50 through 93.58
shall be fined $50 for the first offense and $100 for each offense
thereafter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a
violation occurs or continues to occur.



(Ord. 6-72, passed 11-13-1972; Ord. 18-97, passed 12-22-1997; Ord. 45-2005,
passed 6-27-2005; Ord. 19-2015, passed 11-23-2015)



CHAPTER 94:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Responsibilities of the Police Department and the Department
of Public Works



   94.04   Storage of abandoned vehicles



   94.05   Appraisals of vehicles



   94.06   Disposal of vehicle



   94.07   Towing and storage charges



   94.08   Abandoned Vehicle Fund



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to implement the procedures
contained in I.C. 9-22-1 which govern the removal, storage and disposition of
abandoned vehicles and therefore, I.C. 9-22-1 is hereby adopted and
incorporated as a part of this chapter, except for any provision inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
ascribed to them in I.C. 9-22-1-2 unless defined differently in this chapter.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      OFFICER.



         (a)   A regular member of the Town Metropolitan Police
Department;



         (b)   A regular member of the Town Department of Public
Works; and



         (c)   Community support officers.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.03  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   The Metropolitan Police Department and/or the Department of
Public Works shall be charged with the responsibility for the removal,
storage and disposal of abandoned vehicles which have been declared abandoned
pursuant to this chapter and I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.



   (B)   The Metropolitan Police Department or the Department of Public
Works may enter into contractual arrangements for the disposal of vehicles
which have been declared abandoned pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
and I.C. 9-22-1-1 et seq.



   (C)   The Department of Public Works may employ personnel, and
acquire equipment, property and facilities, to facilitate the removal of
abandoned vehicles.



   (D)   The Department of Public Works may enter into contractual
arrangements with a towing service to provide for the removal, storage and
disposal of abandoned vehicles. The contract for these services shall be
awarded on the basis of specifications prepared by the Department of Public
Works.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.04  STORAGE OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   Abandoned vehicles which are removed pursuant to this chapter and I.C.
9-9-1.1 shall be towed and stored in an area designated by the department
which orders the towing and storage.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)  Penalty,
see § 94.99



§ 94.05  APPRAISALS OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   If a tagged vehicle or parts are not removed within 72 hours
of tagging, and the officer suspects the market value of the vehicle is $500
or less, the vehicle shall be towed to a storage area, and an appraisal shall
be performed by an individual designated by the Town Chief of Police. If the
appraisal confirms the market value of the vehicle is $500 or less, the
officer shall provide for the immediate disposal of the vehicle to an
automobile scrapyard. The department involved shall retain a copy of the
appraisal and any photographs for two years after the disposal of the vehicle
or parts.



   (B)   If the appraisal indicates the market value of the vehicle is
greater than $500, the notification and disposal procedures in I.C. 9-22-1
shall be followed.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.06  DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE.



   Vehicles which have been towed to a storage area and have not been
claimed by the record owner or lienholder within the statutory period shall
be disposed of by means of a public sale in the manner provided by I.C.
9-22-1-2 or I.C. 9-22-1-23.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.07  TOWING AND STORAGE CHARGES.



   (A)   An owner or lienholder who claims a vehicle impounded and
declared abandoned by the Town Metropolitan Police Department or the
Department of Public Works shall be charged a towing fee and a per-day
storage fee consistent with the usual and customary charges for such services.



   (B)   Except as specified in division (A) above, an owner or
lienholder who claims a vehicle removed and stored by the Department of
Public Works shall be charged a $50 towing fee and $15 per day storage fee.
The storage fee shall be allowed to accumulate for a maximum period of 60
days.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)  Penalty,
see § 94.99



§ 94.08  ABANDONED VEHICLE FUND.



   There is hereby established an Abandoned Vehicle Fund to be
administered by the Clerk-Treasurer of the town in accordance with the
provisions of I.C. 9-22-1-25 and I.C. 9-22-1-27.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating I.C. 9-22-1-12 or I.C. 9-22-1-16(a), as
incorporated into the chapter, by failing to remove the vehicle or a part
tagged within the 72-hour period commits a town ordinance violation and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $100. The fine
provided for by this section shall be in addition to any costs for which the
owner of a vehicle is responsible incidental to the removal, storage and
disposal of the vehicle or part, as well as any applicable court costs.



(Ord. 03-2004, passed 3-22-2004; Ord. 22-2004, passed 9-13-2004)



CHAPTER 95:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Protection Territory




   95.001   Establishment




Regulation of Fireworks




   95.015   Definitions



   95.016   Limitations on the use of fireworks




Burning Regulations




   95.030   Certain outdoor burning prohibited



   95.031   Regulation of fires permitted



   95.032   Regulation of combustible matter




Smoke Detectors




   95.045   Smoke detector installation requirement



   95.046   Definitions



   95.047   Smoke detector location requirements



   95.048   Smoke detector type



   95.049   Remedies




Fire Prevention Code




   95.060   Title



   95.061   Purpose



   95.062   Applicability



   95.063   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code



   95.064   Enforcement authority



   95.065   Inspections



   95.066   Right of entry



   95.067   Investigation of fires



   95.068   Fire records; reports



   95.069   Violations; orders



   95.070   Administrative review; appeals



   95.071   Remedies



 



   95.999   Penalty



FIRE PROTECTION TERRITORY



§ 95.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   The Town Fire Protection Territory is hereby created under the
terms and conditions set forth in the interlocal agreement between the town
and Guilford Township, a true and accurate copy of which is attached hereto
as Exhibit A and is incorporated in this subchapter as if set out fully
herein, and pursuant to the requirements of state law.



   (B)   The boundaries of the Town Fire Protection Territory are and
extend to the municipal boundaries of the town and the boundaries of Guilford
Township.



   (C)   The town is authorized to be the provider unit in the Town
Fire Protection Territory as that term is defined in state law.



   (D)   Guilford Township is authorized to be the participating unit
in the Town Fire Protection Territory as that term is defined in state law.



   (E)   The Town Council shall act as the governing body and ultimate
authority in the Town Fire Protection Territory, including its day-to-day
operations.



   (F)   The Town Fire Protection Territory shall have a uniform rate
upon all taxable property within the territory.



   (G)   Guilford Township shall participate in both the annual
budgeting and rate establishing process in the Town Fire Protection Territory
as specified in the interlocal agreement. However, Guilford Township’s
failure or refusal to participate in the annual budgeting and rate
establishing process shall not deprive the town of its right to proceed and
to approve the annual budget and requisite rates.



   (H)   If either the town or Guilford Township elects to withdraw
from the Town Fire Protection Territory, it must, after January 1 but before
April 1, adopt an ordinance or resolution providing for the withdrawal which
will take effect July 1 of the year in which the ordinance or resolution is
enacted. If either the town or Guilford Township enacts an ordinance or
resolution withdrawing from the Town Fire Protection Territory, the
withdrawing unit’s maximum permissible ad valorem property tax levy, with
respect to fire protection services, shall be initially increased by the
amount of the particular unit’s previous year levy. Moreover, additional
increases, with respect to fire protection services, levy amounts are subject
to the tax levy limitations under state law, except for the part of the
unit’s levy that is necessary to retire the unit’s share of any debt
incurred while the unit was a participating unit.



(Ord. 03-2008, passed 2-25-2008)



REGULATION OF FIREWORKS



§ 95.015  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions as found at I.C. 22-11-14-1 and attached hereto as
Exhibit A are incorporated in this subchapter as if fully set forth herein
and are the definitions to be used by the town for all purposes relating to
this subchapter regarding rules and regulations for fireworks.



(Ord. 19-2007, passed 8-13-2007)



§ 95.016  LIMITATIONS ON THE USE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   The use of fireworks within the town limits shall be limited
to the following hours and days:



      (1)   Between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and the two hours after
sunset on June 29, June 30, July 1, July 2, July 3, July 5, July 6, July 7,
July 8 and July 9;



      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on
Memorial Day, July 4 and Labor Day; and



      (3)   Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00
a.m. on January 1.



   (B)   Fireworks shall be used by town citizens and their guests only
on property owned or leased by the citizen and fireworks shall not be used on
public property of the town unless approved in advance by the town.



   (C)   The term USE as used in this section and in the subchapter
means the days and hours when and the places where consumer fireworks may be
used, ignited or discharged.



(Ord. 19-2007, passed 8-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 95.999



BURNING REGULATIONS



§ 95.030  CERTAIN OUTDOOR BURNING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or burn leaves,
trash, refuse, rubbish, debris, garbage, construction materials or dangerous
materials or dispose of same by open burning or shall knowingly furnish the
materials for such fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or
maintained on or in any street, alley, road, land or public grounds. This
division (A) shall not prohibit the use of an outdoor fire for cooking or for
recreation purposes in a public park so long as such fire is confined in a
permanent facility specifically provided for such purpose.



   (B)   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or burn leaves,
trash, refuse, rubbish, debris, garbage, construction materials or dangerous
materials on any private land or dispose of same by open burning or cause,
suffer, allow or permit open burning on any private land. This division (B)
shall not prohibit the use of an outdoor fire for cooking or for recreation
purposes so long as such fire is supervised by one or more adults at all
times.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-94)  (Ord. 1-89, passed 2-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.031  REGULATION OF FIRES PERMITTED.



   (A)   The following types of fires are permitted with prior approval
of the Town Fire Chief:



      (1)   Fires used for celebrating Twelfth Night ceremonies;



      (2)   Fires used for celebrating school pep rallies;



      (3)   Fires used for celebrating scouting activities; and



      (4)   Other fires approved by the Town Fire Chief.



   (B)   All exempted fires, including fires for cooking or
recreational purposes, shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   Only wood products shall be burned;



      (2)   Fires shall be attended at all times until completely
extinguished;



      (3)   If fires create an air pollution problem, a nuisance or
a fire hazard, they shall be extinguished; and



      (4)   No burning shall be conducted during unfavorable
meteorological conditions such as temperature inversions, high winds, air
stagnation and the like.



   (C)   Burning with prior approval of the Town Fire Chief may be
authorized for the following:



      (1)   Emergency burning of spilled petroleum products when all
reasonable efforts to recover the spilled material have been made and failure
to burn would result in an imminent fire hazard or water pollution problem;



      (2)   Burning of refuse consisting of material resulting from
a natural disaster;



      (3)   Burning for the purpose of fire training;



      (4)   Burning of natural growth derived from a clearing
operation, i.e., removal of natural growth for change in use of the land;



      (5)   Burning of highly explosive or other dangerous materials
for which no alternative disposal method exists or where transportation of
such materials is impossible; and



      (6)   Operation of a municipal burn pit by the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-95)  (Ord. 1-89, passed 2-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.032  REGULATION OF COMBUSTIBLE MATTER.



   Any person who allows the accumulation or existence of combustible
materials which causes or contributes to a fire shall not be excused from
responsibility thereof on the basis that said fire was set by vandals,
accidental or an act of God.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-96)  (Ord. 1-89, passed 2-13-1989)  Penalty, see §
95.999



SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 95.045  SMOKE DETECTOR INSTALLATION REQUIREMENT.



   The owner of each new or existing dwelling unit, hotel motel, hospital,
nursing home and residential-custodial care facility shall install smoke
detectors as required by this subchapter.



   (A)   The owner of each presently existing dwelling unit, hotel,
motel, hospital, nursing home, jail, prison and residential-custodial care
facility which is located within the boundaries of the town shall install and
maintain in good working order smoke detector(s) as required by this
subchapter.



   (B)   The owner of each hotel and motel shall also be subject to
I.C. 22-11, Chapter 18.



   (C)   No residential property may be sold or traded in the town
unless and until the seller installs or provides for the installation of
smoke detectors in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter. This
requirement may be met by the seller placing in an escrow account for the use
of the buyer sufficient funds to pay for said installation.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-110)  (Ord. 9-90, passed 5-14-1990)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.046  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DWELLING UNIT. A structure, building, area, room, or combination of
rooms, occupied by persons for sleeping or living. This term shall include
both single- and multiple-family dwellings except where otherwise stated.



   OWNER. Any person who alone or jointly or with several other persons,
has legal title to any premises. This includes any person who has charge,
care or control over any premises as an agent, officer, fiduciary or employee
of the owner.



   RESIDENTIAL CUSTODIAL CARE FACILITY. A building, or part thereof, used
for the lodging or boarding of persons who are incapable of self-preservation
because of age or physical or mental limitations, or who are detained for
correctional purposes. This includes homes for the aged, nurseries (custodial
care for children under six years of age), institutions for mentally
handicapped (care institutions) and halfway houses, as well as sheltered
living facilities and halfway houses. This does not include day care
facilities that do not provide lodging or boarding for institutional
occupants.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-111)  (Ord. 9-90, passed 5-14-1990)



§ 95.047  SMOKE DETECTOR LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The owner of each single-family dwelling unit shall install at
least one smoke detector in the vicinity of the sleeping areas and on every
level of the dwelling. If sleeping rooms are not located in the same area or
off the same hallway, then more than one smoke detector is required.



   (B)   The owner of each multi-family dwelling unit shall install
smoke detectors in either each individual sleeping room or in a corridor that
is adjacent to a room used for sleeping but in no case may the smoke
detectors be spaced further apart than 30 feet or more than 15 feet from any
wall.



   (C)   The owner of each hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, jail,
prison or residential-custodial care facility shall install smoke detectors
in both the amount directed by the Town Fire Chief or his or her designee and
in the location(s) directed by the Town Fire Chief and his or her designee.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-112)  (Ord. 9-90, passed 5-14-1990)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.048  SMOKE DETECTOR TYPE.



   (A)   An owner subject to this subchapter shall install a smoke
detector which is capable of sensing visible or invisible particles of
combustion and emitting an audible alarm signal. All smoke detectors must be
approved by a nationally recognized testing institute laboratory.



   (B)   In each single- or multi-family dwelling unit the owner may
install any of the following power type smoke detectors:



      (1)   Monitored battery powered;



      (2)   AC plug in; and



      (3)   Direct wired.



   (C)   In each hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, jail prison or
residential-custodial care facility only smoke detectors that are directly
wired to the power supply of the building will be allowed.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-113)  (Ord. 9-90, passed 5-14-1990)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.049  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner, police officer of the Town Metropolitan
Police Department, firefighters of the Town Fire Department or other agents
authorized by the Town Council shall in the name of the town bring actions in
the Town Court or the Circuit or Superior Courts of the county for the
enforcement of and to secure compliance with and to recover the penalties
provided in this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-115)  (Ord. 9-90, passed 5-14-1990)



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 95.060  TITLE.



   This subchapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Fire Prevention Code of the Town of Plainfield,
Indiana”, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this
Code”.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-120)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.061  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this Code is to prescribe minimum
requirements and controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from
the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use
of substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life,
property or public welfare in the use or occupancy of buildings, structures,
sheds, tents, lots or premises.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-121)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.062  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this Code and the building and fire safety
rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission shall
apply equally to new and existing buildings and conditions. Exceptions are:



      (1)   Existing conditions which do not constitute a distinct
hazard to life or property; and



      (2)   The transportation of any articles or substance under
the jurisdiction of and in compliance with regulations prescribed by the
military forces of the United States.



   (B)   Nothing in this Code shall be construed, interpreted or
applied to abrogate, nullify or abolish any law, ordinance or code adopted by
the town governing the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal,
demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings
specifically provided herein. When any provision of this Code is found to be
in conflict with any building, zoning, safety, health or other applicable
law, ordinance or code of the town existing on the effective date of this
Code or hereafter adopted, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the
public shall prevail.



   (C)   The planning, design and construction of new buildings and
structures to provide egress facilities, fire protection and built-in fire
protection equipment shall be controlled by the building rules of the Indiana
Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission; and any alterations,
additions or changes in buildings required by the provisions of this Code
which are within the scope of the said building rules shall be made in
accordance therewith.



   (D)   Buildings built under and in full compliance with the building
and fire safety laws and rules in force at the time of construction or
alteration thereof, and that have been properly maintained and used for such
use as originally permitted, shall be exempt from requirements of this Code
pertaining to any of the following matters:



      (1)   Fire protection of structural elements;



      (2)   Exits required, except as provided for existing
buildings under this Code; and



      (3)   Isolation of hazardous operations and mixed uses;
provided, however, that the Fire Chief shall require the installation of fire
safety devices or systems (fire extinguishers, fire alarms, fire detection
devices or similar systems) where they are necessary to provide safety to
life. In lieu of requiring the installation of safety devices or systems or
when necessary to secure safety in addition thereto, the Fire Chief shall
prescribe limitations on the handling and storage of materials or substances
or upon operations that are liable to cause fire, contribute to the spread of
fire, or endanger life or property. Any orders issued by the Fire Chief to
obtain compliance with this division (D)(3) shall be governed by the
provisions of I.C. 36-8-17-10(d).



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-122)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.063  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   (A)   The following fire safety rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention
and Building Safety Commission as set out in 675 I.A.C. Article 22 are
incorporated by reference in this Code, and shall include later amendments to
that Article as the same are published in the Indiana Register or the Indiana
Administrative Code with effective dates as fixed therein: Article 22- Fire
Prevention Codes:



      (1)   Indiana Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Gases Code
(675 I.A.C. 22-1); and



      (2)   Indiana Fire Prevention Code (675 I.A.C. 22-2).



   (B)   Copies of adopted fire safety rules, Codes and standards are
on file at the Town Fire Headquarters Office located at 4001 S. Clarks Creek
Road in Plainfield, Indiana.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-123)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.064  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Chief of the
Town Fire Department and/or Chief of the Town Fire Department Fire Prevention
Bureau or such officer or designee who is an ex officio assistant to the
State Fire Marshal under I.C. 36-8-17-5(a), to enforce the provisions of this
Code. The designated enforcement officer of this Code is herein referred to
as the Fire Chief.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall cooperate with the Building Commissioner
and/or Building Inspector responsible for the enforcement of the Code of
building laws and orders required to be enforced in the town and state
pursuant to I.C. 36-7-2-9.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-124)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.065  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall cause to be inspected all structures and
premises except the interiors of private single-family dwellings, and
dwelling units in two-family and multi-family dwellings for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire,
contribute to the spread of fire, interfere with firefighting operations,
endanger life or any violations of the provisions or intent of this Code
affecting fire safety.



   (B)   Whenever in the enforcement of this Code the responsibility of
more than one official of the town is involved, it shall be his or her duty
to coordinate his or her inspections and administrative orders as fully as
practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be
subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor multiple or conflicting
orders. Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an
apparent or actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code
of the town not within the inspector’s authority to enforce, the inspector
shall report the findings to the official having jurisdiction.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-125)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.066  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
Code, or whenever the Fire Chief or authorized Fire Inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any
condition which makes such structure or premises unsafe, the Fire Chief or
Fire Inspector shall be permitted to enter such structure or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
Fire Chief by this Code; provided that if such structure or premises be
occupied, the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector shall first present proper
credentials and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Fire Chief shall
have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-126)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.067  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.



   The Fire Chief shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, every
fire or explosion occurring within the town that is of a suspicious nature or
which involves the loss of life or serious injury or causes destruction or
damage to property. Such investigation shall be initiated immediately upon
the occurrence of such fire or explosion; and if it appears that such an
occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the Fire Chief shall take charge
immediately of the physical evidence, and in order to preserve any physical
evidence relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, take
means to prevent access by any person or persons to such buildings, structure
or premises until such evidence has been properly processed. The Fire Chief
shall notify the office of the State Fire Marshal pursuant to I.C. 36-8-17-7,
for further investigations into such matters and shall further cooperate with
said office in the collection of evidence and prosecution of the case.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-127)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.068  FIRE RECORDS; REPORTS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall keep a record of all fires and all facts
concerning the same, including investigation findings and statistics and
information as to the cause, origin and the extent of such fires and the
damage caused thereby.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall submit a report of each fire occurring
within the town to the office of the State Fire Marshal in accordance with
I.C. 36-8-17-7, and in such form as prescribed by that office.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-128)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.069  VIOLATIONS; ORDERS.



   (A)   Whenever the Fire Chief observes an apparent or actual
violation of a provision of this Code or other ordinances under the Fire
Chief’s jurisdiction, the Fire Chief shall prepare a written notice of
violation and order describing the condition deemed unsafe and specifying a
reasonable time for the required repairs or improvements to be made to
correct such violation. The written notice of violation of this Code shall be
served upon the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or other
person responsible for the conditions under violation. Such notice of
violation shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such person
or persons by ordinary mail to the last known post office address, delivered
in person or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any
person in charge of the premises, or in the case such person is not found
upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof, in a conspicuous place at the
entrance door or avenue of access; and such procedure shall be deemed the
equivalent of personal notice.



   (B)   If the notice of violation and order is not complied with
within the time specified by the Fire Chief, and if no review of such order
has been initiated under I.C. 36-8-17-10, the Fire Chief shall request the
legal counsel of the town to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to
restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or
termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of
the provisions of this Code or of any order or direction made pursuant
thereto.



   (C)   Temporary or emergency orders issued by the Fire Chief under
I.C. 36-8-17-9(b) shall first be approved by the State Fire Marshal.



   (D)   When, in the opinion of the Fire Chief, there is actual and
potential danger to the occupants of those in the proximity of any building,
structure or premises because of unsafe structural conditions, or inadequacy
of any means of egress, the presence of explosives, explosive fumes or
vapors, or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, the Fire Chief
may issue an emergency order for the immediate evacuation of said building,
structure or premises. All of the occupants so notified shall immediately
leave the building, structure or premises and persons shall not enter or
reenter until authorized to do so by the Fire Chief. Any person who shall
refuse to leave, interfere with the evacuation of other occupants or continue
any operation after having been given an evacuation order except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be deemed in violation of this Code.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-129)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)  Penalty, see §
95.999



§ 95.070  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW; APPEALS.



   (A)   A person who is aggrieved by an order issued pursuant to 675
I.A.C. 22-2, § 10 or I.C. 36-8-17-9, shall have an opportunity to informally
discuss the order with the State Fire Marshal, who may modify or reverse the
order.



   (B)   An order issued pursuant to 675 I.A.C. 22-2, § 6-129 or I.C.
36-8-17-9, or an order affirmed or modified by the State Fire Marshal may be
appealed to the Indiana Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission under
I.C. 4-21.5-3-7.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-130)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.071  REMEDIES.



   The Attorney for the town upon receipt of a written notice from the
Fire Chief, that after having issued a lawful notice and order to abate a
violation of this Code, and after a reasonable time for compliance has
expired, shall bring actions in the Town Court or the Circuit or Superior
Courts of the county for mandatory and injunctive relief in the enforcement
of and to secure compliance with any order or orders made by the Fire Chief,
and any such action for mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an
action to recover the penalties provided for in this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-131)  (Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990)



§ 95.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Regulation of fireworks. Any person, firm or corporation
violating §§ 95.015 and 95.016 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $300 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



   (C)   Burning regulations. Any person violating the provisions of
§§ 95.030 through 95.032 shall be cited by the Town Metropolitan Police
Department, or Town Fire Department or such other duly authorized and
designated employee of the town. A fine may be imposed against said violator
in a sum up to $100. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation under §§ 95.030 through 95.032.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-97)



   (D)   Smoke detectors. Any person who violates §§ 95.045 through
95.049 shall be fined $50 for the first offense and $100 for each offense
thereafter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during
which or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-114)



   (E)   Fire Prevention Code. If any person, firm or corporation shall
violate any of the provisions of §§ 95.060 through 95.071, or shall do any
act prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined,
within the time prescribed by the Fire Chief, or shall fail, neglect or
refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Fire Chief in connection with
the provisions of §§ 95.060 through 95.071, for each such violation,
failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation shall be fined in any
sum not less than $25, nor more that $2,500. Each day of such unlawful
activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of §§ 95.060 through 95.071
shall constitute a separate offense.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-132)



(Ord. 1-89, passed 2-13-1989; Ord. 2-90, passed 2-28-1990; Ord. 9-90, passed
5-14-1990; Ord. 19-2007, passed 8-13-2007)



CHAPTER 96:  GARBAGE



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Role of Town Council



   96.03   Receptacles for businesses



   96.04   Residential receptacles



   96.05   Location of pickup



   96.06   Prohibited items



   96.07   Removal procedures



   96.08   Curbside recycling



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. Within the meaning of this chapter shall be construed to mean
and include rejected food wastes resulting from the cooking or preparing of
food for human consumption, and includes every refuse accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food, or that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing or, meat, fish, fowl, fruit
or vegetable, but shall not include coffee grounds or other substances not
fit for animal consumption.



   RUBBISH. Within the meaning of this chapter shall be construed to mean
and include rejected waste substances and matters normally resulting from the
operation of a household; and includes ashes, tin cans, bottles, bottle caps,
glass and similar substances, but shall not include garbage as defined herein.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-100)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)



Statutory reference:



   Solid waste disposal, see I.C. 36-9-30-1 et seq.



§ 96.02  ROLE OF TOWN COUNCIL.



   (A)   The Town Council shall have the exclusive control of the
collection, removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish as defined in §
96.01.



   (B)   The collection, removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish
shall be under the direct supervision of the Street Commissioner. The Street
Commissioner shall have authority to designate the days of the week, the
times and the places when and where garbage and rubbish shall be placed for
collection, removal and disposal. He or she shall have authority to zone the
town for garbage and rubbish collection and shall have authority to refuse to
accept and remove garbage and rubbish not properly contained and placed for
removal or which contains substances not included within the definition
herein of garbage and rubbish.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-101)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)



§ 96.03  RECEPTACLES FOR BUSINESSES.



   Every person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a hotel,
restaurant, eating place, grocery store or other business place or
establishment which by reason of said business accumulates garbage, and
desiring to have the same collected, removed and disposed of through the
facilities furnished by the town shall hold the same in suitable receptacles
with tight covers and place such receptacle at the curb of the nearest street
or at a place designated by the Street Commissioner on the days of the week
and at the times designated by the Street Commissioner for the collection and
removal of such garbage; and when the garbage is removed from the receptacle,
the same shall be said person, firm or corporation be taken within 12 hours
from the place where it was left for the collection of said garbage.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-102)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)  Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.04  RESIDENTIAL RECEPTACLES.



   Every person owning or occupying a private residence or dwelling house
who accumulates garbage by reason of the operation of a household therein,
and desiring to have the same collected, removed and disposed of through the
facilities furnished by the town, shall hold the same in suitable receptacles
with tight covers and place such receptacle at the curb of the nearest street
or at a place designated by the Street Commissioner for the collection and
removal of such garbage; and when the garbage is removed from the receptacle,
the same shall by said person be taken within 12 hours from the place where
it was left for the collection of said garbage. Such receptacles shall be
placed for the removal of garbage on the days of the week and at the times
designated by the Street Commissioner.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-103)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)  Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.05  LOCATION OF PICKUP.



   Every person owning or occupying a private residence or dwelling house
who accumulates rubbish by reason of the operation of a household therein,
and desiring to have the same collected, removed, and disposed of through the
facilities furnished by the town shall hold the same in disposable
receptacles and place the same at the curb of the nearest street or at a
place designated by the Street Commissioner on the days of the week and at
the times when garbage is collected.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)  Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.06  PROHIBITED ITEMS.



   Garbage left for collection and removal shall contain no cigarette
butts, paper, bottle caps, bottles, glass, broken glass, matches, razor
blades, nails or other like objects. Any garbage containing any of said
objects shall be rejected by the collected of garbage.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-105)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)  Penalty, see
§ 96.99



§ 96.07  REMOVAL PROCEDURES.



   Nothing in this chapter contained shall prohibit a producer of garbage
or rubbish from removing and disposing of such garbage and rubbish so
produced, provided such removal and disposal are accomplished in a sanitary
manner.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-106)  (Ord. 8-1948, passed 7-20-1948)



§ 96.08  CURBSIDE RECYCLING.



   (A)   The Town Council mandates the curbside collection of
recyclable materials from residential properties, beginning April 1, 1996.



   (B)   Each residential user residing in a single-, two- or
three-family unit shall be charged $1 per unit per month for curbside
recycling. The recycling charge shall be added as a separate item to each
residential property owner’s monthly water bill and shall be billed and
collected by the town. Regardless of how payment may be designated, partial
payments of a combined water, recycling and sewer bill shall be applied first
to the water bill, second to the recycling bill and last to the sewer bill.
The recycling charge shall apply irrespective of whether the residential user
complies with mandatory curbside recycling; the single exception being if the
residential user has water to the residence shut off at the water meter.
During such period of water shut-off, the residential user shall not be
billed or charged for water usage or curbside recycling. Residential
properties not on municipal water and sewer shall be billed annually for
recycling services.



   (C)   The contractor awarded the contract to collect recyclable
materials shall have the exclusive right to collect, recycle, monitor and
dispose of such recyclable materials, and all other contractors and persons
shall be prohibited from collecting, recycling or disposing of any recyclable
materials from residential properties throughout the town.



(Ord. 5-96, passed 3-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of § 96.08 or of any rules and regulations imposed
under § 96.08 shall be enforceable in the same manner as other penal
ordinances, and violations shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $25.
Each offense shall constitute a separate violation.



(Ord. 5-96, passed 3-11-1996)



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




Parks and Recreation in General




   97.001   Authority to operate



   97.002   Administration of parks and recreation programs




General Provisions




   97.015   Naming of town parks




Park Concessions




   97.030   Application



   97.031   Permit fees



   97.032   Hours of operation



   97.033   Maintenance of concession stand



   97.034   Prohibitions



   97.035   Special events



   97.036   Insurance




Park Rules and Regulations




   97.050   Purpose



   97.051   Parks and other recreation areas defined



   97.052   Park/trail hours



   97.053   Vehicles left in parks after closing hours



   97.054   Disposal of rubbish, refuse and garbage



   97.055   Altering or removing signs, structures, fixtures and other
improvements prohibited



   97.056   Disturbing, injuring or removing wildlife and vegetation
prohibited



   97.057   Swimming prohibited



   97.058   Pet supervision required



   97.059   Camping prohibited



   97.060   Fires and fireworks prohibited



   97.061   Solicitations, commercial sales and commercial photography
prohibited



   97.062   Speed limits



   97.063   Bicycle/pedestrian trail restrictions



   97.064   Other prohibited activities



   97.065   Possession, consumption and sale of alcoholic beverages
prohibited



   97.066   Smoking prohibited



   97.067   Deadly weapons prohibited



   97.068   Discharging a firearm prohibited



   97.069   Prohibited persons



   97.070   Prohibited activities in Friendship Gardens Park



   97.071   Shelter and ball field rentals



   97.072   Remedies




Park Impact Fee




   97.085   Limitation on imposition of impact fee



   97.086   Establishment of impact zone



   97.087   Zone improvement plan



   97.088   Establishment of park and recreational impact fee



   97.089   Credit in lieu of payment; exemptions



   97.090   Impact fee due upon issuance of structural building permit



   97.091   Lien rights established



   97.092   Form of receipt



   97.093   Impact Fee Review Board



   97.094   Appeals



   97.095   Establishment of Park and Recreational Fund



   97.096   Use of impact fees collected



   97.097   House Enrolled Act No. 1467



   97.098   Amendments and review



   97.099   Effective date



 



   97.999   Penalty



PARKS AND RECREATION IN GENERAL



§ 97.001  AUTHORITY TO OPERATE.



   The town may establish, aid, maintain and operate public parks,
playgrounds and recreation facilities and programs.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-1)



Statutory reference:



   Recreation facilities and programs, see I.C. 36-10-2-2



§ 97.002  ADMINISTRATION OF PARKS AND RECREATION PROGRAMS.



   The Park Department as established in Chapter 32 of this code of
ordinances shall be responsible for administering programs under the Park and
Recreation Law, I.C. 36-10-3-1 et seq.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-2)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.015  NAMING OF TOWN PARKS.



   (A)   Carlos “Red” Swinford gave 45 years of outstanding and
meritorious services to the town, and retired as the Chief of its Fire
Department in 1968.



   (B)   The Town Park previously designated as Lincoln Park, is
changed to “Swinford Park” in honor of Carlos Swinford for his
meritorious and outstanding services to the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-6)  (Res. passed 9-23-1968)



PARK CONCESSIONS



§ 97.030  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any adult person or persons desiring to operate the concession
or concessions in a municipal park in the town may submit an application in
writing to the Town Council of said town for consideration. The application
shall be submitted not later than the second Council meeting during the month
of April of each year.



   (B)   All applications shall be typed, shall list all items to be
offered for sale by the concessionaire, shall outline the procedure of
control of the paper, trash, garbage and other items that might constitute a
nuisance and shall show the names of persons to be engaged in the activity
and responsible for the concession business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-10)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)



§ 97.031  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of applications for the operation of municipal
park refreshment concessions, the Town Council shall consider said
applications and may issue one permit for the summer concession per park to
extend from date of issuance to and including October 15 each year. It is
specifically provided that the permit shall not be transferred by the
concessionaire to whom the permit is issued.



   (B)   It is further provided that on indication by the Town Council
of its selection that the applicant shall purchase the permit at the
Clerk-Treasurer’s office of the town within ten days following notification
of the Council’s selection.



   (C)   It is further provided that a fee of $15 shall and is
established for each permit issued.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-11)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)  Penalty, see
§ 97.999



§ 97.032  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   It is provided that the concessionaire to whom a permit is
issued shall not operate any such concession prior to 1:00 p.m. on Sundays
and that all concession activities shall terminate at 11:00 p.m. each and
every day, Sundays included.



   (B)   It is specifically provided that the times mentioned
heretofore shall relate to the time zone and time schedule as recognized by
the town.



   (C)   It is further provided that in operation of the concession
that there will be no concession peddling in or near the shelter house or
houses, the area of such limitation to be determined solely by the Town
Council.



   (D)   It is further provided that in the operation of the concession
or concessions, that no beverage or article of consumption shall be sold in
bottles for public consumption.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-12)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)  Penalty, see
§ 97.999



§ 97.033  MAINTENANCE OF CONCESSION STAND.



   It is ordered that the concessionaire shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the concession stand or stands during the term of his, her or
their permit. It is provided further than any alteration of the concession
stands shall first be approved in writing by the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-13)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)  Penalty, see
§ 97.999



§ 97.034  PROHIBITIONS.



   Elected or appointed officials or their families shall not be
considered for the issuance of a concession permit.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-14)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)



§ 97.035  SPECIAL EVENTS.



   Due to the nature of the operation of the park program of the town, the
Town Council may issue exclusive refreshment rights for special events to
civic groups, not to exceed four days per summer session and provided three
days’ notice shall be given by said Council to the concessionaire.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-15)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)



§ 97.036  INSURANCE.



   The concessionaire obtaining a permit under this subchapter shall
provide such insurance as the Town Council may require and it is further
provided that the Town Council may accept or reject any or all applications
and all issuance of a permit may terminate same on just cause being shown for
termination of the permit.



(1991 Draft Code, § 5-16)  (Ord. 16-1963, passed 12-30-1963)



PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 97.050  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish reasonable and
responsible rules for those individuals who use the parks and other
recreational areas owned and operated by the town. This subchapter is
necessary to ensure that residents fully enjoy leisure and recreational
activities available in town parks and other recreational areas and to
protect the health and safety of persons using the parks and other
recreational areas.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)



§ 97.051  PARKS AND OTHER RECREATION AREAS DEFINED.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARKS AND OTHER RECREATION AREAS. Includes, but not be limited to, any
lands, buildings, structures, waters, parks, trails, drives and roadways in
the town that are under the jurisdiction and control of the town and the Town
Parks and Recreation Department.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)



§ 97.052  PARK/TRAIL HOURS.



   No person shall enter or remain in any park or other recreational area
or on any trail, except those portions of trails that are town sidewalks, in
the town after the park, trail or recreational area is closed to the public.
Parks and other recreational areas in the town are open to the public at dawn
and close at dusk or at the conclusion of Department programming or park
approved activities, whichever is later.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.053  VEHICLES LEFT IN PARKS AFTER CLOSING HOURS.



   No person shall leave a vehicle within any park or other recreation
area in the town after the location has closed to the public, except in cases
of an emergency or with consent of the Town Manager or the Director of the
Town Parks and Recreation Department. The registered owner of a vehicle shall
be responsible for the vehicle being within, any park or other recreational
area after the location has closed to the public.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.054  DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH, REFUSE AND GARBAGE.



   No person shall take into, carry through or put into any park or other
recreation area any rubbish, refuse, garbage or other material except any
refuse or garbage resulting from properly using the parks and recreation
areas which shall be deposited in receptacles provided. Where receptacles or
adequate receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park or recreation area by the person responsible for
its presence and disposed of elsewhere.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.055  ALTERING OR REMOVING SIGNS, STRUCTURES, FIXTURES AND OTHER
IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall damage, deface, remove or otherwise alter any sign,
structure, fixture or other improvement in any park or other recreational
area in the town. The signs, structures, fixtures or other improvements shall
include, but not be limited to, any drive, roadway, walk, path, trail,
bridge, wall, monument, statue, fountain, grill, table, bench, fence, gate,
building, pool and recreational equipment.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.056  DISTURBING, INJURING OR REMOVING WILDLIFE AND VEGETATION
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall harass, hurt, trap, injure, remove or
otherwise disturb any wildlife located in any park or other recreational area
in the town without the express written permission of the Town Council. The
term WILDLIFE shall mean any wild mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, mollusk,
crustacean or other wild animal or any part, product, egg, offspring or the
dead body or parts of the wild animal.



   (B)   Except for those persons participating in the Parks and
Recreation Department Community Garden programs and adhering to the rules and
regulations for participation in the program, no person shall harvest, cut,
break, set afire, injure, remove or otherwise disturb or damage any plant,
flower, bush, tree or other vegetation growing in any park or other
recreational area in the town. No person shall attach any rope or cable or
other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing, bridge, bench or other
structure.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.057  SWIMMING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall swim or bathe in any waters that are within any park,
along any trail or are a part of other recreational areas unless a lifeguard
is on duty at the particular site. Recreational areas included, but not
limited to, are Splash Island Outdoor Family Waterpark and Splash Island
Indoor Pool.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.058  PET SUPERVISION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall bring any pet into a park or other
recreational area in the town unless the person shall continuously supervise
such pet, including preventing or promptly repairing any damages caused by
the pet and picking-up and disposing of any excrement dropped by the pet upon
any park property. All pets are to be kept on short leashes at all times.



   (B)   Dogs are allowed off-leash at the Plainfield Bark Park. Annual
memberships are required to gain access to the Plainfield Bark Park. Users of
the Bark Park must adhere to rules posted at the Bark Park and those listed
on the registration form.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.059  CAMPING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall erect or maintain a tent or other shelter, or otherwise
camp within any park or other recreational area in the town without express
written permission of the Plainfield Parks and Recreation Department.
Permission must be conspicuously posted at the campsite.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.060  FIRES AND FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall build, kindle, maintain or use a fire within any park
or other recreational area in the town unless the person properly contains
such fire in facilities designed for that purpose. Any fire shall be
continuously monitored and under the care and direction of a competent person
from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. A permit from the Town
Fire Department and approved by the Town Parks and Recreation Department is
required for any bonfire or fires for cooking not utilizing a grill.
Discharging of fireworks is prohibited in any park, trail or property owned
or maintained by the town.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.061  SOLICITATIONS, COMMERCIAL SALES AND COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHY
PROHIBITED.



   Except for persons complying with town parks and recreation facility
fund-raising, canvassing, soliciting, vending and advertising policy, no
person shall solicit, advertise, sell, photograph or promote for sale any
commercial product or event within any park or other recreational area in the
town without the express written permission of the Town Council. The person
must conspicuously post such permission at the site of such activity.
Distribution or posting of flyers, brochures or other written material is
prohibited in parks and other recreational areas within the town.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.062  SPEED LIMITS.



   No person shall operate any vehicle or bicycle upon roadways within a
park or other recreational area in the town in excess of the speed limit as
posted, or 15 mph, whichever is less.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.063  BICYCLE/PEDESTRIAN TRAIL RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall enter or remain on any trail area, except
those portions of trails that are town sidewalks, in the town after the trail
area is closed to the public. Trails are open to the public at dawn and close
at dusk or at the conclusion of Parks and Recreation Department programming
or park approved activities, whichever is later.



   (B)   No person shall operate any motorized vehicle, including golf
carts, motorized bicycle, motorized skateboard or other similar device upon
any trail designed for bicycle/pedestrian use in the town, except persons
with a disability, as defined by the American With Disabilities Act, being 42
U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq., who may operate the specialized motorized
equipment designed for their transportation. Motorized vehicles owned and
operated by the town and/or its contractors and subcontractors are permitted
on any trail designed for bicycle/pedestrian use within town, when doing work
for the town or providing a service for the town.



   (C)   No person shall ride or allow any horse on any trail designed
for bicycle/pedestrian use or in any park or other recreational area in the
town unless approved by the town.



   (D)   No person shall ride a bicycle at an excessive speed or engage
in any racing activity upon any trail designed for bicycle/pedestrian use in
the town unless participating in a Parks and Recreation Department approved
or sponsored function. In-line skaters, skate boarders and bicyclists shall
yield to pedestrians. Bicyclists shall yield to all trail users not on
bicycles.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.064  OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   Users must comply with posted rules, restrictions and
guidelines.



   (B)   Activities listed as follows are prohibited within all parks
and other recreational areas in the town:



      (1)   Littering;



      (2)   Use of a metal detector;



      (3)   Parking vehicles on grass;



      (4)   Golfing;



      (5)   Children under the age of 13 not accompanied by an adult;



      (6)   Fishing from all bridges over White Lick Creek;



      (7)   Use of park equipment, apparatus, structures and
buildings in any manner inconsistent with their intended purposes;



      (8)   Swimming in White Lick Creek, ponds, retention ponds or
other similar bodies of water;



      (9)   Climbing on all bridges;



      (10)   Wash any vehicle unless being done in compliance with
§ 97.061;



      (11)   Hold public assemblages;



      (12)   Conduct an exhibition;



      (13)   Hold a parade;



      (14)   Enter an area posted as “closed to the public”;



      (15)   Engage in threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language or engage in any conduct or behavior tending to breach the public
peace;



      (16)   Fundraisers unless being done in compliance with §
97.061;



      (17)   Bounce houses unless being used by a patron renting a
shelter and only during the time of the rental. Bounce houses may not use
anchors that are driven into the ground;



      (18)   DJs are only allowed in Friendship Gardens and the
Recreation and Aquatic Center; and



      (19)   Petting zoos.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.065  POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION AND SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess, consume, sell, offer for sale, barter or
exchange any alcoholic beverage in any park or other recreational area in the
town. The term ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE means a liquid or solid that is or contains
0.5% or more alcohol by volume; is fit for human consumption; and is
reasonably likely, or intended to be used as a beverage.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.066  SMOKING PROHIBITED.



   Smoking is prohibited on the campus of the Town Recreation and Aquatic
Center, the Al and Jan Barker Sports Complex and all other park properties
owned by the town, except any public right-of-way on such properties.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.067  DEADLY WEAPONS PROHIBITED.



   Deadly weapons are prohibited in the Town Recreation and Aquatic
Center, the Al and Jan Barker Sports Complex, or in any park, trail or other
recreational area in the town as provided by Ord. 10-2011 (as codified in
Chapter 132 of this code of ordinances). DEADLY WEAPONS means a sword of any
length; an electronic stun gun; a fixed blade knife; or a knife with a
folding blade of four inches or more.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.068  DISCHARGING A FIREARM PROHIBITED.



   Except when acting in self-defense, as that term is defined under state
law, no person shall discharge a firearm within the Town Recreation and
Aquatic Center, the Al and Jan Barker Sports Complex or in any park, on any
trail, or in any other public place owned by or being used for a public
purpose by the town.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.069  PROHIBITED PERSONS.



   Individuals listed on State of Indiana Sex Offender Registry published
and disseminated by the Indiana Criminal Justice Institute are prohibited
from all parks and other recreational areas of the town.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.070  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN FRIENDSHIP GARDENS PARK.



   In addition to the rules and regulations contained in §§ 97.052
through 97.066, the following activities are prohibited in Friendship Gardens
Park:



   (A)   Bicycles, roller blades, skates or skateboards are restricted
to paved roadways and pedestrian/bicycle trails. Bicycles, roller blades,
skates or skateboards are not allowed on bricked areas, gazebo, walkways
leading to gazebo, enabling gardens, bronze family statue or Veterans
Memorial;



   (B)   Tape, nails, push pins, thumb tacks, screws or other similar
fasteners are not to be driven, bolted, screwed or applied into gazebo posts,
railings, beams, fascia, soffit or roof;



   (C)   Swimming, wading, standing in waterfall or waterfall basin;



   (D)   Placing objects in waterfall including, but not limited to,
detergents, rocks, litter, debris, wood, coins, dirt, cans, bottles or other
similar objects;



   (E)   Climbing on waterfall or attaching any object that would cause
damage to waterfall pumping, mechanical or electrical components or damage
the surface of rocks or plantings;



   (F)   Sports activities not specifically permitted by this section
are prohibited; and



   (G)   Rental of the area around the waterfall.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.071  SHELTER AND BALL FIELD RENTALS.



   Any person or group renting shelters, baseball fields or softball
fields shall conform to Parks and Recreation Department published fees, rules
and regulations.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 97.999



§ 97.072  REMEDIES.



   Employees of the town or other agents authorized by the Town Council
may, in the name of the town, bring actions in the Town Court or the Circuit
or Superior Courts of the county for violations and enforcement of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)



PARK IMPACT FEE



§ 97.085  LIMITATION ON IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE.



   This subchapter shall expire and become void five years after its
effective date as required by I.C. 36-7-4-1340, unless action is undertaken
to extend its life consistent with the provisions of said code section which
contemplates a replacement ordinance.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.086  ESTABLISHMENT OF IMPACT ZONE.



   (A)   There is hereby established one park and recreational
infrastructure impact zone, the borders of which are co-terminus with the
existing corporate borders of the town, and, as they may be extended from
time to time through annexation, and, over which the town exercises planning
and zoning jurisdiction. In this regard, the Town Council specifically finds
that there is a functional relationship between the components of the Park
and Recreation Master Plan and Infrastructure Improvement Plan and that such
park and recreational plan provides a reasonably uniform benefit to all of
the citizens throughout the impact zone as of the adoption of this
subchapter. The Town Council further finds that all areas within the impact
zone are contiguous as required in I.C. 36-7-4-1316. Except as provided
below, this subchapter shall apply uniformly to all residential developments
within the impact zone hereby established for which the town may require a
structural building permit and which creates a need for new and additional
park and recreational infrastructure.



   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:



      (1)   Developments meeting the requirements set forth in I.C.
36-7-4-1322(g);



      (2)   Improvements which do not require a structural building
permit;



      (3)   Improvements which do not create a need for new and
additional infrastructure, including the erection of a sign, construction of
accessory buildings, structures or fences or the alteration, renovation or
expansion of an improvement where the use, or intensity thereof, has not
changed;



      (4)   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed
improvement, provided that the replacement improvement does not create a need
for new and additional infrastructure over and above the infrastructure
needed by the original improvement prior to the destruction or partial
destruction thereof; and



      (5)   Nonresidential development.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.087  ZONE IMPROVEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   As a pre-condition to the adoption of this subchapter, the
Town Council undertook a comprehensive and detailed park and recreational
impact analysis through the employment for that purpose of H. J. Umbaugh &
Associates, LLP. The Town Council does now find that the resulting study and
data base constitute a sufficient study to constitute a Zone Improvement
Plan. The Town Council does hereby adopt the Zone Improvement Plan prepared
by H. J. Umbaugh & Associates, LLP, and dated according to its most recent
update, May 17, 2012, as its Zone Improvement Plan and finds in this regard
that said Zone Improvement Plan does contain the following elements:



      (1)   Reasonable estimates relating to the nature and location
of development that is expected within the impact zone during the planning
period, which, for the purposes of this subchapter is defined to be a period
of five years commencing with the date of adoption hereof;



      (2)   A reasonable determination of the community level of
service for the impact zone;



      (3)   A reasonable determination of the current level of
service provided within the impact zone;



      (4)   A reasonable estimate of the nature, location,
sequencing and timing of the park and recreational requirements and costs
necessary to provide the community level of service for the developments
contemplated in division (A)(1) above;



      (5)   A reasonable estimate of the share of the park and
recreational costs identified in division (A)(4) above that will be used to:



         (a)   Raise the current level of service for existing
development or provide service to existing development; or



         (b)   Provide service to new development.



      (6)   A reasonable estimate of revenues that:



         (a)   Are from sources other than impact fees; and



         (b)   Will be used to finance the cost identified in
division (A)(5)(a) above.



      (7)   A description of the nature and location of existing
infrastructure in the impact zone; and



      (8)   A general description of the sources and amounts of
money used to pay for infrastructure during the previous five years.



   (B)   In addition, the Town Council does hereby specifically adopts
the Zone Improvement Plan as an official part of the Comprehensive Plan of
the town, pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-500 et seq.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.088  ESTABLISHMENT OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   Based upon the Park and Recreation Master Plan and
Infrastructure Improvement Plan previously referred to and which is made a
part of this subchapter, the Town Council determines that the cost per
detached single-family housing unit is in the amount of $730; the cost per
duplex unit, condo unit and townhome unit is in the amount of $526 and the
cost per apartment unit is in the amount of $477. The Town Council does
hereby make as a part of the record of these proceedings, all of the data
collected, the calculations made, and the conclusions reached by the Town
Council in the process of developing the Zone Improvement Plan.



   (B)   In the event that any parcel of real estate considered in the
creation of the Zone Improvement Plan undergoes a change in use,
redevelopment or a modification which requires a structural building permit,
and creates a need for new infrastructure, an impact fee will only be
assessed for the increase in the burden on infrastructure.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.089  CREDIT IN LIEU OF PAYMENT; EXEMPTIONS.



   Credits against impact fees otherwise due shall be allowed pursuant to
this section for all infrastructure and improvements constructed or furnished
in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-1313, I.C. 36-7-4-1335 since January 1, 1989
and I.C. 36-7-4-1336. In addition, a fee payer or other person or entity
responsible for installing infrastructure or improvements may designate in
writing a method of allocating its credits to future fee payers who may be
successors in interest to the credits earned by the fee payer or others, as
part of the certification provided for above. Any person or entity otherwise
obligated to pay the fee established by this subchapter whose property was
totally or partially destroyed by fire, storm or other casualty beyond their
control, shall be exempt from said fee if they repair or replace the
destroyed structure without creating a burden on infrastructure greater than
the burden imposed by the destroyed structure. In the event of such
additional burden, the fee shall be calculated based only on the increased
burden created by the structure.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.090  IMPACT FEE DUE UPON ISSUANCE OF STRUCTURAL BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   The impact fee imposed pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter shall be due and payable upon the issuance of a structural
building permit by the town. In this regard, it is understood that the
structural building permit is synonymous with the term “structural building
permit” as that term is used in I.C. 36-7-4-1323, in that the issuance of a
structural building permit authorizes the applicant to commence construction
activities, structural and otherwise. The entire fee which is calculated
pursuant to the terms of this subchapter shall be due at said time unless the
amount of the fee upon calculation is greater than $5,000, in which case an
installment plan may be requested by the applicant in accordance with the
terms set forth in I.C. 36-7-4-1324(a), I.C. 36-7-4-1324(b), I.C.
36-7-4-1324(c) and I.C. 36-7-4-1324(d). The Town Impact Fee Review Board
shall establish specific rules consistent with said code provisions for
installment payments. The interest rate on any installment plan or deferred
payment shall be the pre-judgment rate of interest set forth in the Indiana
Code as from time to time amended.



   (B)   If a fee payer requests, the amount of the impact fee shall be
assessed upon the voluntary submission of a development plan or upon the
issuance of the improvement location permit, whichever is earlier. For
purposes of this section, ASSESSMENT means the act of calculating the amount
of the impact fee which shall be due. The town shall make such assessment
within 30 days of the date of such voluntary request or at the issuance of
the improvement location permit with or without a request.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.091  LIEN RIGHTS ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1325, the town acquires a lien against the real
estate which is the subject of the impact fee. The town hereby incorporates
I.C. 36-7-4-1325(a), I.C. 36-7-4-1325(b), I.C. 36-7-4-1325(c), I.C.
36-7-4-1325(d), I.C. 36-7-4-1325(e) and I.C. 36-7-4-1325(f) into this
subchapter. Upon adoption, this subchapter shall be recorded, and,
thereafter, it shall constitute constructive notice of the lien rights of the
town. The town may, in its discretion, file a specific instrument setting
forth its lien rights with respect to a parcel of real estate which is the
subject of an installment payment of an impact fee, and such instrument shall
constitute actual notice in addition to the constructive notice provided for
by the recording of this subchapter.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.092  FORM OF RECEIPT.



   The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall issue a receipt for any and all
impact fees collected, and the form of such receipt shall be as follows:



 

Received of _______________ (fee payer), this ____ day of ____________,
20___, the sum of ____________________ ($________________) in (full)
(partial) satisfaction of impact fees due pursuant to Ord. _______ relating
to improvements to be constructed on the real estate described on Exhibit A,
attached hereto, made part hereof, and subject to lien rights in favor of the
Town of Plainfield in the event of partial payment with payments remaining
due. The remaining balance due (if any) is in the following amount:
____________________________________ ($_____________).

 

_____________________________

Clerk-Treasurer, Town of Plainfield



 



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.093  IMPACT FEE REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   An Impact Fee Review Board (“Review Board”) shall be
established consisting of three members appointed by the President of the
Town Council.  A member of the Review Board may not be a member of the
Plainfield Plan Commission.



   (B)   The term of the Review Board members shall be one year
commencing on January 1 and ending on the following December 31.



   (C)   The Review Board membership must meet the following conditions:



      (1)   One member who is a real estate broker licensed in the
state;



      (2)   One member who is an engineer licensed in the state; and



      (3)   One member who is a certified public accountant.



   (D)   In the event of a conflict of interest on the Review Board,
the President of the Town Council shall appoint a temporary replacement
member meeting the qualifications of the member being temporarily replaced.



   (E)   The Review Board shall have the power and duties set forth
specifically in I.C. 36-7-4-1338 as well as any other duties set forth
generally in I.C. 36-7-4-1300, 1300 series-impact fees.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.094  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any fee payer who believes itself to be aggrieved by the
calculation of the impact fee, may appeal from such calculation to the Town
Impact Fee Review Board and the Town Impact Fee Review Board shall conduct a
hearing with regard thereto. An appeal of the amount of an impact fee shall
be made for the following reasons:



      (1)   A fact assumption used in determining the amount of the
impact fee is incorrect; or



      (2)   The amount of the impact fee is greater than the amount
allowed under I.C. 36-7-4-1320, I.C. 36-7-4-1321 and I.C. 36-7-4-1322.



   (B)   The fee payor must file a petition (“petitioner”) for a
review of the amount of an impact fee with the town’s Impact Fee Review
Board not later than 30 days after issuance of the structural building permit
for the development for which the impact fee was assessed. The petition shall
be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer and be accompanied by payment of a filing
fee of $100. The petitioner shall receive a full refund of the filing fee if:



      (1)   The petitioner prevails;



      (2)   The amount of the impact fee or the reductions or
credits against the fee is adjusted by the town, the Board or a court; and



      (3)   The body ordering the adjustment finds that the fee,
reductions or credits were arbitrary or capricious.



   (C)   The town’s Impact Fee Review Board shall prescribe the form
of the petition for review of an impact fee under division (B) above. The
Review Board shall issue instructions for completion of the form. The form
and the instructions must be clear, simple and understandable to a lay
person. The form must require the petitioner to specify:



      (1)   A description of the new development on which the impact
fee has been assessed;



      (2)   All facts related to the assessment of the impact fee;
and



      (3)   The reasons the petitioner believes that the amount of
the impact fee assessed is erroneous or is greater than the amount allowed by
the fee limitations set forth in this series.



   (D)   The town’s Impact Fee Review Board shall prescribe a form
for a response by the town to a petition for review under this section. The
Review Board shall issue instructions for completion of the form. The form
must require the town to indicate:



      (1)   Agreement or disagreement with each item indicated on
the petition for review under division (C) above; and



      (2)   The reasons the town believes that the amount of the fee
assessed is correct.



   (E)   Immediately upon the receipt of a timely filed petition on the
form prescribed under division (C) above, the Town’s Impact Fee Review
Board shall provide a copy of the petition to the town assessing the impact
fee. The town shall not later than 30 days after the receipt of the petition
provide to the Review Board a completed response to the petition on the form
prescribed under division (D) above. The Review Board shall immediately
forward a copy of the response form to the petitioner.



   (F)   An Impact Fee Review Board shall:



      (1)   Review the petition and the response submitted under
this section; and



      (2)   Determine the appropriate amount of the impact fee not
later than 30 days after submission of both petitions.



   (G)   A petitioner aggrieved by a final determination of an Impact
Fee Review Board may appeal to the Circuit or Superior Court of the county in
which the unit is located and is entitled to a trial de novo. If the
assessment of a fee is vacated by judgment of the court, the assessment of
the impact fee shall be remanded to the Review Board for correction of the
impact fee assessment and further proceedings in accordance with law.



   (H)   If a petition for a review or an appeal of an impact fee
assessment is pending, the impact fee is not due and payable until after the
petition or appeal is finally adjudicated and the amount of the fee is
determined.



   (I)   The town shall not deny the issuance of a structural building
permit on the basis that the impact fee has not been paid, or, condition
issuance of the permit on the payment of the impact fee. If the impact fee
totals $1,000 or less, the town may require the fee payer to pay the impact
fee or initiate an appeal under this section before the structural building
permit is issued.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.095  ESTABLISHMENT OF PARK AND RECREATIONAL FUND.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established the Town Park and
Recreational Fund. This Fund shall be a non-reverting fund and shall receive
any and all sums collected pursuant to this subchapter to be utilized in
connection with the purposes set forth herein. The Fund shall consist
initially of one account based upon the current existence of one impact zone.
In the event, and only in the event, that an additional impact zone is
created hereafter, a separate account shall be maintained for each separate
impact zone established within the town. Interest earned on the Fund or on
any account within the Fund, shall be deposited and maintained within the
Fund or the separate account. The Clerk-Treasurer of the town shall maintain
records of the status of the Fund or any account which may be established
therein, and shall make an annual report of said fund and accounts which
shall be available to the public in general and fee payers, upon request, in
particular.



      (2)   The annual report shall include:



         (a)   The amount of money in accounts established for
the impact zone; and



         (b)   The total receipts and disbursements of the
accounts established for the impact zone.



   (B)   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1332(e), the Clerk-Treasurer is
designated as the town official responsible for acting upon refund requests.
In order to facilitate refunds when they may be due, the Clerk-Treasurer is
directed to identify the purpose of any impact fee paid in order that a
refund, if any, may be paid from the Fund or account into which the fee was
originally deposited.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.096  USE OF IMPACT FEES COLLECTED.



   Any and all fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter may be utilized for the following purposes only by the town,
acting by and through its Town Council, which, for the purpose of this
subchapter is identified as the “infrastructure agency” contemplated by
I.C. 36-7-4-1317:



   (A)   Providing funds to be utilized by the town for the purpose of
paying the capital costs of new park and recreational infrastructure that is
necessary to serve the new development within the corporate limits of the
town and that is identified in the Zone Improvement Plan;



   (B)   An amount not to exceed 5% of the annual collections of the
fee to be utilized for expenses incurred by the town for the consulting
services used to establish this subchapter;



   (C)   To pay any refund due pursuant to the terms of this
subchapter; and



   (D)   To pay the debt service cost on an obligation issued to
provide new park and recreational infrastructure described in division (A)
above.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.097  HOUSE ENROLLED ACT NO. 1467.



   The Town Council specifically acknowledges the existence of a law
adopted by the General Assembly of the state which regulates the imposition
of impact fee ordinances by municipal corporations within the state. It is
the intent of the town to comply with such legislation, and this subchapter
shall be construed in all respects to be consistent with the Act. The
substantive and procedural requirements of I.C. 36-7-4-1300 et seq. shall
control in the event of conflicts, which are unintended by the Town Council.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.098  AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW.



   The impact fee provided for herein is based upon data which, in large
part, is subject to inflation and other economic and market forces over which
the town has no control. The Town Council shall, therefore, when the town
determines that circumstances require, cause a review to be made by town
staff or consultants as may be required, to determine the continuing validity
of the impact fee, the impact zone and the Zone Improvement Plan. The Town
Council shall consider and adopt such amendments as are necessary to cause a
substantive compliance with the rational nexus test to continue, to ensure
that procedural due process is maintained or enhanced and to insure that this
subchapter meets the requirements of the I.C. 36-7-4-1300 series. To the
extent required by the facts and circumstances, this process shall include
the steps necessary to update the Zone Improvement Plan and the Comprehensive
Plan.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.099  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall take effect six months after the date Ord.
09-2012 is adopted by the Town Council.



(Ord. 09-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 97.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates §§ 97.052 through and
including 97.064 or § 97.068 shall be fined $25 for the first offense and
$50 for each offense thereafter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
for each day during which or on which a violation occurs or continues to
occur.



      (2)   Any person who violates §§ 97.065, 97.066 and 97.067
shall be fined $100 for the first offense and $200 for each offense
thereafter. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during
which or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur.



      (3)   In addition to, or in lieu of, a fine as provided for in
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above, any person who violates any provision of
§§ 97.050 through 97.072 may be restricted from being on any part or all of
the parks and recreation areas of the town. This restriction may be for a
period of five days to one year depending on the circumstances of the
violation. The time period and area of the restriction will initially be made
by the Director of Parks and Recreation of the town who shall send the notice
of restriction to the offender by registered mail, return receipt requested.
Any restriction may be appealed with a written request to Town Council.



      (4)   In addition to penalties contained herein, any person
who damages park property is subject to payment of restitution in an amount
equal to the town’s cost to repair or replace said park property.



(Ord. 10-2013, passed 11-11-2013)



CHAPTER 98:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   98.01   Policy statement



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Unlawful practice



   98.04   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing



   98.05   Discrimination in residential real estate-related
transactions



   98.06   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service



   98.07   Interference, coercion or intimidation



   98.08   Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases



   98.09   Exemptions



   98.10   Administrative enforcement of chapter



§ 98.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It shall be the policy of the town to provide, within constitutional
limitation, for fair housing throughout its corporate limits as provided for
under the Federal Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, the Federal Housing
and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, and I.C. 22-9.5-1 et seq.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:



      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice; or



      (2)   Believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-2)



   COMMISSION. The Indiana Civil Rights Commission created pursuant to
I.C. 22-9-1-4 et seq.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-3)



   COMPLAINANT. A person, including the Commission, who files a complaint
under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-4)



   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
98.04, 98.05, 98.06, 98.07 or 98.08 or I.C. 22-9.5-5.



   DWELLING. Any building, structure or part of a building or structure
that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by
one or more families; or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a
building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-8)



   FAMILIAL STATUS.



      (1)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of
18 years being domiciled with: a parent or another person having legal
custody of such individual or the written permission of such parent or other
person.



      (2)   The protections afforded against discrimination on the
basis of FAMILIAL STATUS shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained
the age of 18 years.



   FAMILY. Includes a single individual (I.C. 22-9.5-2-9), with the status
of such family being further defined in the definition for FAMILIAL STATUS
above.



   DISABILITY.



      (1)   With respect to a person:



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities;



         (b)   A record of having such an impairment;



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment;



         (d)   An impairment described or defined pursuant to the
Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101
et seq.; or



         (e)   Any other impairment.



      (2)   The term DISABILITY shall not include current illegal
use of or addictions to a controlled substance as defined in the Controlled
Substances Act, being 21 U.S.C. § 802; nor does the term DISABILITY include
an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite.



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint-stock companies, trusts, non-incorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in cases under U.S.C. Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-11)



   RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
a consideration the rights to occupy the premises not owned by the occupant.



(I.C. 22-9.5-2-13)



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.03  UNLAWFUL PRACTICE.



   Subject to the provisions of division (B) below, § 98.09 and I.C.
22-9.5-3, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of
housing set forth I.C. 22-9.5-5-1 and in § 98.04 shall apply to:



   (A)   All dwellings except as exempted by division (B) below and
I.C. 22-9.5-3;



   (B)   Other than the provisions of division (C) below, nothing in §
98.04 shall apply to:



      (1)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner where
the private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided that in the sale of such single-family house
by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale
or exemption shall apply only to one such sale within any 24-month period.
The private individual owner may not own any interest in, nor have owned or
reserved on his or her behalf, title to or any right to all or a portion of
the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family
houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from application of this division (B)(1) only if such house
is sold or rented:



         (a)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings,
or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent or saleperson, or
person; and



         (b)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after
notice of advertisement or written notice in violation of § 98.04(C), but
noting in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstracters, title companies and other such professional assistance as
necessary to perfect or transfer this title.



      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of such living quarters as his or her residence.



   (C)   For the purposes of division (B) above, a person shall be
deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:



      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or
rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;



      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months,
participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal
residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or services in two or more
transaction involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or



      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling unit designed or
intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.04  DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.



   As made applicable by § 98.03 and except as exempted by §§ 98.03(B)
and 98.09, it shall be unlawful:



   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide
offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services of
facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status or national origin;



   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or
published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or
rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status
or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation
or discrimination;



   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion,
sex, handicap, familial status or national origin that any dwelling is not
available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available;



   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induct any person to sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or perspective
entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race,
color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin; and



   (F)   (1)   To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because
of a handicap of:



         (a)   That buyer or renter;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (2)   To discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a
handicap of:



         (a)   That person;



         (b)   A person residing in or intending to reside in
that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or



         (c)   Any person associated with that person.



      (3)   For purposes of this division (F), DISCRIMINATION
includes:



         (a)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the
handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or
to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises except that, in the case of
a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition
permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior
of the premises to the condition that existed before the modifications,
reasonable wear and tear excepted;



         (b)   A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in
rules, policies, practices or services when such accommodations may be
necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling; or



         (c)   In connection with the design and construction of
covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after the date that is 30
months after September 13, 1998, a failure to design and construct those
dwellings in such a manner that:



            1.   The public use and common use portions of
such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;



            2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into
and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow
passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and



            3.   All premises within such dwellings contain
the following features of adaptive design:



               a.   An accessible route into and through
the dwelling;



               b.   Light, switches, electrical outlets,
thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible locations; and



               c.   Reinforcements in bathrooms such that
an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.



            4.   Compliance with the appropriate requirement
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and of the American National Standard
for Buildings and Facilities providing accessibility an usability for
physically handicapped people (commonly cited as AANSI A117.1) suffices to
satisfy the requirements of division (F)(3)(c)3. above; and



            5.    Nothing in this division (F) requires that a
dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health of safety of other individuals of whose tenancy
would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.05  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose
business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in
the terms or conditions of such a transaction, because of race, color,
religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term RESIDENTIAL REAL
ESTATE-RELATED TRANSACTION means any of the following:



      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or providing other
financial assistance:



         (a)   For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing
or maintaining a dwelling; or



         (b)   Secured by residential real estate.



      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real
property.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person engaged in the
business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration
factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap or
familial status.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.06  DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or
her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation,
on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or
national origin.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.07  INTERFERENCE, COERCION OR INTIMIDATION.



   It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with
any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her
having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by §§ 98.03, 98.04, 98.05 or 98.06.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.08  PREVENTION OF INTIMIDATION IN FAIR HOUSING CASES.



   Whoever, whether or not acting under code or law, by force or threat of
force willfully injures, intimidates or interferes with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate or interfere with:



   (A)   Any person because of his or her race, color, religion, sex,
handicap, familial status, or national origin and because he or she is or has
been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings;



   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to
intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from:



      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, in
any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) of this section; or



      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity
or protection so to participate.



   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account
of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status or national origin,
in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in
division (A) above, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly
opposing any denial of the opportunity to participate shall be fined
according to local, state and federal law; and if bodily injury results shall
be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than ten years, or
both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of
years or for life.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.09  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Exemptions defined or set forth under I.C. 22-9.5-3 et seq.
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to include those
activities or organizations set forth under divisions (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account
of race, color or national origin. Nor shall anything in this chapter
prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its
members.



   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter regarding familial status
shall apply with respect to housing for older persons.



      (2)   As used in this section, HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS means
housing:



         (a)   Provided under any state or federal program that
the Secretary of the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or
the State Civil Rights Commission determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly person (as defined in the state or federal
program);



         (b)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, person 62
years of age or older; or



         (c)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least
one person 55 years of age or older per unit.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 98.10  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The authority and responsibility for properly administering
this chapter and referral of complaints hereunder to the Commissioner as set
forth in division (B) below shall be vested in the chief elected official of
the town.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of I.C. 22-9.5-4-8, the town,
because of lack of financial and other resources necessary to fully
administer enforcement proceedings and possible civil actions under the
chapter, herein elects to refer all formal complaints of violation of the
sections of this chapter by complainants to the Indiana Civil Rights
Commission for administrative enforcement actions pursuant to I.C. 22-9.5-6
and the chief elected official of the town, shall refer all said complaints
to the Commission as provided for under division (A) above to said Commission
for purposes of investigation, resolution and appropriate relief as provided
for under I.C. 22-9.5-6.



   (C)   All executive departments and agencies of the town shall
administer its departments, programs and activities relating to housing and
urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this
chapter and shall cooperate with the chief elected official and the
Commission to further such purposes.



   (D)   The chief elected official of the town, or the chief elected
official’s designee, shall provide information on remedies available to any
aggrieved person or complainant requesting such information.



(Ord. 08-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



CHAPTER 99:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   99.01   Title



   99.02   Purpose



   99.03   Definitions



   99.04   Registration fees and terms



   99.05   Prohibited activity and fees



   99.06   Hearings



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be titled “Alarm Systems”, and may be cited as
such. Reference shall be Ord. 5-2001.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



§ 99.02  PURPOSE.



   To establish required fees, encourage registration of alarm systems and
to provide penalties for violations of said ordinance and to encourage
security alarm users and alarm businesses, (sales, installations, customer
service and/or monitoring) to maintain the operational reliability and the
proper use of alarm systems, limiting of unnecessary responses to alarms by
the Police and Fire Departments.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



§ 99.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT. Any person who is employed by an alarm business either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling, maintaining, leasing,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing on or in any
building, structure, facility or grounds any alarm system.



   ALARM BUSINESS. Any individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity who in addition to selling alarm systems, also leases, maintains,
services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves or installs any alarm system or
causes to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building structure, facility
or grounds.



   ALARM NOTIFICATION. A notification intended to summon the Police or
Fire Departments which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a
person or by an alarm system that responds to an unlawful entry, attempted
entry or any other unauthorized intrusion.



   ALARM SITE. A single premises or location served by an alarm system.



   ALARM SYSTEM.



      (1)   Any device used for the detection of an unauthorized
entry or attempted entry into a building, structure, facility or grounds, or
for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building,
structure, facility or grounds, which when activated causes notification to
be made directly or indirectly to the Town Police or Fire Departments.



      (2)   For the purpose of this chapter, an ALARM SYSTEM shall
be considered exempt:



         (a)   An alarm installed on a motor vehicle;



         (b)   An alarm installed upon premises occupied by the
United States, the state or any political subdivision thereof;



         (c)   An alarm that signals or alerts only the occupants
of the premises protected by the alarm system;



         (d)   An alarm occurring during electrical storms,
tornados, blizzards or other acts of nature; and



         (e)   Circumstances not reasonably under the controls of
the alarm user, installer or maintainer (the responsibility to show causation
is that of the user, installer or maintainer).



   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. Any device that is designed or intended to
automatically dial, via telephone lines, the Police and Fire Department to
report an emergency such as a burglary or holdup.



   FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION. Any alarm notification, whether direct or
indirect, to the Town Police and Fire Communication Center, when the
responding officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted
offense or emergency.



   PANIC ALARM. Any device that is designed to be manually activated by a
person, whether in a business, residence or automobile, that has encountered
an actual or perceived emergency situation.



   REMOTE ALARM REPORTER. Any device that is designed or intended to
provide an audible (bell, tone, siren and the like) response, in the event of
a burglar/holdup alarm, to a remote site such as the Town Police and Fire
Communication Center.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



§ 99.04  REGISTRATION FEES AND TERMS.



   (A)   Registration shall be mandatory and on the form provided by
the communications center and registration shall remain on file with agency
only. At time of registration a permit decal will be issued and displayed in
a prominent location at the front entrance of the building.



   (B)   There is no fee required in the issuance of an alarm
registration.



   (C)   An alarm system registration issued pursuant to this section
shall be valid for a term of two years commencing from the date of issuance.



   (D)   An alarm system registration issued pursuant to this section
shall be personal to the registration holder for a specific location and is
not transferable.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



§ 99.05  PROHIBITED ACTIVITY AND FEES.



   It shall be the duty of the Town Police and Fire Departments to enforce
this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to fines and costs as specified within § 99.99.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.06  HEARINGS.



   Any person receiving any such notice of violation as described herein
and wishes to enter a denial, may be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Town Court. At such time, said Court shall assess court costs and may
also award reasonable attorneys’ fees from the violator for the necessity
of prosecuting an action when judgment is found for the town. The court may
also assess administrative costs expended by the town in taking enforcement
action.



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violators of this chapter shall be served a written notice of
the violation (complaint and summons) either in person or by any other manner
reasonably calculated to result in actual notice, including certified mail.



   (B)   If emergency personnel respond to an alarm that is not
registered with the communication center, a warning will be issued. A failure
to comply with this chapter in the future will result in a fine not to exceed
$100.



   (C)   The holder of an alarm permit or the person in control of an
alarm system shall be subject to warning, fines and suspension or loss of
permit depending on the number of false alarm notifications emitted from an
alarm system within any 12-month period based upon the following schedule:



 


Number of False Alarm Notifications

 

Action Taken




5+

 
Minimum $200 fine not to exceed $500 for each incident



 



(Ord. 5-2001, passed - -2001)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   SPECIFIC LICENSING PROCEDURES



      112.   FRANCHISES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   110.01   Authority to license



   110.02   Application and fee



   110.03   Approval of Town Council



   110.04   Duration of license, display required, inspections



   110.05   Issuance, revocation of suspension



§ 110.01  AUTHORITY TO LICENSE.



   The town has the authority to impose a license fee that is reasonably
related to the administrative cost of exercising such regulating power.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-1)



Statutory reference:



   Towns to have licensing powers, see I.C. 36-1-3-8(5)



§ 110.02  APPLICATION AND FEE.



   All applications for a permit or license under this title shall be
referred by the Town Clerk-Treasurer to the Town Council, unless otherwise
specified.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-2)



§ 110.03  APPROVAL OF TOWN COUNCIL.



   After examination, the Town Council shall grant such permit or license
at the next regular meeting, unless good cause be shown why said permit or
license should not be granted.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-3)



§ 110.04  DURATION OF LICENSE, DISPLAY REQUIRED, INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All licenses issued under this title, unless specified
otherwise on the license, shall be issued for the duration of the calendar
year for which they were issued, and shall expire on December 31.



   (B)   Every person who is issued a license under the provisions of
the licensed activity is being conducted, or if there are no premises shall
carry the license while engaged in the activity for which he or she has been
licensed, and shall exhibit it to any town official or citizen upon request.



   (C)   The Town Marshal or his or her designee may inspect all places
of business under license or required to have a license.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-4)



Statutory reference:



   Police Department to do inspections and set forth other duties, see
I.C. 36-8-3-10



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE, REVOCATION OF SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall issue licenses upon payment of the
license fees and compliance with the applicable provisions of this code and
Town Board approval.



   (B)   Licenses issued by the town may be revoked or suspended if the
person holding the license has violated the terms or conditions of the
license or the law under which it was issued, or has conducted the business
in such a manner as to constitute a threat to public health, safety or
general welfare of the town citizens.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-5)



Statutory reference:



   Clerk-Treasurer to issue licenses, see I.C. 36-5-6-6(6)



CHAPTER 111:  SPECIFIC LICENSING PROCEDURES



Section




Canvasser Regulations




   111.001   Registration required for canvassers/peddlers



   111.002   Definitions



   111.003   Exceptions



   111.004   Regulation



   111.005   Permit fees



   111.006   Valid registration



   111.007   Regulations



   111.008   Revocation



   111.009   Nuisance abatement




Direct Seller Regulations




   111.055   Registration required



   111.056   Definitions



   111.057   Exemptions



   111.058   Registration



   111.059   Additional information



   111.060   License



   111.061   Investigation



   111.062   Appeal



   111.063   Regulations



   111.064   Disclosure requirements



   111.065   Records



   111.066   Revocation of registration




Emergency Medical Ambulance Service




   111.080   Title



   111.081   Purpose



   111.082   Emergency medical ambulance service



   111.083   Authorized transport destinations



   111.084   Destination determination



   111.085   Mutual aid to areas surrounding the town



   111.086   Required training, certification, equipment, policies and
operational procedures



   111.087   Ambulance service charges and fee structure



   111.088   Billing and payment responsibility



   111.089   Effective date




Massage Businesses and Licensing Masseurs




   111.100   Definitions



   111.101   Permit required



   111.102   Application for massage business permit



   111.103   Application for masseur’s permit



   111.104   Approval by Police Chief and Town Council member



   111.105   Issuance or denial of massage business permit



   111.106   Display of permits



   111.107   Fee



   111.108   Revocation or suspension of permit



   111.109   Keeping of records



   111.110   Transfer prohibited



   111.111   Sanitation and safety requirements



   111.112   Supervision



   111.113   Persons under age 18 prohibited on the premises



   111.114   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   111.115   Exceptions



   111.116   Validity



 



   111.999   Penalty



CANVASSER REGULATIONS



§ 111.001  REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR CANVASSERS/PEDDLERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in canvassing within the
corporate limits of the town without being registered for that purpose as
herein provided.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANVASSER. Any person, whether acting on his or her own or on behalf of
another person, corporation or other entity who engages in canvassing as
herein defined.



   CANVASSING. Any act of a person going from house to house, door to door
or business to business for any purpose including, but not limited to, the
conducting of a survey, the dissemination of information either orally or
with written materials, the distribution of any written materials, objects or
products and any act of solicitation including solicitation of information.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-27)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.003  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to the following
persons:



   (A)   Officers or employees of the town, a state county, the state,
or the federal government, or any subdivision thereof, when on official
business;



   (B)   Legitimate candidates for national, state and local public
office and their authorized individuals working for such candidates when such
candidates or their authorized agents are engaged in an election campaign for
public office;



   (C)   Authorized individuals soliciting donations, contributions or
memberships to recognized charitable and religious organizations; and



   (D)   Authorized individuals soliciting donations, contributions or
memberships for recognized service and fraternal organizations that have an
organized chapter or body located within the town or within Guilford Township.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-28)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.004  REGULATION.



   Before any person shall engage in an act of canvassing he or she shall
register with the Clerk- Treasurer of the town and shall give his or her
complete identification, his or her signature, the name of his or her
employer, the nature and purpose of his or her canvassing, the name or names
or the organization or entity for which he or she is soliciting, the make,
model, color and license plate number of any vehicle being used during his or
her canvassing, the purpose of his or her canvassing and the proposed method
of operation in the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-29)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.005  PERMIT FEES.



   For such permits, each registrant shall pay to the Clerk-Treasurer of
the town as follows:



   (A)   Twenty dollars per day;



   (B)   Fifty dollars per week; and



   (C)   One hundred dollars per month.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-30)  (Ord. 1-87, passed 6-8-1987; Ord. 11-90, passed
7-9-1990)



§ 111.006  VALID REGISTRATION.



   Upon proper registration pursuant to this subchapter and the payment of
the fee by the registrant, said registration shall be valid for said person
for a period of 30 days commencing on the date that the fee is paid for such
registration to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-31)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.007  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall govern the conduct of registrants
hereunder.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any canvasser to call at any
dwelling, business or other place before 8:00 a.m. and after 30 minutes
before sunset, except by appointment.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any canvasser to remain on any
premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or other person
having authority over such premises.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any canvasser to misrepresent or make
false, deceptive or misleading statements while engaged in canvassing, the
purpose of his or her visit, his or her identity or the identity of the
organization he or she represents.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any canvasser to impede the free use
of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any canvasser to allow any written
materials or other rubbish or litter to be dropped, thrown or left on the
sidewalks, streets, yards, vehicles, parks, residences or businesses within
the corporate limits of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-32)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.008  REVOCATION.



   Any such registration pursuant to this subchapter may be revoked by the
Chief of Police of the town because of any violation by the registrant of
this subchapter or of any other ordinance of the town, or of any state or
federal law, and upon revocation of the registration of any canvasser any
further act of canvassing by such person shall result in a violation of this
subchapter and the application of the appropriate penalties therefor.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-33)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.009  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   In addition to the penalty provided for in §§ 111.999, any act of any
person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this subchapter is
declared to be a nuisance and all remedies applicable to a nuisance, both
public and private, including, but not limited to, injunction and damages,
are preserved.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-35)  (Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985)



DIRECT SELLER REGULATIONS



§ 111.055  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to engage in direct sales
within the town without being registered for that purpose as provided herein.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-37)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



Statutory reference:



   Regulation of the operation of businesses, crafts, professions and
occupations, see I.C. 36-8-2-10



§ 111.056  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Includes any benevolent, philanthropic,
patriotic or eleemosynary person, partnership, association or corporation, or
one purporting to be such.



   DIRECT SELLER. Any individual who, for himself or herself, or for a
partnership, association or corporation, sells goods, or takes sales orders
for the later delivery of goods, at any location other than the permanent
business place or residence of said individual, partnership, association or
corporation, and shall include, but not be limited to, peddlers, solicitors
and transient merchants. The sale of goods includes donations required by the
DIRECT SELLER for the retention of goods by a donor or prospective customer.



   GOODS. Includes personal property of any kind, and shall include goods
provided incidental to services offered or sold.



   PERMANENT MERCHANT. A direct seller who, for at least one year prior to
the consideration of the application of this subchapter to said merchants,
has continuously operated an established place of business in this town or
has continuously resided in this town and now does business from his or her
residence.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-38)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.057  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following shall be exempt from all provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Any person delivering newspapers, fuel, dairy products or
bakery goods to regular customers on established routes;



   (B)   Any person selling goods at wholesale to dealers in such goods;



   (C)   Any person selling agricultural products which such person has
grown or produced in the county and is being sold by a resident of the county;



   (D)   Any permanent merchant or employee thereof who takes orders
away from the established place of business for goods regularly offered for
sale by such merchant within the town and who delivers such goods in their
regular course of business;



   (E)   Any person who has an established place of business where the
goods being sold are offered for sale on a regular basis, and in which the
buyer has initiated contact with, and specifically requested a home visit by
said person;



   (F)   Any person who has had, or one who represents a company which
has had, a prior business transaction, such as a prior sale or credit
arrangement, with the prospective customer;



   (G)   Any person selling or offering for sale a service unconnected
with the sale or offering for sale of goods;



   (H)   Any person holding a sale required by statute or by order of
any court and any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law;
and



   (I)   Any employee, officer or agent of a charitable organization as
defined in § 111.056.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-39)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.058  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Applicants for registration must complete and return to the
Clerk-Treasurer at least three days before such applicant shall be authorized
to do business a registration form furnished by the Clerk-Treasurer which
shall require the following information:



      (1)   Name, permanent address and telephone number, and
temporary address, if any;



      (2)   Age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;



      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
association or corporation that the direct seller represents or is employed
by, or whose merchandise is being sold;



      (4)   Temporary address and telephone number from which
business will be conducted, if any;



      (5)   Nature of business to be conducted and a brief
description of the goods offered, and any services offered;



      (6)   Proposed method of delivery of goods, if applicable;



      (7)   Make, model and license number of any vehicle to be used
by applicant in the conduct of his or her business;



      (8)   The last three previous cities, villages or towns where
applicant conducted similar business;



      (9)   Place where applicant can be contacted for at least
seven days after leaving the town; and



      (10)   Statement as to whether applicant has been convicted of
any crime or ordinance violation related to applicant’s transient merchant
business within the last five years; the nature of the offense and the place
of conviction.



   (B)   Such application shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of
$250 executed by a surety company, or by two responsible freeholders residing
with the corporate limits of the town or a cash bond of equal amount, said
bond conditioned that all goods, wares, merchandise or articles sold by such
applicant will be as represented by him or her and that he or she will refund
the purchase price of any goods, wares, merchandise or articles sold by him
or her which are not as represented. Any person aggrieved by the action of a
licensed direct seller hereunder shall have a right of action on the bond or
other surety for the recovery of money or damages or both. In the event a
cash bond is deposited, the same shall be retained by the town for 60 days
after the expiration of any license issued upon said bond or surety.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-40)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.059  ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.



   Each applicant shall present to the Clerk-Treasurer for examination:



   (A)   A driver’s license or some other proof of identity as may be
reasonably required;



   (B)   A state certificate of examination and approval from the
sealer of weights and measures where applicant’s business requires use of
weighing and measuring devices approved by state authorities; and



   (C)   A State Health Officer’s certificate where applicant’s
business involves the handling of food or clothing and is required to be
certified under state law; such certificate to state that applicant is
apparently free from any contagious or infectious disease, dated not more
than 90 days prior to the date the application for license is made.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-41)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.060  LICENSE.



   (A)   At the time the registration and surety are returned and the
bond approved by the Clerk-Treasurer, a license shall be issued by the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town to such applicant to begin business not less than
three days after the date of filing such application and bond, upon payment
of the following fees:



 

One day
 
$20


One week
 
$50


One month
 
$100



 



   (B)   Upon payment of said fee, the Clerk-Treasurer shall register
the applicant as a direct seller and date the entry and issue the license. If
any such licensee desires to continue in business after the expiration of
such license, a new license must be secured in the same manner and upon the
same terms as the original license, subject to subsequent refusal as provided
herein.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-42)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985; Ord. 1-87, passed
6-8-1987)



§ 111.061  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of each application, the Clerk-Treasurer may
refer it immediately to the Chief of Police who may make and complete an
investigation of the statements made in such registration.



   (B)   The Clerk-Treasurer shall refuse to register the applicant if
it is determined pursuant to the investigation above that: the application
contains any material omission or materially inaccurate statement; complaints
of a material nature have been received and proven against the applicant by
authorities in the three previous cities, villages and towns, in which the
applicant conducted similar business; the applicant was convicted of a crime,
statutory violation or ordinance violation within the last five years, the
nature of which is directly related to the applicant’s fitness to engage in
direct selling; or the applicant failed to comply with any applicable
provision of § 111.058.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-43)



§ 111.062  APPEAL.



   Any person denied registration may appeal the denial through the appeal
procedure provided by ordinance or resolution of the Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-44)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.063  REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall govern the conduct of registrants
hereunder.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to call at any
dwelling or other place between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except
by appointment; to call at any dwelling or other place where a sign is
displayed bearing the words “No Peddlers”, “No Solicitors” or words
of similar meaning; to call at the rear door of any dwelling place; or to
remain on any premises after being asked to leave by the owner, occupant or
other person having authority over such premises.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a direct seller to misrepresent or
make false, deceptive or misleading statements concerning the quality,
quantity or character of any goods offered for sale, the purpose of his or
her visit, his or her identity or the identity of the organization he or she
represents. A charitable organization direct seller shall specifically
disclose what portion of the sale price of goods being offered will actually
be used for the charitable purpose for which the organization is soliciting.
Said portion shall be expressed as a percentage of the sale price of the
goods.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to impede the free
use of sidewalks and streets by pedestrians and vehicles. Where sales are
made from vehicles, all traffic and parking regulations shall be observed.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to make any loud
noises or use any sound amplifying device to attract customers if the noise
produced is capable of being plainly heard outside a 100-foot radius of the
source.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any direct seller to allow rubbish or
litter to accumulate in or around the area in which he or she is conducting
business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-45)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.064  DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.



   The following requirements shall govern the conduct of registrants.



   (A)   After the initial greeting and before any other statement is
made to a prospective customer, a direct seller shall expressly disclose his
or her name, the name of the company or organization he or she is affiliated
with, if any, and the identity of goods or services he or she offers to sell.



   (B)   If any sale of goods is made by a direct seller, or any sales
order for the later delivery of goods is taken by the seller, the buyer shall
have the right to cancel said transaction if it involves the extension of
credit or is a cash transaction of more than $25.



   (C)   If the direct seller takes a sales order for the later
delivery of goods, he or she shall, at the time the order is taken, provide
the buyer with a written statement containing the terms of the agreement, the
amount paid in advance whether full, partial or no advance payment is made,
the name, address and telephone number of the seller, the delivery or
performance date and whether a guarantee or warranty is provided and, if so,
the terms thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-46)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)  Penalty, see §
111.999



§ 111.065  RECORDS.



   The Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk-Treasurer all convictions
for violation of this subchapter and the Clerk-Treasurer shall note any such
violation on the record of the registrant convicted.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-47)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



§ 111.066  REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.



   The registration of a direct seller may be revoked by the Town Council
for any violation of this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-48)  (Ord. 3-85, passed 2-25-1985)



EMERGENCY MEDICAL AMBULANCE SERVICE’



§ 111.080  TITLE.



   This subchapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Emergency Medical Ambulance Service Ordinance of the
Town of Plainfield, Indiana”.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.081  PURPOSE.



   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to prescribe requirements,
and establish fees for the operations of an emergency medical ambulance
service in the town, which is operated by the Town Fire Territory.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.082  EMERGENCY MEDICAL AMBULANCE SERVICE.



   (A)   The Town Fire Territory will operate and maintain an emergency
ambulance service that provides both basic life support and advanced life
support to the citizens of the town.



   (B)   This emergency medical ambulance service will be operated and
maintained for medical emergencies only and not for prearranged medical
visits, transportation to doctor’s offices, clinics, convalescent transfers
or transportation of patients from hospitals back to their residence or
extended care facility unless duly authorized by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee. The town’s obligation is to only render emergency first aid and
if necessary transport emergency patients to an authorized hospital.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.083  AUTHORIZED TRANSPORT DESTINATIONS.



   (A)   The following is a list of hospital facilities to which the
Town Fire Territory is authorized to transport emergency patients from within
their jurisdiction:



      (1)   Clarian Hospital West;



      (2)   Community Hospital South;



      (3)   Heart Center of Indiana;



      (4)   Hendricks Regional Health;



      (5)   Indiana Heart Hospital;



      (6)   Indiana University Hospital;



      (7)   Methodist Hospital;



      (8)   Morgan County Hospital;



      (9)   Riley Hospital;



      (10)   Richard Roudebush Veterans Hospital;



      (11)   St. Francis Hospital Mooresville;



      (12)   St. Francis Hospital South Campus;



      (13)   St. Vincent’s Hospital 86th Street;



      (14)   Westview Hospital;



      (15)   Wishard Memorial Hospital; and



      (16)   St. Vincent’s Women’s Hospital.



   (B)   As hospitals change names, offered services or as new
hospitals are constructed, the Fire Chief shall have authority to add to or
delete from this list of authorized hospital destinations. The Fire Chief
shall notify the Town Council within 30 days of any changes made to the list
of authorized hospital facilities.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.084  DESTINATION DETERMINATION.



   (A)   When suitable, the request of the patient or patient’s legal
representative shall be honored in accordance with the authorized transport
destinations list.



   (B)   Every effort shall be made to follow the request of the family
physician or attending physician when determining destination.



   (C)   If warranted by the seriousness of the injury or illness, the
emergency medical personnel shall make the determination of the destination
either by their own evaluation or by contact with the appropriate hospital.



   (D)   Emergency situations, bed diversions, lack of specialty care
equipment or staff may prevent a patient from being transported to the
hospital of their choice or being diverted en-route from the hospital of
their choice to an alternate hospital.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.085  MUTUAL AID TO AREAS SURROUNDING THE TOWN.



   (A)   Based on availability of equipment and/or personnel, the
emergency medical ambulance will assist another fire department or ambulance
service with equipment and/or personnel if requested.



   (B)   The Town Council, in consultation with the Town Fire Chief,
shall have the authority to establish the boundaries and limitations for
mutual aid. The Fire Chief shall notify the Town Council 30 days in advance
of any changes recommended to be made to the boundaries and limitations for
mutual aid.



   (C)   When rendering mutual aid, a reasonable attempt will be made
to comply with the requesting agencies authorized transport destination list.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.086  REQUIRED TRAINING, CERTIFICATION, EQUIPMENT, POLICIES AND
OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES.



   All training, state certifications, equipment, supplies, policies and
operational procedures shall be governed by the laws of the state, the rule
of the Emergency Medical Services Commission, the sponsoring hospital, the
physician providing medical direction and the rules, regulations and standard
operational guidelines of the Town Fire Department.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.087  AMBULANCE SERVICE CHARGES AND FEE STRUCTURE.



   (A)   The town operates an emergency medical ambulance service to
safeguard and protect the life and public welfare of the Plainfield
community. The intent of this service is to care for the citizens of
Plainfield and offer competent emergency medical care.



   (B)   In order to provide and maintain the equipment, supplies and
certified personnel of a professional emergency medical ambulance service, it
is necessary for the town to establish ambulance service fees.



   (C)   The town shall only charge a patient if said patient is
transported by the Town Fire Territory personnel or a Town Fire Territory
personnel assists with the treatment on an ambulance of another agency while
providing mutual aid.



   (D)   The Town Fire Territory offers emergency medical care at three
levels. The level of care shall be determined by an evaluation of the
seriousness of the patient’s injury or illness. The three levels of
emergency care shall be as follows:



      (1)   Basic life support (BLS). When medically necessary, the
provisions of basic life support (BLS) services is defined by the State
Department of Homeland Security EMS Commission for the emergency medical
technician – basic (EMT-Basic);



      (2)   Advance life support I, (ALS) Advanced life support,
level I (ALSI). When medically necessary, the provisions of advanced life
support (ALS) services is defined by the State Department of Homeland
Security EMS Commission for the advanced life support ambulance provider or
supplier or furnishing of one or more ALS interventions. An ALS assessment is
performed by an ALS crew and results in the determination that the
patient’s condition requires an ALS level of care, even if no other ALS
intervention is performed. An ALS provider is defined as a provider whose
staff has individuals trained to the level of EMT-basic advanced, EMT
advanced or EMT- paramedic as defined by the State Department of Homeland
Security EMS Commission. An ALS procedure is defined as a procedure beyond
the scope of EMT-basic; and



      (3)   Advanced life support II, (ALS II).



         (a)   Shall be defined as three or more medications by
intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion excluding, crystalloid,
hypotonic, isotonic and hypertonic solutions (dextrose, normal saline,
Ringers lactate) not including intravenous fluids for the purpose of
maintaining an IV access or provision of at least one of the following ALS
procedures:



            1.   Manual defibrillation and/or synchronized
cardioversion;



            2.   Endotracheal intubation;



            3.   Central venous line;



            4.   Cardiac pacing;



            5.   Chest decompression;



            6.   Surgical airway; and



            7.   Intraosseous line.



         (b)   Aspirin and oxygen do not qualify a response as an
ALS II level. However, three separate administrations of the same acceptable
medication during a single transport do qualify as an ALS level II.



   (E)   (1)   The established fees for the levels of care shall be
set at the following rates for the residents of the town and the areas
contracted for the provision of such service.



 

Advanced life support I
 

$500



Advanced life support II
 

$600



Basic life support
 

$400




 



      (2)   The established fees for the levels of care shall be set
at the following rates for nonresidents of the town and the areas contracted
for the provisions of such service.



 

Advanced life support I
 

$700



Advanced life support II
 

$775



Advanced life support paramedic assist
 

$300



Basic life support
 

$600




 



   (F)   “Paramedic assist” is to be utilized when transport of the
patient is by another agency with Town Fire Territory personnel assisting
with patient care in the other agency’s vehicle.



   (G)   (1)   In addition to the rates for the level of care
provided, the following fee shall be added as an additional charge.



 

Transport mileage
 

$10




 



      (2)   When the transporting ambulance transports more than one
patient in the same ambulance, the total mileage should be distributed
equally among the patients being transported.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.088  BILLING AND PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The procedures for billing and collection for services shall
be prescribed by the Town Council and administered by the Clerk-Treasurer of
the town.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the patient receiving
emergency medical ambulance services or the patient’s legal representative
to satisfy the charges for the services rendered.



   (C)   All billing shall be sent to the patient, the patient’s
legal representative or named responsible party for the services rendered,
except where federal and/or state law dictates differently.



   (D)   The town is not a network provider for any private insurance
companies and therefore does not accept assignment for payment. In cases
where employers and or insurance carriers make only partial payments for
services rendered, it shall be the responsibility of the patient or the
patient’s legal representative to satisfy the remaining unpaid balance.



   (E)   The town is classified as a Medicare and Medicaid provider. As
such, the town will file claims on behalf of any patient eligible for
Medicare and/or Medicaid. The town cannot bill the patient for a balance
greater than the co-payment, patient responsibility and/or spend-down
established by Medicare and/or Medicaid. In the event that secondary and/or
supplemental insurance is available, the town will request that the patient
file a claim with any secondary and/or supplemental insurance for
satisfaction of the remaining balance. Any co-payment, patient responsibility
and/or spend-down balance not paid by the secondary and/or supplemental
insurance will be the responsibility of the patient as permitted by Medicare
and/or Medicaid.



   (F)   The town has not entered into any agreements with the entities
to which the town provides paramedic assistance. Therefore, all “paramedic
assists” for patients who are eligible for Medicare will be filed with
Medicare for consideration of payment. Any denied claims from Medicare shall
be the responsibility of the patient as permitted by Medicare.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



§ 111.089  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect on June 26, 2012,
subject to its adoption by the Town Council and any publication required by
law.



(Ord. 10-2012, passed 6- -2012)



MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND LICENSING MASSEURS



§ 111.100  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person over 18 years of age, other than a masseur, who
renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business
and receives compensation from the operator of the business of patrons.



   MASSAGE. Any method of treating the superficial parts of a patron for
physiological, psychological, psychiatric, medical, hygienic, exercise,
sensitivity or relaxation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating with the hands or any instrument, or by
the application of air, liquid or vapor baths or any kind whatever.



   MASSEUR. Any person who engages in the practice of massage as herein
defined. The use of the masculine gender shall include in all cases the
feminine gender as well.



   PATRON. Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give any other consideration therefor.



   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. Any school or institution of learning what has for
its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession or work of
massage, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 70
hours before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of
graduation from such school following the successful completion of such
course of study or learning.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-55)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.101  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Business permit required. No person shall engage or carry on
the business of massage unless he or she has a valid massage business permit
issued by the town pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter for each and
every separate office or place of business conducted by such person.



   (B)   Masseur’s permit required. No person shall practice massage
as a masseur, employee or otherwise, unless he or she has a valid and
subsisting masseur’s permit issued to him or her by the town pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-56)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 111.999



§ 111.102  APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE BUSINESS PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file a
written application with the Police Chief on a form to be furnished by the
Police Chief.



   (B)   The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of
the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition,
furnish the following:



      (1)   The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether
individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise;



      (2)   The name, style and designation under which the business
or practice is to be conducted;



      (3)   The business address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted;



      (4)   A complete list of the names and addresses of all
masseurs and employees in the business and the name and residence addresses
of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business;



      (5)   The following personal information concerning the
applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if
the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business:



         (a)   Name, complete residence address and residence
telephone numbers;



         (b)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to
the present address of the applicant;



         (c)   Written proof of age;



         (d)   Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex;



         (e)   Two front-face-portrait photographs taken within
30 days of the date of the application and at least two inches by two inches
in size;



         (f)   The massage or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in
previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit
has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason
therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such
action of denial, suspension or revocation;



         (g)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor
traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted an
the cause number of the case in which convicted;



         (h)   A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be
retained on file by the Police Chief or his or her authorized
representatives; and



         (i)   Diploma, certificate or other written proof of
graduation from a recognized school by the person who shall be directly
responsible for the operation and management of the massage business.



      (6)   Such other information, identification and physical
examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the Police Chief to
discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in
the application;



      (7)   Authorization for the town, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit;



      (8)   The names and addresses of three adult residents of the
county who will serve as character references. These references must be
persons other than relatives and business associates; and



      (9)   Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of
perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the applicant is true
and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-57)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.103  APPLICATION FOR MASSEUR’S PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring a masseur’s permit shall file a written
application with the Police Chief on a form to be furnished by the Police
Chief.



   (B)   The applicant shall tender with the application the correct
permit fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the
following:



      (1)   Business address and all telephone numbers where the
massage is to be practiced;



      (2)   The following personal information concerning the
applicant:



         (a)   Name, complete residence address and residence
telephone numbers;



         (b)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to
the present address of the applicant;



         (c)   Written proof of age;



         (d)   Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex;



         (e)   Two front-face-portrait photographs taken within
30 days of the date of application and at least two inches by two inches in
size;



         (f)   The massage or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person in
previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit
has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason
therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such
action of denial, suspension or revocation;



         (g)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor
traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and
the cause number of the case in which convicted;



         (h)   A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be
retained on file by the Police Chief or his or her authorized representatives;



         (i)   Diploma, certificate or other written proof of
graduation from a recognized school where the theory, method, profession or
work of massage is taught; and



         (j)   A statement is writing from a licensed physician
in the state that he or she has examined the applicant and believes the
applicant to be free of all communicable diseases.



      (3)   Such other information, identification and physical
examination of the person deemed necessary by the Police Chief in order to
discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in
the application;



      (4)   Authorization for the town, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit; and



      (5)   Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of
perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true
and correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-58)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.104  APPROVAL BY POLICE CHIEF AND TOWN COUNCIL MEMBER.



   (A)   Upon receiving the application for a massage business or
masseur’s permit, the Police Chief shall conduct an investigation into the
applicant’s moral character and personal and criminal history. The Police
Chief may, in his or her discretion, require a personal interview of the
applicant, and such further information, identification and physical
examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation.



   (B)   In the case of applications for massage business permits, the
Police Chief shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises
where the massage business is to be carried on, for the purposes of assuring
that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth
in the subchapter and with the regulations of public health, safety and
welfare.



   (C)   Before any permit shall issue under this subchapter, the
Police Chief shall first sign his or her approval of the application and,
upon approval of the Police Chief, the Police Chief shall then submit the
application to the President of the Town Council for his or her approval.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-59)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.105  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF MASSAGE BUSINESS PERMIT.



   The Police Chief, subject to approval of the application by the
President of the Town Council, shall issue a massage business permit within
60 days of receipt of the application unless he or she finds that:



   (A)   The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the town, and,
in the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation;



   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
town’s building, zoning and health regulations;



   (C)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders
holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation, any of the officers
and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, have been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or
deceit, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date
of the application;



   (D)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or in any document
required by the town in conjunction therewith;



   (E)   The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or other
similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above
causes by the town or any other state or local agency within five years prior
to the date of the application;



   (F)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, is not over the age of 18 years; and



   (G)   The manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business has not successfully completed a resident course of
study or learning of not less than 70 hours from a recognized school where
the theory, method, profession or work of massage is taught.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-60)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.106  DISPLAY OF PERMITS.



   The massage business permittee shall display his or her permit, and
that of each and every masseur employed in the establishment, in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-61)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 111.999



§ 111.107  FEE.



   The permit fee for a massage business shall be $1,000 per year or any
part thereof. The permit fee for masseurs shall be $250 per year or any part
thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-62)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.108  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   Any massage business or masseur’s permit issued under this subchapter
shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Police Chief for
violation of any provision of this subchapter, or for any grounds that would
warrant the denial of issuance of such permit in the first place. The Chief,
upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his or her reasons in
writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation or suspension.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-63)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.109  KEEPING OF RECORDS.



   Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a
massage shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the name of each
and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and place of
service, and the service provided. Such appointment book shall be available
at all times for inspection by the Police Chief or his or her authorized
representatives.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-64)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.110  TRANSFER PROHIBITED.



   No massage business and masseur permits are transferable, separate or
divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on
the permittee named therein.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-65)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.111  SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically
inspected by the Police Chief or his or her authorized representatives for
safety of the structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating and
illumination. The walls shall be clean and painted with washable,
mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All
equipment used in the massage operation shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and
patients shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets
shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be
substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every patron.
No massage service or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room,
booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door
capable of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
eliminate other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the
maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-66)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.112  SUPERVISION.



   A permittee shall have the premises supervised at all times when open
for business. Any business rendering massage services shall have one person
who qualifies as a masseur on the premises at all times while the
establishment is open. The permittee shall personally supervise the business,
and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any applicable provisions
of this subchapter. The violation of any such provision by any agent or
employee of the permittee shall constitute a violation by the permittee.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-67)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.113  PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED ON THE PREMISES.



   No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or
remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur,
employee or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-68)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 111.999



§ 111.114  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the
premises of any massage business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-69)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)  Penalty, see
§ 111.999



§ 111.115  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing
homes, sanitariums or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice
the healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the
direction of any such persons or in any such establishment nor shall this
subchapter apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their
particular profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or
certificate of registration issued by the state.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-70)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.116  VALIDITY.



   Should any section or provision of this subchapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the subchapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
part declared to be invalid.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-72)  (Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981)



§ 111.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Canvasser. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of §§ 111.001 through 111.009 shall be fined not less then $5
nor more than $100 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-34)



   (C)   Direct seller. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of §§ 111.055 through 111.066 shall be fined not less than $5 nor
more than $100 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-49)



   (D)   Massage. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 111.100 through 111.116 shall be fined not less than $250
nor more than $1,000 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-71)



(Ord. 1981-2, passed 4-27-1981; Ord. 1-85, passed 2-25-1985; Ord. 3-85,
passed 2-25-1985)



CHAPTER 112:  FRANCHISES



Section




Cable Television




   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Grant of authority



   112.03   Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances



   112.04   Construction standards



   112.05   Street vacation or abandonment



   112.06   Conditions on street occupancy



   112.07   Pole use



   112.08   Regulation



   112.09   Employment practices



   112.10   Service to community buildings and schools



   112.11   Rates



   112.12   Payment to the town



   112.13   Assignment transfer, lease or merger



   112.14   Forfeiture of franchise



   112.15   Miscellaneous



   112.16   Separability



   112.17   Written acceptance



Editor’s note:



   The provisions of this chapter set forth the terms of the town cable
television franchise. The chapter has been generalized to indicate all terms
and conditions which potential franchise holders must meet.



CABLE TELEVISION



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Where not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory
and not merely directory.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM. A system of coaxial cable wave guides, or
other conductors and equipment for the reception, amplification and
distribution of television, radio or other signals to subscribing members of
the public for a fee.



   COMPANY. The grantee of rights under a franchise.



   COUNCIL MEMBERS. The Town Council of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



   GROSS SUBSCRIPTION REVENUE. Includes all compensation paid by a
subscriber for the sale of the company’s monthly basic television services.
This does not include revenue derived from paid TV program charges, leased
channels, pay-TV service, nor does it include any sales or excise tax.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
organization of any kind.



   TOWN. Plainfield, Indiana.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-90)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.02  GRANT OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Town Council has the authority to grant to a company the
right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain a cable
television system for the reception, amplification and distribution of video
and/or audio signals to subscribing members of the public for a fee, for a
period of 15 years from and after the effective date of a franchise.



   (B)   The company would be granted by the Town Council the right and
privilege to construct, operate and maintain said cable television system,
in, upon, along, across, above over and under the streets, alleys, public
ways and public places now laid out or dedicated to the town.



   (C)   The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways
and places for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the
Town Council reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets,
alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the term of a
franchise.



   (D)   In connection with the right and privilege herein granted, the
Council Members have examined and approved the legal, character, financial,
technical and other qualifications of the company, as well as the adequacy
and feasibility of its construction arrangements, as part of a public
proceeding affording due process.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-91)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.03  COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The company shall, at all times during the life of a
franchise, be subject to all lawful exercises of police power of the town.



   (B)   The company must agree to comply with all valid local, state
and federal regulations including the rules and regulations of the FCC.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-92)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.04  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   The company shall construct a substantial portion of its cable
system and commence cable television operations within one year after the
telephone company and the power company have cleared the poles to permit the
cable company to begin construction, and the company has secured all
necessary federal, state and local permits. The company shall begin applying
for necessary pole line agreements and permits within 120 days from the
enactment of a franchise.



   (B)   With regard to the company’s construction, operation and
maintenance of its cable television system, the following standards shall
apply.



      (1)   The construction, maintenance and use of the company’s
cable television system shall comply with the standards for materials and
engineering and all other provisions of the National Electric Safety Code and
the National Electric Code.



      (2)   The town has the right to supervise all construction and
installation work performed subject to the provisions of a franchise and to
make such inspections as it may find necessary to ensure compliance with
governing ordinances.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-94)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.05  STREET VACATION OR ABANDONMENT.



   In the event any street, alley, public highway or utility easement or
any portion thereof, used by the company shall be vacated by the town or the
use thereof discontinued by the company during the term of a franchise, the
company shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically
permitted to leave them there, and upon the removal thereof, restore, repair
or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred in such
condition as may be required by the town. In the event of failure, neglect or
refusal of the company, after 30 days notice by the Town Council to repair,
improve or maintain such street proportions, the town may do such work or
cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the town
shall be paid by the company, and collection may be by court action or
otherwise.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-95)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.06  CONDITIONS ON STREET OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the company with the town shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of all streets, alleys and
other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the
said streets, alleys or other public ways or places.



   (B)   Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk,
driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense
and in a manner approved by the town, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed to as good
condition as before said work has commenced.



   (C)   Relocation. In the event that at any time during the period of
a franchise the town shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or
width of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable
notice by the town shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other system fixtures at its own expense.



   (D)   Temporary removal of wire for building moving. The company
shall, on request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by
the town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of
buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of
wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The company shall be
given not less than 120 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.



   (E)   Trimming of trees. The company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon an overhanging any street, alley or other public way so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its wires,
cables or other equipment.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-96)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.07  POLE USE.



   (A)   The company shall, whenever possible and practicable, use the
poles owned and maintained by the town and/or the utility company or
companies which serve the town. When the use of such poles is not practicable
or satisfactory and rental agreements cannot be entered into with said
parties, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own
poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the
television distribution systems.



   (B)   In all sections of the town where the cables, wires or other
like facilities of public utilities are presently placed underground or are
required to be so placed underground at any time in the future, the company
shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the
maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the company to do
so.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-97)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.08  REGULATION.



   (A)   The company shall, while operating under a franchise, maintain
efficient cable television service in the town. However, the company shall
not be liable for loss or damage caused by interruption or failure or service
due to accident or breakdown to lines or equipment, strike, riot, act of God,
or the public enemy or such other causes as are beyond its control, or due to
shutdowns for reasonable periods to make repairs to equipment; but the
company shall in such cases exercise proper diligence in repairing such
equipment and resume operation of same without unnecessary delay.



   (B)   The company must adopt, and the Town Council must approve
procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints regarding its
cable television operations. Notice of the procedures for reporting and
resolving complaints shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial
subscription to the cable television system operated by the company. Further,
the company shall have an area business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving notice of, investigating and seeing that proper steps are taken to
effect the resolution of any problems relating to service or other aspects of
its cable television operations. The area manager shall have primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of a franchise, and for the
implementation of the procedures of this division (B).



   (C)   The town shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of
the company’s plans, contracts and engineering, accounting, financial
statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the
operation of the company and to all other records required to be kept
hereunder.



   (D)   A copy of any and all rules, regulations, terms and conditions
adopted by the company for conduct of its business shall be filed with the
Town Clerk-Treasurer; and a copy shall also be available for public
inspection at the office of the company.



   (E)   A franchise shall not in any way be construed as a license or
permit to the company to engage in the sale or service of radio or television
sets, appliances or parts.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-98)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.09  EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.



   Equal opportunity in employment shall be afforded all qualified persons
by the company and no person shall be discriminated against because of race,
color, religion, national origin or sex.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-99)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.10  SERVICE TO COMMUNITY BUILDINGS AND SCHOOLS.



   The company must agree to and shall furnish, without installation
charge of monthly service fee, a free connection to the local police station
facilities and one connection to all fire houses and any other building or
buildings designated by the Town Council, and to all public and parochial,
elementary and secondary schools located within the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-100)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.11  RATES.



   The rates or charges which the company assesses is subscribers for
cable television services shall be at all times fair and reasonable, and
shall be established pursuant to a “proposed rate schedule” as submitted
in writing by the company’s written “Cable Television Proposal for
Plainfield, Indiana”, and thereafter modified at the sole discretion of the
company.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-101)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.12  PAYMENT TO THE TOWN.



   (A)   The company shall pay to the town, for and in consideration of
the right and privilege to conduct cable television operations pursuant to a
franchise, an annual fee in an amount equal to 3% of its monthly gross
subscriber revenues derived from it cable television operations in the town,
with each year’s fee due and payable to the Town Clerk-Treasurer by March
31, for the preceding calendar year.



   (B)   In the event of revocation or termination of a franchise, the
final annual fee payment shall be prorated from the immediately preceding
January 1 to the date of termination of service.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-102)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.13  ASSIGNMENT TRANSFER, LEASE OR MERGER.



   (A)   A franchise shall not be assigned nor shall control of the
company be transferred without the prior approval of the Town Council, which
approval shall not be reasonably withheld.



   (B)   The company shall not consolidate or merge or enter into any
agreement in restriction of competition with any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the transmission of television signals by cable to members of the
public within limits of the town, and shall not purchase or otherwise acquire
all or any portion of any system or plant within the town of any other
person, firm or corporation engaged in the transmission of television signals
by cable to members of the public within the limits of the town without prior
consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-103)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.14  FORFEITURE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   The town may declare a forfeiture of a franchise and revoke
the same in the event the company:



      (1)   Substantially violates any provisions of the franchise,
where such violations remain uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent to
receipt by the company of a written notice of such violation, except where
such violation is not the fault of the company or is due to excusable
neglect; or



      (2)   Practices any fraud or deceit upon the town.



   (B)   If such forfeiture shall be declared for alleged practices of
fraud or deceit upon the town by the company, the town will give written
notice to the company of the alleged fraudulent or deceitful practice. Before
the franchise may be terminated and cancelled, however, under division (A)(2)
above except for non-payment of monies due to the town from the company, the
company shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing
before the Council upon ten days’ written notice to the company on the time
and place of the public hearing; provided that said notice shall
affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to constitute a cause for revocation;
and provided further that notice of said public hearing shall be published in
a local newspaper of general circulation at least five days before the
hearing.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-104)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.15  MISCELLANEOUS.



   Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or
conditions of this franchise shall not constitute a general waiver or
relinquishment of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and
remain at all times in full force and effect.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-105)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.16  SEPARABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of a
franchise is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
other governmental authority of competent jurisdiction, such section shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-106)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



§ 112.17  WRITTEN ACCEPTANCE.



   The company shall within 20 days after a franchise becomes effective,
file in the office of the Town Clerk-Treasurer a written acceptance of the
franchise ordinance. Failure on the part of the company to file such written
acceptance within such time shall be deemed abandonment and rejection of the
rights conferred hereby, and a franchise shall thereupon be null and void.
Acceptance shall be unqualified and shall be construed to be an acceptance of
all the terms, conditions and restrictions contained in a franchise.



(1991 Draft Code, § 4-107)  (Ord. 2-1980, passed 3-24-1980)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



      132.   WEAPONS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section




Damage and Interference with Broadband Cable System




   130.01   Purpose



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Prohibited acts



   130.04   Territorial application



   130.05   Jurisdiction



 



   130.99   Penalty



DAMAGE AND INTERFERENCE WITH BROADBAND CABLE SYSTEM



§ 130.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to prohibit any activity that results
in damage to the facilities or interference with the proper functioning of
the facilities and to provide for fines for violation of the subchapter and
restitution for damage to the facilities.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DAMAGE. Any loss, injury or deterioration to any of the facilities
caused by person, firm or corporation or any unauthorized access (physical or
electronic) to the facilities.



   FACILITIES. The town’s broadband cable and internet system and
related facilities that provide voice, video and data connectivity (wired and
wireless); including, but not limited to, all computers, cables (including,
without limitation, fiber optic and coaxial cables), ducts, conduit, routers,
switches, power supplies and systems, remote site-monitoring and control
hardware and software, climate- controlled enclosures, cabinets, shelters and
towers and other associated equipment and all associated appurtenances to all
of the foregoing.



   INTERFERENCE. Any loss, injury or deterioration of the quality of the
bandwidth, throughput or signal (optical, radio frequency, or otherwise)
produced by the facilities.



   TOWN. The Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 130.03  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall do any act that results in damage
to the facilities or interference with the proper functioning of the
facilities.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall apply to the entire town broadband cable and
internet system and its related facilities both inside and outside the
corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 130.05  JURISDICTION.



   The Town Court and the Circuit and Superior Courts of the county shall
have jurisdiction for the enforcement of the subchapter and the determination
of any and all penalties and damages.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §§
130.01 through 130.05 by interfering with the town’s broadband cable system
or its related facilities shall be fined not less than $500 for each offense.
Each day that the interference continues shall constitute a separate offense
subjecting the offending person, firm or corporation to an additional $500
fine for each day.



      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation that damages the
facilities shall be fined $2,500. Each day that the facilities remain
unrepaired shall constitute a separate violation and will subject the
offending person, firm or corporation responsible to an additional $2,500
fine for each day.



      (3)   In addition to the fines set forth in divisions (B)(1)
and (B)(2) above, any person, firm or corporation that damages the facilities
or interferes with the proper functioning of the facilities shall be
responsible for payment for all repairs to said facilities that were caused
by their violation of §§ 130.01 through 130.05.



(Ord. 07-2010, passed 5-10-2010)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section




General Provisions




   131.01   Disorderly conduct



   131.02   Congregating in public places



   131.03   Disturbing place of worship or meetings



   131.04   Minor curfew



   131.05   Interference with officials




Sale of Substances Containing Synthetic Cannabinoids or Their Use in Public
Facilities




   131.20   Unlawful to sell, market or offer for sale



   131.21   Unlawful to burn, incinerate or ignite in public places



   131.22   Unlawful to sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to
sell, give or barter



   131.23   Confiscation and destruction of substances or products




Smoking and Use of E-Cigarettes in Public Places and Places of Employment




   131.35   Definitions



   131.36   Smoking and e-cigarettes prohibited in and on town
properties



   131.37   Smoking prohibited in public places



   131.38   Prohibition of smoking in places of employment



   131.39   Reasonable distance



   131.40   Where smoking is not regulated



   131.41   Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking



   131.42   Posting of signs



   131.43   Enforcement



   131.44   Non-retaliation



   131.45   Other applicable laws



   131.46   Subchapter to be broadly interpreted



   131.47   Effective date



 



   131.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 131.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It is unlawful for any person or persons to disturb the peace and quiet
of the town or of its inhabitants by loud talking or by the making of unusual
noises, or by the crying of any alarm without good cause, or by threatening
any person or challenging him or her to fight or menacing him or her with
physical injury or pecuniary loss, or by accosting or approaching any person
of the opposite sex unknown to such person and by word, sign or gesture
attempting to speak to or become acquainted with such person against his or
her will except in the transaction of legitimate business.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-39)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.02  CONGREGATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It is unlawful for any person to congregate or cause to be congregated
a crowd of three or more persons upon any public street, alley, sidewalk,
parking lot, school or school grounds, building or any other public place
within the town so as to obstruct the same or as to hinder or annoy
passers-by or occupants of adjacent premises, or as to interfere with the
activities normally carried on on the premises.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-40)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.03  DISTURBING PLACE OF WORSHIP OR MEETINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the town by any
loud or unnecessary talking or shouting or by any threatening, abusive,
profane or obscene language or violent action, or by any other rude behavior,
to interrupt, molest, annoy or disturb any group of persons convened for the
purpose of worship, or in like manner to interrupt, molest, annoy or disturb
any meeting of persons met together for any lawful purpose.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-41)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



§ 131.04  MINOR CURFEW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years
to be upon the public streets, alleys, public places, public grounds or
public thoroughfares of the town during the hours from 10:00 p.m. official
town time to 5:00 a.m. official town time. It shall also be unlawful for any
parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of any
person under the age of 16 years knowingly to permit such minor person to be
upon the streets, alleys, public places or public thoroughfares of the town
during the above mentioned hours. The provisions of this section shall not
apply when such minor person is accompanied by parent, guardian or other
adult person having care or custody of such person, or while such minor is
engaged in some necessary business.



   (B)   A citation for violation of division (A) of this section may
be issued by a police officer only if the officer reasonably believes that a
violation has occurred and that the minor was not:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the Town Metropolitan Police Department about the minor’s
presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home  from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-42)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



Statutory reference:



   Permission for towns to advance the curfew time by not more than one
hour when based on public safety reasons, see I.C. 31-6-4-2



§ 131.05  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to intentionally impede
or interfere, or attempt to impede or interfere with any police officer,
firefighter or any other town official in the performance of his or her duty
or emergency functions as a firefighter, police officer or town official.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-43)  (Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970)  Penalty, see §
131.99



SALE OF SUBSTANCES CONTAINING SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS OR
THEIR USE IN PUBLIC FACILITIES



§ 131.20  UNLAWFUL TO SELL, MARKET OR OFFER FOR SALE.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell, market, or offer for sale within
the town products containing synthetic cannabinoids such as K2 or Spice or
similar products which contain one or more of the following chemical
compounds:



   (A)   (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,
6-dimethyl-3-(2methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydro-
benzo[c]chromen-1-ol, also known as HU-210;



   (B)   1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, also known as JWH-018;



   (C)   1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, also known as JWH-073;



   (D)   All parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, any extract from any part of such
plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or its extracts;



   (E)   TFMPP, a substance also known as 1-(3-[trifluoromethylphenyl])
piperazine; or



   (F)   Cannabicyclohexanol, a substance also known as
2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl) phenol; or



   (G)   Any other relevant compound or derivative products.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 10-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.21  UNLAWFUL TO BURN, INCINERATE OR IGNITE IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It is unlawful for any person to burn, incinerate, or ignite in any
public place or on any property owned, leased, or controlled by the town, the
products or any other product containing synthetic cannabinoids.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 10-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.22  UNLAWFUL TO SELL, PUBLICLY DISPLAY FOR SALE OR ATTEMPT TO SELL,
GIVE OR BARTER.



   It is unlawful for any person, entity or business/retail establishment
to sell, publicly display for sale, or attempt to sell, give or barter the
products or any other synthetic marijuana or synthetic equivalents of
substances contained in the plant Cannabis or in the resinous extractives of
Cannabis or synthetic substances, derivatives and their isomers with similar
chemical structure and pharmacological activity or any substance which claims
such properties even if in actuality they do not. Because the nomenclature of
these substances and products are not internationally standardized, compounds
of these structures, regardless of numerical designation of atomic positions,
are similarly prohibited.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 10-11-2010)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.23  CONFISCATION AND DESTRUCTION OF SUBSTANCES OR PRODUCTS.



   If any of the aforementioned substances or products is found in the
possession of any person or entity, they may be confiscated and destroyed by
any law enforcement official as provided by law, and any aforementioned
substance(s) or product(s) reasonably suspected to be described herein may be
photographed as evidence pending adjudication of the alleged violation.



(Ord. 13-2010, passed 10-11-2010)



SMOKING AND USE OF E-CIGARETTES IN PUBLIC
PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT



§ 131.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BAR. Any establishment used primarily for the sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the sale of
food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages, including, but
not limited to, taverns, nightclubs and cocktail lounges.



   E-CIGARETTE.  Includes, but not limited to e-cig, e-cigarette,
personal vaporizer (PV) and electronic nicotine delivery system (ENDS).



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed
on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend
from the floor to the ceiling.



   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including
weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices,
employee lounges and restrooms, conference and class rooms, employee
cafeterias and hallways.



   PRIVATE CLUB. A facility:



      (1)   Owned or operated by an association or corporation which
shall:



         (a)   Not be operated for pecuniary gain; and



         (b)   Consists of a membership:



            1.   Formed as a lodge, local chapter or
corresponding unit of a fraternal order recognized on a national basis;



            2.   Comprised of persons who have served in the
armed forces of the United States; or



            3.   Formed as a recognized, exclusive association
of persons organized for a joint or common purpose for which application for
membership, the payment of dues and self-governance by the membership are
distinguishing characteristics.



      (2)   Where entry into and use of the facility is restricted
to members and guests of members.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area used by the general public, including,
but not limited to, retail stores and financial institutions, department
stores, banks, laundromats and beauty and barber shops, retail food
production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, and
other commercial establishments, regardless of whether a fee is charged for
admission to the place.



   RESTAURANT. Any establishment used as or held out to the public as
having food available for payment to be consumed on the premises, including
coffee shops, cafeterias, cafes, luncheonettes sandwich stands and soda
fountains. The term RESTAURANT shall include a bar area within the restaurant.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. Retail store utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental. The term does not include retail stores where food or
beverages are sold for consumption on the premises or where an area has been
set-aside on the premises for customers to consume food or beverages.



   SMOKE or SMOKING. The act of lighting, carrying, inhaling from, or
leaving a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind.



   THEATER. Any enclosed facility, open to the public, which is primarily
used for or designed for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage
drama, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.36 SMOKING AND E-CIGARETTES PROHIBITED IN AND ON TOWN PROPERTIES.



   Smoking and use of e-cigarettes shall be prohibited in and on all
properties owned by the town except public rights-of-way and easements,
including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the town.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.37  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the
town, including, but not limited to, the following places:



   (A)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums;



   (B)   Areas available to and customarily used by the general public
in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but
not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels and motels;



   (C)   Bars;



   (D)   Bingo facilities;



   (E)   Convention facilities;



   (F)   Elevators;



   (G)   Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture,
stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance;



   (H)   Health care facilities;



   (I)   Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities;



   (J)   Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes
and other multiple-unit residential facilities;



   (K)   Polling places;



   (L)   Private club during any period of time that the public is
invited and present on the premises;



   (M)   Public transportation facilities, including buses and
taxicabs, under the authority of the town and ticket, boarding and waiting
areas of public transit depots;



   (N)   Restaurants;



   (O)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other
common-use areas;



   (P)   Retail stores;



   (Q)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly,
including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council of the town or a political subdivision of
the state when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is
subject to the jurisdiction of the town;



   (R)   Schools;



   (S)   Service lines;



   (T)   Enclosed shopping malls; and



   (U)   Sports arenas, including enclosed place in outdoor arenas.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)  Penalty,
see § 131.99



§ 131.38  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of
employment. This includes, but is not limited to, common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices,
elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges,
stairs, restrooms, vehicles and all other enclosed facilities.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)  Penalty,
see § 131.99



§ 131.39  REASONABLE DISTANCE.



   Smoking shall be prohibited within a reasonable distance from an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this subchapter, so as to ensure
tobacco smoke does not enter into establishments designated as smoke-free
under this subchapter through entrances, windows, ventilation intakes or
other means.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)  Penalty,
see § 131.99



§ 131.40  WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.



   The prohibitions of § 131.36 shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare,
adult day care or health care facility;



   (B)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided however, that not more than 25% of
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. The status
of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add
additional nonsmoking rooms;



   (C)   Retail tobacco stores; provided that smoke from these places
does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this subchapter;



   (D)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term
care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into
areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this subchapter;



   (E)   Outdoor areas of places of employment; and



   (F)   Private clubs as defined herein.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.41  DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an owner,
operator, manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility or
outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, outdoor area or
parking lot as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place
in which a sign conforming to the requirements of § 131.42 is posted.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.42  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this subchapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.43  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Town Metropolitan
Police Department and the town community service officers.



   (B)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
subchapter may initiate enforcement with the Town Metropolitan Police
Department or the town community service officers.



   (C)   The Fire Department, Building Inspector, or their designees
may, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections,
inspect for compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   An owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment
regulated by this subchapter shall inform persons violating this subchapter
of the appropriate provisions thereof.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.44  NON-RETALIATION.



   No person or employers shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free
environment afforded by this subchapter.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)  Penalty,
see § 131.99



§ 131.45  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This subchapter shall not be interpreted to permit smoking where it is
otherwise restricted by other applicable laws or to supersede any local laws
which are more restrictive.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.46  SUBCHAPTER TO BE BROADLY INTERPRETED.



   This subchapter shall be construed broadly to effectuate the purposes
described in the preamble of Ord. 01-2016.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.47  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be effective on January 11, 2016.



(Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   General provisions. Any person violating any provisions of
§§ 131.01 through 131.05 or any order made by the President of the Town
Council, in accordance with the term of §§ 131.01 through 131.05 shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100.



(1991 Draft Code, § 6-45)



   (C)   Cannabinoids.



      (1)   Persons violating the provisions of §§ 131.20 through
131.23 shall be subject to a civil fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $1,000, plus court costs. Each day of the existence of any violation of
§§ 131.20 through 131.23 shall be considered a separate offense.



      (2)   Entities, including businesses and retail
establishments, violating the provisions of §§ 131.20 through 131.23 shall
be subject to a civil fine of not less than $250 and not more than $2,500,
plus court costs. Each day of the existence of any violation of §§ 131.20
through 131.23 shall be considered a separate offense.



   (D)   Smoking.



      (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited by the provisions of §§ 131.35 through 131.47 shall be guilty of
an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.



      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with
the provisions of §§ 131.35 through 131.47 shall be guilty of an
infraction, punishable by:



         (a)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;



         (b)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation
within one year; and



         (c)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional
violation within one year.



      (3)   Each day on which a violation of §§ 131.35 through
131.47 occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. 1-1970, passed 2-9-1970; Ord. 31-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 13-2010,
passed 10-11-2010; Ord. 01-2016, passed 1-11-2016)



CHAPTER 132:  WEAPONS



Section




Deadly Weapons Within the Municipal Building, Police Headquarters Building
and the Town Recreation Center




   132.01   Definitions



   132.02   Possession of deadly weapon prohibited in the municipal
building, police headquarters building and the town recreation center



   132.03   Possession of firearms prohibited in the police
headquarters building



   132.04   Display of a deadly weapon or firearm at a public meeting



   132.05   Excepted persons



   132.06   Discharging a firearm



 



   132.99   Penalty



DEADLY WEAPONS WITHIN THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING, POLICE HEADQUARTERS BUILDING
AND THE TOWN RECREATION CENTER



§ 132.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEADLY WEAPON. A sword of any length; an electronic stun gun; a fixed
blade knife; or a knife with a folding blade of four inches or more.



   FIREARM. Any weapon that is capable of or designed to or that may
readily be converted to expel a projectile by means of an explosion and
includes any such weapon commonly referred to as a pistol, revolver, handgun,
rifle, shotgun or gun.



(Ord. 23-94, passed 2-13-1995; Ord. 11-2000, passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 21-2009,
passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)



§ 132.02  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON PROHIBITED IN THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING,
POLICE HEADQUARTERS BUILDING AND THE TOWN RECREATION CENTER.



   Except as provided in § 132.05, no person shall possess on or about
his or her person any deadly weapon(s) within the Town Municipal Building
located at 206 West Main Street, Plainfield, Indiana, the Police Headquarters
Building located at 1075 West Main Street, Plainfield Indiana, the Town
Recreation Center located at 651 Vestal Road, Plainfield, Indiana, the Al and
Jan Barker Sports Complex, or in any park, trail or other public place owned
by or being used for a public purpose by the town.



(Ord. 23-94, passed 2-13-1995; Ord. 11-2000, passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 21-2009,
passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  POSSESSION OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN THE POLICE HEADQUARTERS
BUILDING.



   In light of the fact that the Police Headquarters Building contains the
Town Court courtroom and the fact that no portion of that building is
occupied by a residential tenant or a private business, no person shall
possess on or about his or her person any firearm(s) within the Police
Headquarters Building located at 1075 West Main Street, Plainfield, Indiana,
except as provided in § 132.05.



(Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.04  DISPLAY OF A DEADLY WEAPON OR FIREARM AT A PUBLIC MEETING.



   Except as provided in § 132.05, no person shall intentionally display
any deadly weapon or any firearm at any public meeting.



(Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  EXCEPTED PERSONS.



   Sections 132.02, 132.03 and 132.04 shall not apply to the following
persons:



   (A)   Law enforcement officers as that term is defined under state
law;



   (B)   Federal enforcement officers as that term is defined under
state law; and



   (C)   Persons who are in the Town Police Department section of the
Town Police Headquarters Building and have in their possession a firearm for
the sole purpose of having it registered.



(Ord. 23-94, passed 2-13-1995; Ord. 11-2000, passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 21-2009,
passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)



§ 132.06  DISCHARGING A FIREARM.



   Except when acting in self-defense, as that term is defined under state
law, no person shall discharge a firearm within the Town Municipal Building
located at 206 West Main Street, Plainfield, Indiana, the Police Headquarters
Building located at 1075 West Main Street, Plainfield Indiana, the Town
Recreation Center located at 651 Vestal Road, Plainfield, Indiana, the Al and
Jan Barker Sports Complex, or in any park, trail or other public place owned
by or being used for a public purpose by the town.



(Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§ 132.01 through
132.06 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 23-94, passed 2-13-1995; Ord. 11-2000, passed 4-24-2000; Ord. 21-2009,
passed 7-13-2009; Ord. 10-2011, passed 8-29-2011)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



      151.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



      152.   FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



      153.   SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE



      154.   ZONING ORDINANCE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



Section



Building Code



   150.001   Title



   150.002   Purpose



   150.003   Authority



   150.004   Scope



   150.005   Adoption of rules by reference



   150.006   Lifting devices located within a private residence



   150.007   Application for permits



   150.008   Permits required



   150.009   Other ordinances



   150.010   Fees



   150.011   Records



   150.012   Review of application



   150.013   Inspections



   150.014   Inspection assistance



   150.015   Entry



   150.016   Stop order



   150.017   Certificate of occupancy



   150.018   Plot plan



   150.019   Displaying of building permits



   150.020   Work must commence



   150.021   Workmanship



   150.022   Violations



   150.023   Right of appeal



   150.024   Remedies




Planning Fees




   150.035   Fees established




Unsafe Building Law




   150.050   Law established



   150.051   Law adopted by reference



   150.052   Inspections



   150.053   Building Commissioner



   150.054   Compliance



   150.055   Definitions



   150.056   Substantial property interest



   150.057   Standards of work



   150.058   Unsafe Building Fund




Manufactured Housing




   150.070   Intent



   150.071   Definitions



   150.072   Standards



   150.073   Temporary use



   150.074   Appeal




Requirements for Street, Sidewalk and Alley Cuts or Excavations




   150.085   Application for street, sidewalk, and alley cuts or
excavation permits



   150.086   Bond requirements



   150.087   Issuance of permit



   150.088   Street cut specifications and requirements



   150.089   Inspections



   150.090   Bond requirements for numerous cuts



   150.091   Separate and distinct offense




Review of Building Sites in Light of Potential Flooding




   150.105   Review of building permit applications



   150.106   Commission to review subdivision proposals



   150.107   Role of Town Engineer




Permits and Regulations for Cleaning Dry-Wells and Underground Areas




   150.120   Application for permit required



   150.121   Permit required



 



   150.999   Penalty



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.001  TITLE.



   This subchapter and all ordinances supplemental or amendatory hereto,
shall be known as the “Building Code of the Town of Plainfield, Indiana”,
and be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code”.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of life, limb, health, environment, public safety and general
welfare, and for the conservation of energy in the design and construction of
buildings and structures.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.003  AUTHORITY.



   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to
administer and enforce all of the provisions of this code. Whenever in the
building regulations, it is provided that anything must be done to the
approval of or subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner, this
shall be construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining
whether the rules and standards established by ordinances has been compiled
with; and no such provisions shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what such regulations, codes or standards shall
be, or power to require conditions not prescribed by ordinances or to enforce
ordinance provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. Any variance
from adopted building rules are subject to approval under I.C. 22-13-2-11.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.004  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code apply to the construction, alterations,
repair, equipment, use, occupancy, maintenance and additions to all buildings
and structures, other than “industrialized building systems”, as defined
on I.C. 22-13-2-6, and “mobile structures”, as defined in I.C. 22-15-4,
in the town.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.005  ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   Pursuant to I.C. 22-13-2-3(b) rules of the Indiana Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission as set out in the following Articles of I.A.C.
Title 675 are hereby incorporated by reference in this code and shall include
any later amendments to those Articles as the same are published in the
Indiana Register of the Indiana Administrative Code with effective dates as
fixed therein:



   (A)   Article 13 - Building Codes:



      (1)   Fire and Building Safety Standards; and



      (2)   Indiana Building Code.



   (B)   Article 14 - Indiana Residential Code;



   (C)   Article 16 - Indiana Plumbing Code;



   (D)   Article 17 - Indiana Electrical Code;



   (E)   Article 18 - Indiana Mechanical Code;



   (F)   Article 19 - Indiana Energy Conservation Code;



   (G)   Article 20 - Indiana Swimming Pool Code;



   (H)   Article 22 - Indiana Fire Code;



   (I)   Article 24 - Migrant Day Care Nursery Fire Safety Code; and



   (J)   Article 25 - Indiana Fuel Gas Code.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.006  LIFTING DEVICES LOCATED WITHIN A PRIVATE RESIDENCE.



   (A)   Pursuant to I.C. 22-12-1-22(b)(12), lifting devices, such as
elevators and wheelchair lifts, located within a private residence are not
regulated lifting devices.



   (B)   Therefore, the following standards applicable to lifting
devices located within a private residence are incorporated by reference:



      (1)   Part 5.3, Private Residence Elevators, ANSI/ASME
A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New
York, 10016;



      (2)   Part 5.4, Private Residence Inclined Elevators,
ANSI/ASME A17.1-2000, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators published by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York,
New York, 10016;



      (3)   Section 5, Private Residence Vertical Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016;



      (4)   Section 6, Private Residence Inclined Platform Lifts,
ASME A18.1a, 2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform
and Stairway Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, Three Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016; and



      (5)   Section 7, Private Inclined Stairway Lifts, ASME A18.1a,
2001 (Addenda to ASME 18.1-1999), Safety Standard for Platform and Stairway
Chair Lifts, published by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Three
Park Avenue, New York, New York 10016.



   (C)   Copies of adopted building rules, codes and standards are on
file in the office of the Clerk- Treasurer for public inspection as required
by I.C. 36-1-5-4.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.007  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   No building permit shall be issued for the foregoing purposes, unless
the application for a permit is accompanied by a clear, complete and
understandable copy of detailed plans and specifications drawn to scale which
indicate in a precise manner the nature and location of all work to be
accomplished. In addition, a copy of a design release for the work to be
done, issued by the Building Law Compliance Officer pursuant to I.C. 22-15-3,
shall be provided to the Building Commissioner before issuance of a permit
for construction covered by such design release, or any additional
information that the Building Commissioner finds to be necessary to determine
that the construction will conform to all applicable building laws and will
not violate any other applicable ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.008  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Construction is prohibited unless in conformity with a valid building
permit obtained from the Building Commissioner prior to the commencement of
the construction, alteration, addition, demolition or repair of any building
or structure, using forms furnished by the Building Commissioner. All fees
provided for herein shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer within 30 days of
the permit date or the permit will become null and void, unless an extension
has been approved by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.009  OTHER ORDINANCES.



   All work done under any permit issued hereunder shall be paid in full
compliance with all other ordinances pertaining thereto, and in addition to
the fees for permits hereinafter provided for, there shall be paid the fees
prescribed in such ordinances.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.010  FEES.



   See Chapter 38 of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.011  RECORDS.



   All applications, descriptions, permits, certificates and other
supporting documents pertaining to building permits or certificates of
occupancy shall be filed by the Building Commissioner and become a
conditional record of the town.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.012  REVIEW OF APPLICATION.



   Prior to the issuance of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall:



   (A)   Review all building permit applications to determine full
compliance with the provisions of the subchapter;



   (B)   Review all building permit applications for new construction
or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding;



   (C)   Review building permit applications for major repairs within
the floodplain area having special flood hazards to determine that the
proposed repair:



      (1)   Uses construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage: and



      (2)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



   (D)   Review building permit applications for new construction or
substantial improvements within the floodplain area having special flood
hazards to assure that the proposed construction (including prefabricated and
mobile homes):



      (1)   Is protected against flood damage;



      (2)   Is designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, flood damage; and



      (3)   Uses construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.013  INSPECTIONS.



   After the issuances of any building permit hereunder, the Building
Commissioner shall make, or shall cause to be made, such inspections of the
work being done under such permit as are necessary to ensure full compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter and the terms of the permit.
Reinspections of work found to be incomplete or not ready for inspection are
subject to assessment of reinspection fees as prescribed by this subchapter.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.014  INSPECTION ASSISTANCE.



   The Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designated
representative shall assist the Building Commissioner in the inspection of
fire suppression, detection, alarm systems and hazardous materials and shall
provide reports of such inspection to the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.015  ENTRY.



   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Commissioner or
his or her duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure or premises in the town to perform any duty imposed upon
him or her by this chapter.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.016  STOP ORDER.



   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Commissioner may order the work stopped by notice in
writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be
done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by
the Building Commissioner to proceed with the work.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.017  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   No certificate of occupancy for any building or structure erected,
altered or repaired after adoption of this subchapter shall be issued unless
such building or structure was erected, altered or repaired in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be unlawful to occupy any
such building or structure unless a full or conditional certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.018  PLOT PLAN.



   As a condition of issuing a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy, the Building Commissioner may require the preparation of a plot
plan by an engineer or land surveyor registered in the state.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.019  DISPLAYING OF BUILDING PERMITS.



   At all times, building permits shall be clearly displayed at the site
for which the building permit was issued.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.020  WORK MUST COMMENCE.



   The work or use authorized by a building permit shall commence within
six months from the permit date of such permit. Otherwise the same shall
lapse and become null and void. All work so authorized shall be completed
within 24 months from the permit date unless an extension has been approved
by the Building Commissioner.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.021  WORKMANSHIP.



   All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and
other structures shall be performed in a good and workmanlike manner
according to accepted standards and practices in the trade.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.022  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, whether as
owner, lessee, sub-lessee or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain
any building or structure, other than fences, in the town or cause or permit
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.023  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   All persons shall have the right to appeal the Building
Commissioner’s decision first through the Board of Zoning Appeals for the
town and then to the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission of
Indiana in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 22-13-2-7 and I.C.
4-21.5-3-7.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



§ 150.024  REMEDIES.



   The Building Commissioner may in the name of the town bring actions in
the Town Court or the Circuit or Superior Courts of the county for mandatory
and injunctive relief in the enforcement of and to secure compliance with any
order or orders made by the Building Commissioner, and any such action for
mandatory or injunctive relief may be joined with an action to recover the
penalties provided for in this subchapter.



(Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.999



PLANNING FEES



§ 150.035  FEES ESTABLISHED.



   See Chapter 38 of this code of ordinances.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-30)



UNSAFE BUILDING LAW



§ 150.050  LAW ESTABLISHED.



   Under the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9, there is established the Town
Unsafe Building Law.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-34)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.051  LAW ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28 is adopted by reference as the
Town Unsafe Building Law. All proceedings within the town for the inspection,
repair and removal of unsafe buildings shall be governed by said law and the
provisions of this subchapter. In the event the provisions of this subchapter
conflict with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-1 through I.C. 36-7-9-28, then
the provisions of the state statute shall control.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-35)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.052  INSPECTIONS.



   All buildings or portions thereof within the town which are determined
after inspection by the Building Commissioner to be unsafe as defined in this
subchapter are declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-36)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.053  BUILDING COMMISSIONER.



   The Town Building Commissioner, as Chief Administrative Officer of the
Department of Building and Zoning, shall be authorized to administer and to
proceed under the provisions of said law in ordering the repair or removal of
any buildings found to be unsafe as specified therein or as specified
hereafter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-37)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.054  COMPLIANCE.



   Wherever in the building regulations of the town or the Town Unsafe
Building Law, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the Building Commissioner, this shall be
construed to give such officer only the discretion of determining whether the
rules and standards established by ordinance have been complied with; and no
such provisions shall be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers
as to what such regulations or standards shall be, power to require
conditions not prescribed by ordinance, or to enforce ordinance provisions in
an arbitrary or discretionary manner.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-38)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.055  DEFINITIONS.



   The description of an UNSAFE BUILDING contained in I.C. 36-7-9-4 is
hereby supplemented to provide minimum standards for building condition or
maintenance in the town, by adding the following definition:



   UNSAFE BUILDING. Any building or structure which has any or all of the
conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be an UNSAFE
BUILDING, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that
life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are
endangered:



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway or other means of
exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide
safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic;



      (2)   Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times
the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location;



      (3)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location;



      (4)   Whenever any portion, member or appurtenance thereof is
likely to fail, to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property;



      (5)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so
as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified
for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding
the working stresses permitted for such buildings;



      (6)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction;



      (7)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:



         (a)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;



         (b)   Faulty construction;



         (c)   The removal, movement or instability of any
portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;



         (d)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its
foundation; or



         (e)   Any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse.



      (8)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used;



      (9)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of
the base;



      (10)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members,
enclosing or outside walls or coverings;



      (11)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated so as to become:



         (a)   An attractive nuisance to children; or



         (b)   Freely accessible to persons for the purpose of
committing unlawful acts.



      (12)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement
or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the
building regulations of this subchapter, or of any law or ordinance of this
state or county relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings;



      (13)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or
not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion less than 50%, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66% of the:



         (a)   Strength;



         (b)   Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or



         (c)   Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics
required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area,
height and occupancy in the same location.



      (14)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Chief to be a fire hazard; and



      (15)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-39)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.056  SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST.



   The definition of SUBSTANTIAL PROPERTY INTEREST set forth in I.C.
36-7-9-2, is incorporated by reference herein as if copied in full.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-40)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



§ 150.057  STANDARDS OF WORK.



   All work for the reconstruction, alteration, repair or demolition of
buildings and other structures shall be performed in a good workmanlike
manner according to the accepted standards and practices in the trade. The
provisions of the rules pertaining to construction, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical and one- and two-family dwellings, promulgated by the
Administrative Building Council of Indiana, (now the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission) shall be considered standard and acceptable
practice for all matters covered by this subchapter or orders issued pursuant
to this subchapter by the Building Commissioner of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-41)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.058  UNSAFE BUILDING FUND.



   An Unsafe Building Fund is established in the operation budget of the
town in accordance with the provisions of I.C. 36-7-9-14.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-42)  (Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983)



MANUFACTURED HOUSING



§ 150.070  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to encourage provision of
alternative modest income housing in general residential areas by permitting
the use of certain manufactured homes, as defined herein, in all districts in
which similar dwellings constructed on site are permitted, subject to the
requirements set forth herein to assure acceptable similarity in exterior
appearance between such manufactured homes and dwellings that have been or
might be constructed under there and other lawful regulations on adjacent or
nearby lots in the same district.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-50)  (Ord. 4-1982, passed 11-22-1982)



§ 150.071  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXPANDO ROOM. An expandable manufactured housing unit.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit fabricated after January 1, 1981, in
an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the
building site, bearing a seal certifying that it is built in compliance with
the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code or
Indiana Public Law 360, Acts of 1971, as promulgated by the Indiana
Administrative Building Counsel, now known as the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, and containing more than 950 square feet or
occupied space.



   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS CODE. Title IV
of the 1974 Housing and Community Development Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq.), as amended (previously known as the Federal Mobile Home Construction
and Safety Act), rules and regulations adopted thereunder, which include
H.U.D. approved information supplied by the home manufacturer, and
regulations and interpretations of said Code by the Administrative Building
Council, now known as the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission.



   MOBILE HOME. A transportable factory-built structure that contains less
than 951 square feet of occupied space.



   ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLING CODE, INDIANA. The mandatory statewide
building code adopted by the Indiana Administrative Building Council, now
known as the Fire Prevention and Building Safety Commission, for one- and
two-family residential dwellings.



   PUBLIC LAW 360, ACTS OF 1971. Enabling legislation requiring the
Indiana Administrative Building Council, now know as the Fire Prevention and
Building Safety Commission, to adopt rules and regulations for the
construction, repair or maintenance of one or two-family residential
dwellings.



   SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT. A device for permitting a use within a
district other than a principally permitted use.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-51)  (Ord. 4-1982, passed 11-22-1982)



§ 150.072  STANDARDS.



   (A)   Permitted placement. The establishment, location and use of
manufactured homes as scattered-site residences shall be permitted in any
zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit subject to requirements and
limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district and
provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations:



      (1)   The home shall meet all requirements applicable to
single-family dwellings and possess all necessary improvement location,
building and occupancy permits and other certifications required by the code;



      (2)   The home shall be larger than 950 square feet of
occupied space or meet the minimum square footage requirements for the
appropriate zone;



      (3)   The home shall be attached and anchored to a permanent
foundation in conformance with the regulations in the Indiana One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code with manufacturer’s installation specifications;



      (4)   The house shall be covered with an exterior material
customarily used on site built residential dwellings, and such material shall
extend over the top of the foundation (or meet the community’s site built
residential dwelling home standards); and



      (5)   The home shall have a roof composed of a material
customarily used on site built residential dwellings, such as asbestos,
fiberglass, asphalt or tile, which shall be installed onto a surface
appropriately pitched for the materials used.



   (B)   Placement with permit. Mobile homes shall be permitted within
the town only after receiving a special exception permit from the Board of
Zoning Appeals.



   (C)   Structural alteration. Due to its integral design, any
structural alteration or modification of a manufactured or mobile home after
it is placed on the site must be approved by the authorized Building
Administrator of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-52)  (Ord. 4-1982, passed 11-22-1982)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.073  TEMPORARY USE.



   (A)   Circumstances for permit issuance. Subject to conditions, fees
and standards otherwise required in the Zoning Ordinance, a temporary use
permit shall be issued to an applicant to use a manufactured or mobile home
only as a construction office at a job site.



   (B)   Length of permit. A temporary use permit may be issued, at the
discretion of the Plan Commission or its designated administrator, for a
period of one year.



   (C)   Permit expiration. At the time the temporary permit expires,
the manufactured or mobile home and all appurtenances shall be removed from
the property within 90 days.



   (D)   Utility improvements. Manufactured or mobile homes used for
temporary uses shall have an approved water supply, sewage disposal system
and utility connections, where appropriate, and at the discretion of the Plan
Commission or its designated administrator.



   (E)   Permit fee. A temporary use permit shall be issued by the Plan
Commission’s designated administrator. The fee shall be $50 and is in
addition to all other required permits for utilities and sewage disposal
system.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-53)  (Ord. 4-1982, passed 11-22-1982)



§ 150.074  APPEAL.



   An action to review any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official or board charged with enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance shall be pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-919.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-54)  (Ord. 4-1982, passed 11-22-1982)



REQUIREMENTS FOR STREET, SIDEWALK AND ALLEY CUTS OR EXCAVATIONS



§ 150.085  APPLICATION FOR STREET, SIDEWALK, AND ALLEY CUTS OR EXCAVATION
PERMITS.



   It is required that any person, business or corporation, their agents
or employees desiring to cut or make an excavation into, through or under any
public street, sidewalk and/or alley in the town shall first make an
application for said cut by applying for a permit to make said cut to the
Clerk-Treasurer of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-60)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.086  BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   The application for the permit to make such a cut or excavation three
feet eight inches in width and 12 feet eight inches in length or less shall
be accompanied with a cash bond in the amount of $2,000 to be posted with the
Clerk-Treasurer as surety that said applicant shall fully comply with this
subchapter, and with all ordinances remaining in force hereinafter enacted
concerning the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the town; an application for
the permit to make such cut or excavation in excess of three feet eight 
inches in width or 12 feet eight inches in length shall be accompanied with a
cash bond in the amount of $2,000 per cut to be posted with the
Clerk-Treasurer as surety that said applicant shall fully comply with this
subchapter and with all ordinances remaining in force hereinafter enacted
concerning the streets, alleys and sidewalks of the town.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-61)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.087  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Said application shall show in detail the location and type of cut
proposed and said application shall be approved by the Clerk-Treasurer and
the general foreman of the town’s Department of Public Works or his or her
authorized representative prior to the issuance of any such requested permit.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-62)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.088  STREET CUT SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.



   All street cuts shall be made, and backfilled in accordance with the
following specifications and requirements.



   (A)   All work described in this subchapter shall be subject to the
inspection, direction and approval of the authorized representative of the
Department of Public Works. Twenty-four hour notification shall be provided
to the general foreman of the Town Department of Public Works prior to
cutting of any pavement.



   (B)   The replacement of pavement shall not be less than 12 inches
of bituminous mixture, thoroughly compacted in lifts of not more than three
inches, consisting of 11 inches of bituminous base mixture with one inch of
bituminous surface mixture. A “Wacker-Rammer” compactor or equivalent
shall be used for compacting the bituminous mixtures.



   (C)   If the street requested to be cut consists of a bituminous
overlay on top of a concrete pavement, then the pavement replacement shall be
no less than nine inches of high early strength concrete placed so the top
elevation of the new concrete is the same as the top elevation of the
original concrete pavement, and the portion of the pavement replacement from
the top of the new concrete pavement to the present pavement elevation shall
consist of a bituminous base mixture, thoroughly compacted plus at least one
inch of bituminous surface mixture properly compacted. A “Wacker-Rammer”
compactor or equivalent shall be used for compacting the bituminous mixtures.
The sub-grade on which the concrete is to be placed shall be compacted
thoroughly prior to placing the concrete.



   (D)   Cutting in cement concrete pavement shall be performed as
follows: the trench or area to be removed shall be outlined with drilled
holes spaced no more than six inches apart or, in the alternative, the trench
or area to be removed may be saved to the bottom of the steel mesh with a
minimum depth of two inches. Breakage of the concrete shall be limited to and
confined within said lines. After removal of all the waste the edge of the
area of concrete shall be such that the maximum variation from the vertical
plane of the sides of the cut concrete will not exceed one and one-half
inches. When trimming and straightening these edges, it may be necessary to
use hand methods, and hand methods shall be used if necessary to comply with
this subchapter. Methods and equipment used in cutting, breaking and removal
shall not cause any substantial or material breakage, excessive shattering or
spalling of the concrete which is to be left in place, and said methods and
equipment used shall be such that will not cause any substantial material or
excessive vibration and shock to be transmitted along reinforcing steel to
the adjacent pavement. The depth of the replaced concrete pavement shall be
the same as the removed pavement, provided that it shall be a minimum of nine
inches.



   (E)   The sub-grade upon which the concrete shall be placed shall be
compacted thoroughly prior to the placing of the concrete upon the roadway.
The concrete used shall be high early strength as set out in subsection
501.03(c) of the Standard Specifications of the State Highway Commission,
except that test beams shall not be required.



   (F)   All cuts in the pavement area shall be open to traffic at all
times except when the contractor is working at the site. If the cut in the
pavement cannot be completed prior to the completion of work during each
working day, the cuts shall be temporarily backfilled with a compacted
aggregate base material or covered with a steel plate of sufficient size and
thickness to safely carry the traffic. The steel plate shall be properly
fastened down so as not to create any safety hazard for vehicles traveling
upon it. A steel plate shall also be used to cover any concrete area during
the curing period for such concrete.



   (G)   All material or matter from the excavation of all cuts in the
pavement area shall be removed from the right-of-way. The backfilling of this
area shall be compacted aggregate base or “B” borrow. This backfill shall
meet all State Highway Commission Standard Specifications.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-63)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.089  INSPECTIONS.



   The bonds required above to be posted with the Clerk-Treasurer shall be
held by said Clerk-Treasurer until the cut and backfill of same has been
completed in full and an employee designated by the Town Council has
inspected and approved said backfill. Upon approval of the cut and the
backfill thereof said bond shall be released and in the event said backfill
does not meet the terms and conditions of this subchapter said bond shall be
forfeited upon ten days’ notice by the town to the applicant.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-64)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.090  BOND REQUIREMENTS FOR NUMEROUS CUTS.



   In the event an applicant is engaged in such an operation in the town
that requires numerous cuts to be made and the Clerk-Treasurer finds it
impracticable to require the posting of numerous bonds on numerous cuts, said
persons may make individual applications for the issuance of said cut permits
upon posting a surety bond of $2,000 per cut, said surety bond to be a
continuing bond as respect to said applicant. In the event such a surety bond
is posted and the applicant fails to make the backfill as required, then the
town or its agent or employees may upon notice to the applicant make the
backfill or repairs required and deduct the costs thereof from said bond at
which time said bond shall be null and void and the applicant shall then be
required to make individual applications and the posting of bonds for same
until such time as a general blanket bond is again approved by the
Clerk-Treasurer or Town Council.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-65)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)



§ 150.091  SEPARATE AND DISTINCT OFFENSE.



   Each and every cut, excavation or undermining in violation of this
subchapter shall be considered to be a separate and distinct offense and each
day on which any person, business, corporation, its agents or employees,
shall engage in the act of cutting, excavating or undermining, into, through
or under any public street, sidewalk or alley in the town, shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense against this subchapter.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-67)  (Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



REVIEW OF BUILDING SITES IN LIGHT OF POTENTIAL FLOODING



§ 150.105  REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   The Town Building Inspector shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.



   (B)   If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood
hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including
prefabricated and mobile homes) must:



      (1)   Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage; and



      (3)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-75)  (Ord. 3-75, passed 10-27-1975)



§ 150.106  COMMISSION TO REVIEW SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   The Town Plan Commission shall review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new developments to assure that:



   (A)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;



   (B)   All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and



   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-76)  (Res. 3-75, passed 10-27-1975)



§ 150.107  ROLE OF TOWN ENGINEER.



   The Engineer of the town shall require new or replacement water systems
and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters, and require on-site water disposal systems to be located
so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-77)  (Res. 3-75, passed 10-27-1975)



PERMITS AND REGULATIONS FOR CLEANING DRY-WELLS
AND UNDERGROUND AREAS



§ 150.120  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Before any person, firm or corporation shall remove or clean out any
substance from any dry-well, cesspool, septic tank or other underground place
in the town, used for the purpose of collecting offal, refuse, excreta or
other waste substance or matter, such person, firm or corporation shall first
make application to the Clerk-Treasurer of said town for permit so to do.
Such application shall state the location of such dry-well, cesspool, septic
tank or other underground place; the day or days and the time when such
substance therefrom is desired to be removed or cleaned out; the person or
persons who will perform the work and labor; and the price to be charged
therefor or the price per unit or other basis upon which a charge therefor is
to be made. Upon such written application being made, and no reason appearing
why a permit should not be issued, the Clerk-Treasurer shall issue a written
permit allowing or permitting such person, firm or corporation to clean out
or remove substance from said dry-well, cesspool, septic tank or other
underground place, at a time and the place designated in such permit.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-85)  (Ord. 11, 1949, passed 4-11-1949)



§ 150.121  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to clean out
or remove substance from any dry-well, cesspool, septic tank or other
underground place used for the purpose of collecting refuse, offal, excreta
or other waste substance without applying for and obtaining a written permit
from the Clerk-Treasurer as provided in § 150.120.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-86)  (Ord. 11, 1949, passed 4-11-1949)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which
no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   If any person, firm or corporation shall violate any
of the provisions of §§ 150.001 through 150.024, or shall do any act
prohibited herein, or shall fail to perform any duty lawfully enjoined,
within the time prescribed by the Building Commissioner, or shall fail,
neglect or refuse to obey any lawful order given by the Building Commissioner
in connection with the provisions of §§ 150.001 through 150.024 for each
such violation, failure or refusal, such person, firm or corporation may be
fined up to and including the maximum penalty prescribed by state statute.
Each day of such unlawful activity as is prohibited by the first sentence of
this section shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   Any person who violates § 150.017 may be subject to a
fine equal to $1 per square foot. The total square foot of the building
occupied in violation of § 150.017 shall be the basis for calculating the
fine. The fine shall not exceed $2,500 per day. Each day the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person who violates § 150.019 may be subject to a
fine of $25. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (C)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation, whether as owner,
lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or
in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 150.050 through 150.058 or any
order issued by the Building Commissioner.



      (2)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 150.050
through 150.058 or I.C. 36-7-9-28 shall commit a Class C infraction for each
day such violation continues.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-43)



   (D)   (1)   Failure to comply. Each day of noncompliance with the
provisions of §§ 150.070 through 150.074 constitutes a separate and
distinct ordinance violation. Judgment of up to $2,500 per day may be entered
for a violation of §§ 150.070 through 150.074.



      (2)   Subject to removal. A home, sited upon property in
violation of §§ 150.070 through 150.074, shall be subject to removal from
such property. However, the home owner must be given a reasonable opportunity
to bring the property into compliance before action for removal can be taken.
If action finally is taken by the appropriate authority to bring compliance,
the expenses involved may be made a lien against the property.



      (3)   Removal method. The Plan Commission or its designated
Administrator may institute a suit in an appropriate Court for injunctive
relief to cause such violation to be prevented, abated or removed.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-55)



   (E)   Any person, business, corporation, agent or employee, who
shall hereafter make any cut, excavation or undermining as provided herein
without first complying with the requirements of §§ 150.105 through 150.107
as to the posting of said bond and the obtaining of said permit, shall be
guilty of an ordinance violation and subject to a fine in the amount of not
less than $1 or more than $25 upon conviction.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-66)



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §§ 150.120 and
150.121 or any part thereof shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and
upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $10. Provided,
however, that whenever any police officer shall find that any person has
violated any provision of §§ 150.120 and 150.121, such officer shall notify
such person by delivering to such person a written notice stating the name of
such person, the specific violation, the date of such violation. Such notice
shall be prepared in triplicate. One copy shall be served on the violator;
one copy shall be filed with the Clerk-Treasurer; and one copy shall be
retained by the officer. The copy served on the violator shall state in
substance that the violator or his or her representative must appear at the
office of the Clerk-Treasurer within 72 hours of 4:00 p.m. following the
service of said notice and have the privilege of paying the sum of $2 in
compromise and settlement of the penalty for the violation charged in said
notice. The Clerk-Treasurer is authorized to accept on behalf of the town any
such offer to pay and settle such penalty pursuant to §§ 150.120 and
150.121. Such acceptance shall be effected by issuing to such violator a
receipt for the payment of the sum of $2 within the time stated in the
notice, such failure shall be deemed a rejection on the part of the violator
of the privilege to compromise and settle the claim of the town in payment of
the penalty as provided herein; and the Town Attorney shall prepare the
necessary papers and proceeds against said violator on behalf of the town for
the violation of §§ 150.120 and 150.121 in the manner provided by law.



(1991 Draft Code, § 7-87)



(Ord. 11, 1949, passed 4-11-1949; Ord. 3-75, passed 10-27-1975; Res. 3-75,
passed 10-27-1975; Ord. 12-77, passed 12-27-1977; Ord. 4-1982, passed
11-22-1982; Ord. 3-83, passed 7-11-1983; Ord. 02-2010, passed 3-8-2010)



CHAPTER 151:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   151.01   Adopted by reference



§ 151.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The Comprehensive Plan, as amended, is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length in this code of
ordinances.



(Res. 2003-12, passed 5-12-2003; Res. 2003-18, passed 7-14-2003; Res.
2004-34, passed 12-13-2004; Res. 2005-45, passed 12-12-2005; Res. 2006-17,
passed - -2006; Res. 2007-07, passed - -2007; Res. 2008-21, passed - -2008;
Res. 2008-22, passed 8-11-2008; Res. 2010-02, passed 2-22-2010; Res. 2010-19,
passed 9-27-2010)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



Section




Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, Objectives and Definitions




   152.001   Statutory authorization



   152.002   Findings of fact



   152.003   Statement of purpose



   152.004   Objectives



   152.005   Definitions




General Provisions




   152.020   Lands to which this chapter applies



   152.021   Basis for establishing regulatory flood data



   152.022   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   152.023   Compliance



   152.024   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.025   Discrepancy between mapped floodplain and actual ground
elevations



   152.026   Interpretation



   152.027   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   152.028   Increased cost of compliance (ICC)




Administration




   152.040   Designation of Administrator



   152.041   Permit procedures



   152.042   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   152.055   General standards



   152.056   Specific standards



   152.057   Standards for subdivision proposals



   152.058   Critical facility



   152.059   Standards for identified floodways



   152.060   Standards for identified fringe



   152.061   Standards for SFHAs without established base flood
elevation and/or floodways/fringes




Variance Procedures




   152.075   Designation of Variance and Appeals Board



   152.076   Duties of Variance and Appeals Board



   152.077   Variance procedures



   152.078   Conditions for variances



   152.079   Variance notification



   152.080   Historic structure



   152.081   Special conditions



 



   152.999   Penalty



STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE,
OBJECTIVES AND DEFINITIONS



§ 152.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Indiana Legislature has in I.C. 36-7-4 and I.C. 14-28-4 granted the
power to local government units to control land use within their
jurisdictions. Therefore, the Town Council does hereby adopt the following
floodplain management regulations.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.002  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic
inundation which results in potential loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated,
flood-proofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.003  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage;



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands; and



   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for
structures and their contents in the town by fulfilling the requirements of
the national flood insurance program.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.004  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in floodplains;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood blight areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property
is in a flood area.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A ZONE. Portions of the SFHA in which the principal source of flooding
is runoff from rainfall, snowmelt or a combination of both. In A ZONES,
floodwaters may move slowly or rapidly, but waves are usually not a
significant threat to buildings. These areas are labeled as Zone A, Zone AE,
Zones A1-A30, Zone AO, Zone AH, Zone AR and Zone A99 on a FIRM or FHBM. The
definitions are presented below.



      (1)   ZONE A. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event. Because detailed hydraulic analyses have not been
performed, no base flood elevation or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (2)   ZONE AE AND A1-A30. Areas subject to inundation by the
1% annual chance flood event determined by detailed methods. Base flood
elevations are shown within these zones. Mandatory flood insurance purchase
requirements apply. (ZONE AE is on new and revised maps in place of ZONES
A1-A30.)



      (3)   ZONE AH. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are one to
three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed hydraulic analyses are
shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (4)   ZONE AO. Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths
are between one and three feet. Average flood depths derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown within this zone. Mandatory flood insurance
purchase requirements apply.



      (5)   ZONE AR. Areas that result from the decertification of a
previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the
process of being restored to provide base flood protection. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



      (6)   ZONE A99. Areas subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood event, but which will ultimately be protected upon completion of
an under-construction federal flood protection system. These are areas of
special flood hazard where enough progress has been made on the construction
of a protection system, such as dikes, dams and levees, to consider it
complete for insurance rating purposes. ZONE A99 may only be used when the
flood protection system has reached specified statutory progress toward
completion. No base flood elevations or depths are shown. Mandatory flood
insurance purchase requirements apply.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure that is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES should constitute a minimal initial investment, may not be used
for human habitation and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential.
Examples of ACCESSORY STRUCTURES are detached garages, carports, storage
sheds, pole barns and hay sheds.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING STRUCTURE). Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a structure in which the addition is connected by a common
load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition,
which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter
load-bearing walls, is new construction.



   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the
community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may
be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation of the 1% annual chance flood.



   BASEMENT. The portion of a structure having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.



   COMMUNITY. A political entity that has the authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain ordinances for the area under its jurisdiction.



   COMMUNITY RATING SYSTEM (CRS). A program developed by the Federal
Insurance Administration to provide incentives for those communities in the
regular program that have gone beyond the minimum floodplain management
requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of
flooding might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited
to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a
structure or any addition to a structure;



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home or installing recreational vehicle
on a site for more than 180 days;



         (c)   Installing utilities, erection of walls and
fences, construction of roads or similar projects;



         (d)   Construction of flood control structures such as
levees, dikes, dams, channel improvements and the like;



         (e)   Mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or
drilling operations;



         (f)   Construction and/or reconstruction of bridges or
culverts;



         (g)   Storage of materials; or



         (h)   Any other activity that might change the
direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include activities such as the
maintenance of existing structures and facilities such as painting,
re-roofing; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, excavation or the
construction of permanent structures.



   ELEVATED STRUCTURE. A non-basement structure built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings or columns (posts and piers).



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A certified statement that verifies a
structure’s elevation information.



   EMERGENCY PROGRAM. The first phase under which a community participates
in the NFIP. It is intended to provide a first layer amount of insurance at
subsidized rates on all insurable structures in that community before the
effective date of the initial FIRM.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s
first floodplain ordinance.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed
before the effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FIVE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (500-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 0.2%
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any year.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and
rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance
Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of flood hazards and regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
have been identified as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official hydraulic and hydrologic
report provided by FEMA. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
FIRM, FBFM (where applicable), and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel proper and the areas adjoining any wetland,
lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the
regulatory flood. The FLOODPLAIN includes both the floodway and the fringe
districts.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power which
control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state,
or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
REGULATIONS are also referred to as floodplain regulations, floodplain
ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance and floodplain management
requirements.



   FLOOD PROTECTION GRADE (FPG). The elevation of the regulatory flood
plus two feet at any given location in the SFHA. (See FREEBOARD.)



   FLOODPROOFING (DRY FLOODPROOFING). A method of protecting a structure
that ensures that the structure, together with attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, is watertight to the floodproofed design elevation with
walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All
structural components of these walls are capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic flood forces, including the effects of buoyancy, and anticipated
debris impact forces.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify compliance for
nonresidential structures as an alternative to elevating structures to or
above the FPG. This certification must be by a registered professional
engineer or architect.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to
efficiently carry and discharge the peak flood flow of the regulatory flood
of any river or stream.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above the BFE,
which is applied for the purposes of floodplain management. It is used to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than those calculated for the base flood.



   FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HARDSHIP (AS RELATED TO VARIANCES OF THIS CHAPTER). The exceptional
hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance.
The Board of Zoning Appeals requires that the variance is exceptional,
unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s
neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All
of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to the start of construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure individually listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites
and Structures.



   INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC). The cost to repair a substantially
damaged structure that exceeds the minimal repair cost and that is required
to bring a substantially damaged structure into compliance with the local
flood damage prevention ordinance. Acceptable mitigation measures are
elevation, relocation, demolition or any combination thereof. All renewal and
new business flood insurance policies with effective dates on or after June
1, 1997, will include ICC coverage.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the currently effective
FEMA map that establishes that a property is not located in a SFHA. A LOMA is
only issued by FEMA.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). An official revision to the currently
effective FEMA map. It is issued by FEMA and changes flood zones,
delineations and elevations.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). An official revision by
letter to an effective NFIP map. A LOMR-F provides FEMA’s determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated on fill above the
BFE and excluded from the SFHA.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE. The lowest elevation, after completion of
construction, of the ground, sidewalk, patio, deck support or basement
entryway immediately next to the structure.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest of the following:



      (1)   The top of the lowest level of the structure;



      (2)   The top of the basement floor;



      (3)   The top of the garage floor, if the garage is the lowest
level of the structure;



      (4)   The top of the first floor of a structure elevated on
pilings or pillars;



      (5)   The top of the first floor of a structure constructed
with a crawl space, provided that the lowest point of the interior grade is
at or above the BFE and construction meets requirements of § 152.055; or



      (6)   The top of the floor level of any enclosure, other than
a basement, below an elevated structure where the walls of the enclosure
provide any resistance to the flow of flood waters unless:



         (a)   The walls are designed to automatically equalize
the hydrostatic flood forces on the walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters, by providing a minimum of two openings (in addition to
doorways and windows) having a total net area of one square inch for every
one square foot of enclosed area. The bottom of all such openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade; and



         (b) Such enclosed space shall be usable solely for the
parking of vehicles and building access.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MAP AMENDMENT. A change to an effective NFIP map that results in the
exclusion from the SFHA of an individual structure or a legally described
parcel of land that has been inadvertently included in the SFHA (i.e., no
alterations of topography have occurred since the date of the first NFIP map
that showed the structure or parcel to be within the SFHA).



   MAP PANEL NUMBER. The four-digit number followed by a letter suffix
assigned by FEMA on a flood map. The first four digits represent the map
panel, and the letter suffix represents the number of times the map panel has
been revised. (The letter “A” is not used by FEMA, the letter “B” is
the first revision.)



   MARKET VALUE. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real
estate market will bear. MARKET VALUE can be established by independent
certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated by age of building (actual
cash value) or adjusted assessed values.



   MITIGATION. Sustained actions taken to reduce or eliminate long-term
risk to people and property from hazards and their effects. The purpose of
MITIGATION is two-fold: to protect people and structures, and to minimize the
cost of disaster response and recovery.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The federal program that makes
flood insurance available to owners of property in participating communities
nationwide through the cooperative efforts of the federal government and the
private insurance industry.



   NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929 (NGVD). As corrected in 1929,
is a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of the community’s first
floodplain ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



   NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988 (NAVD 88). As adopted in 1993, is
a vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain.



   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
canalization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water; or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). The flood that has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins
with the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY
FLOOD.



   ONE PERCENT ANNUAL CHANCE FLOOD. The flood that has a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Any flood zone that begins with
the letter A is subject to the 1% annual chance flood. See REGULATORY FLOOD.



   PARTICIPATING COMMUNITY. Any community that voluntarily elects to
participate in the NFIP by adopting and enforcing floodplain management
regulations that are consistent with the standards of the NFIP.



   PHYSICAL MAP REVISION (PMR). An official republication of a
community’s FEMA map to effect changes to base (1% annual chance) flood
elevations, floodplain boundary delineations, regulatory floodways and
planimetric features. These changes typically occur as a result of structural
works or improvements, annexations resulting in additional flood hazard
areas, or correction to base flood elevations or SFHAs.



   POST-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement that
started on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM of the community
or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.



   PRE-FIRM CONSTRUCTION. Construction or substantial improvement, which
started on or before December 31, 1974, or before the effective date of the
initial FIRM of the community, whichever is later.



   PROBATION. A means of formally notifying participating communities of
violations and deficiencies in the administration and enforcement of the
local floodplain management regulations.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community, neighborhood or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use.



   REGULAR PROGRAM. The phase of the community’s participation in the
NFIP where more comprehensive floodplain management requirements are imposed
and higher amounts of insurance are available based upon risk zones and
elevations determined in a FIS.



   REGULATORY FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, as calculated by a method and procedure that is
acceptable to and approved by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and
the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The regulatory flood elevation at
any location is as defined in § 152.021 of this chapter. The REGULATORY
FLOOD is also known by the term “base flood”, “1% annual chance
flood” and “100-year flood”.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event
for which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
structure at the time of each such flood event.



   SECTION 1316. The section of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
as amended, which states that no new flood insurance coverage shall be
provided for any property that the Administrator finds has been declared by a
duly constituted state or local zoning authority or other authorized public
body to be in violation of state or local laws, regulations or ordinances
that intended to discourage or otherwise restrict land development or
occupancy in flood-prone areas.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdictions
(including extraterritorial jurisdictions) of the town subject to inundation
by the regulatory flood. The SFHAs of the town are generally identified as
such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Hendricks County and Incorporated
Areas prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September
25, 2009. (These areas are shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AE, A1-A30, AH, AR, A99
or AO).



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement or permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footing, installation of piles, construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation for placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF
CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home or a prefabricated building. The term also includes
recreational vehicles to be installed on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
“substantial damage” or repetitive loss regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not include improvements of structures to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
requirements or any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a
“historic structure”.



   SUSPENSION. The removal of a participating community from the NFIP
because the community has not enacted and/or enforced the proper floodplain
management regulations required for participation in the NFIP.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter,
which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter
where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation, other certification or other evidence of compliance required in
this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929
(NGVD) or other datum where specified of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.



   X ZONE. The area where the flood hazard is less than that in the SFHA.
Shaded X ZONES shown on recent FIRMs (B zones on older FIRMs) designate areas
subject to inundation by the flood with a 0.2% chance of being equaled or
exceeded (the 500-year flood). Unshaded X ZONES (C zones on older FIRMs)
designate areas where the annual exceedance probability of flooding is less
than 0.2%.



   ZONE. A geographical area shown on a FHBM or FIRM that reflects the
severity or type of flooding in the area.



   ZONE A. See definition for A ZONE.



   ZONE B, C AND X. Areas identified in the community as areas of moderate
or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area. However,
buildings in these zones could be flooded by severe, concentrated rainfall
coupled with inadequate local drainage systems. Flood insurance is available
in participating communities but is not required by regulation in these
zones. (ZONE X is used on new and revised maps in place of ZONES B AND C.)



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.020  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all SFHAs within the jurisdiction of the
town.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.021  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING REGULATORY FLOOD DATA.



   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the regulatory flood.



   (B)   The best available regulatory flood data is listed below.
Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party submitting
the detailed engineering study needs to replace existing data with better
data and submit it to the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review
and approval:



      (1)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe
limits for the studied SFHAs of the Town of Plainfield shall be as delineated
on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Hendricks
County and Incorporated Areas and the corresponding FIRM prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated September 25, 2009; and



      (2)   The regulatory flood elevation, floodway and fringe
limits for each of the unstudied SFHAs of the Town of Plainfield delineated
as an “A Zone” on the FIRM of Hendricks County and Incorporated Areas
shall be according to the best data available as provided by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.022  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities in areas of special flood hazard.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.023  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered within the SFHA without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations. No land or stream within
the SFHA shall hereafter be altered without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.024  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Town
Council to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program,
including Ord. 1-96. However, the chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. This
chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.025  DISCREPANCY BETWEEN MAPPED FLOODPLAIN AND ACTUAL GROUND
ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   In cases where there is a discrepancy between the mapped
floodplain (SFHA) on the FIRM and the actual ground elevations, the elevation
provided on the profiles shall govern.



   (B)   If the elevation of the site in question is below the base
flood elevation, that site shall be included in the SFHA and regulated
accordingly.



   (C)   If the elevation (natural grade) of the site in question is
above the base flood elevation, that site shall be considered outside the
SFHA and the floodplain regulations will not be applied. The property owner
should be advised to apply for a LOMA.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.026  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.027  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods can
and will occur on rare occasions. Therefore, this chapter does not create any
liability on the part of the town, the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources or the state, for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.028  INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).



   In order for buildings to qualify for a claim payment under ICC
coverage as a “repetitive loss structure”, the National Flood Insurance
Reform Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4011 et seq. requires that the building be
covered by a contract for flood insurance and incur flood-related damages on
two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for
which the second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood
damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the
building at the time of each such flood event.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.040  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Town Council hereby appoints the Town Engineer and/or Building
Inspector to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and is
herein referred to as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.041  PERMIT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made
to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any
development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures,
earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Specifically the following information is required:



      (1)   Application stage.



         (a)   A description of the proposed development;



         (b)   Location of the proposed development sufficient to
accurately locate property and structure in relation to existing roads and
streams;



         (c)   A legal description of the property site;



         (d)   A site development plan showing existing and
proposed development locations and existing and proposed land grades;



         (e)   Elevation of the top of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings. Elevation should be in NAVD
88 or NGVD;



         (f)   Elevation (in NAVD 88 or NGVD) to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; and



         (g)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse
will be altered or related as a result of proposed development.



      (2)   Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor
or floodproofing, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the NAVD 88 or NGVD elevation of
the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, as built. Said certification
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer and certified by the same. When
floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure said certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by the same. Any work undertaken prior to submission
of the certification shall be at the permit holders’ risk. (The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the lowest floor and floodproofing elevation
survey data submitted.) The permit holder shall correct deficiencies detected
by such review before any further work is allowed to proceed. Failure to
submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall
be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.042  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator and/or designated staff is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Administrator is further authorized to render interpretations of this
chapter, which are consistent with its spirit and purpose.



   (B)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Review all floodplain development permits to assure that
the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



      (2)   Inspect and inventory damaged structures in SFHA and
complete substantial damage determinations;



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Indiana Department of Natural Resources for all development projects
subject to §§ 152.059 and 152.061(A) of this chapter, and maintain a record
of such authorization (either copy of actual permit or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment);



      (4)   Ensure that all necessary federal or state permits have
been received prior to issuance of the local floodplain development permit.
Copies of such permits are to be maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit;



      (5)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Floodplain
Coordinator prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit copies of such notifications to FEMA;



      (6)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
local permit documents, damaged structure inventories, substantial damage
determinations, regulatory flood data, SFHA maps, letters of map amendment
(LOMA), letters of map revision (LOMR), copies of DNR permits and floodplain
analysis and regulatory assessments (letters of recommendation), federal
permit documents, and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter;



      (7)   Utilize and enforce all letters of map revision (LOMR)
or physical map revisions (PMR) issued by FEMA for the currently effective
SFHA maps of the community;



      (8)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished;



      (9)   Verify and record the actual elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures,
in accordance with § 152.041;



      (10)   Verify and record the actual elevation to which any new
or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance
with § 152.041;



      (11)   Review certified plans and specifications for
compliance;



      (12)   Stop work orders.



         (a)   Upon notice from the Floodplain Administrator,
work on any building, structure or premises that is being done contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall immediately cease; and



         (b)   Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given
to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing
the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed.



      (13)   Revocation of permits.



         (a)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
or approval, issued under the provisions of the chapter, in cases where there
has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based; and



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator may revoke a permit
upon determination by the Floodplain Administrator that the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement
of the structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not
in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.055  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs the following provisions are required:



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure;



   (B)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state
requirements for resisting wind forces;



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage
below the FPG;



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



   (E)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;



   (F)   New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (G)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;



   (H)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (I)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter;
and



   (J)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not further extended or
replaced.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.056  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all SFHAs, the following provisions are required:



   (A)   Generally.  In addition to the requirements of § 152.055,
all structures to be located in the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage
below the FPG. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of any new structure having a
floor area greater than 400 square feet;



      (2)   Addition or improvement made to any existing structure:



         (a)   Where the cost of the addition or improvement
equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the existing structure (excluding the
value of the land); and



         (b)   With a previous addition or improvement
constructed since the community’s first floodplain ordinance.



      (3)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a damaged structure
where the costs of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure (excluding the
value of the land) before damage occurred;



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days;



      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. this chapter does not apply to
returning the existing manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (6)   Reconstruction or repairs made to a repetitive loss
structure.



   (B)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have
the lowest floor; including basement, at or above the FPG (two feet above the
base flood elevation). Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to
elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards
of division (D) below.



   (C)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure (or
manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above the FPG (two feet above the base flood elevation). Structures
located in all A Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated if done
in accordance with the following.



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the structure has been designed so that below the FPG, the
structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of
resisting the effects of the regulatory flood. The structure design shall
take into account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic
pressures and impacts from debris or ice. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 152.042(B)(10).



      (2)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



   (D)   Elevated structures. New construction or substantial
improvements of elevated structures that include fully enclosed areas formed
by foundation and other exterior walls below the flood protection grade shall
be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls.



      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either
be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of
enclosed area;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above foundation interior grade (which must be equal to in elevation
or higher than the exterior foundation grade);



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of floodwaters in both directions;



         (d)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking for vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator);



         (e) The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and



         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood
protection grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.



   (E)   Structures constructed on fill. A residential or
nonresidential structure may be constructed on a permanent land fill in
accordance with the following.



      (1)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one
foot deep before compacting to 95% of the maximum density obtainable with the
Standard Proctor Test method.



      (2)   The fill should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the structure before sloping below the FPG.



      (3)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour
during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or bulkheading. If vegetative
cover is used, the slopes shall be no steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.



      (4)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.



      (5)   The top of the lowest floor including basements shall be
at or above the FPG.



   (F)   Standards for structures constructed with a crawlspace. A
residential or nonresidential structure may be constructed with a crawlspace
located below the flood protection grade provided that the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection grade shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Provide a minimum of two openings
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square
foot of enclosed area. The bottom of the openings shall be no more than one
foot above grade;



      (3)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawlspace



to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet at any point;



      (4)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection grade;



      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event;



      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection
grade must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and



      (7)   The interior grade of the crawlspace must be at or above
the base flood elevation.



   (G) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles to be installed or substantially
improved on a site for more than 180 days must meet one of the following
requirements.



      (1)   The manufactured home shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor shall be at or above the FPG and
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This requirement applies to all
manufactured homes to be placed on a site:



         (a)   Outside a manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (b)   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;



         (c)   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision; or



         (d)   In an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial
damage” as a result of a flood.



      (2)   The manufactured home shall be elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elevations that are no less than 36 inches in
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. This
requirement applies to all manufactured homes to be placed on a site in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision that has not been
substantially damaged by a flood.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles placed on a site shall either:



         (a)   Be on site for less than 180 days; and



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(defined as being on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



         (c)   Meet the requirements for “manufactured homes”
as stated earlier in this section.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.057  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.



   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks
and subdivisions), which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.058  CRITICAL FACILITY.



   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent
possible, located outside the limits of the SFHA. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPG at the site.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the FPG shall be provided to all critical
facilities to the extent possible.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.059  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   Located within SFHAs, established in § 152.021, are
areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles
and has erosion potential. If the site is in an identified floodway, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources and apply for a permit for
construction in a floodway. Under the provisions of I.C. 14-28-1 a permit for
construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources
is required prior to the issuance of a local building permit for any
excavation, deposit, construction or obstruction activity located in the
floodway. This includes land preparation activities such as filling, grading,
clearing and paving and the like undertaken before the actual start of
construction of the structure.



      (2)   However, it does exclude non-substantial
additions/improvements to existing (lawful) residences in a non-boundary
river floodway. (I.C. 14-28-1-26 allows construction of non-substantial
additions/improvements to residences in a non-boundary river floodway without
obtaining a permit for construction in a floodway from the Indiana Department
of Natural Resources. Please note that if fill is needed to elevate an
addition above the existing grade, prior approval (construction in a floodway
permit) for the fill is required from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.)



   (B)   (1)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain
Administrator until a permit (when applicable) has been issued by the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources granting approval for construction in a
floodway. Once a permit for construction in a floodway has been issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue the local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions
contained in §§ 152.055 through 152.061 have been met.



      (2)   The floodplain development permit cannot be less
restrictive than the permit for construction in a floodway issued by the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources. However, a community’s more
restrictive regulations (if any) shall take precedence.



   (C)   No development shall be allowed which acting alone or in
combination with existing or future development, will increase the regulatory
flood more than 0.14 of one foot.



   (D)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) the town shall submit the data and request that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency revise the regulatory flood data.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.060  STANDARDS FOR IDENTIFIED FRINGE.



   (A)   If the site is located in an identified fringe, then the
Floodplain Administrator may issue the local floodplain development permit
provided the provisions contained in §§ 152.055 through 152.061 have been
met.



   (B)   The key provision is that the top of the lowest floor of any
new or substantially improved structure shall be at or above the FPG.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.061  STANDARDS FOR SFHAS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
AND/OR FLOODWAYS/FRINGES.



   (A)   Drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square
mile:



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined, and the
drainage area upstream of the site is greater than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to forward the
application, along with all pertinent plans and specifications, to the
Indiana Department of Natural Resources for review and comment;



      (2)   No action shall be taken by the Floodplain Administrator
until either a permit for construction in a floodway or a floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment citing the 100-year flood elevation and the
recommended flood protection grade has been received from the Indiana
Department of Natural Resources; and



      (3)   Once the Floodplain Administrator has received the
proper permit for construction in a floodway or floodplain
analysis/regulatory assessment approving the proposed development, a
floodplain development permit may be issued provided the conditions of the
floodplain development permit are not less restrictive than the conditions
received from the Indiana Department of Natural Resources and the provisions
contained in §§ 152.055 through 152.061 have been met.



   (B)   Drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square
mile:



      (1)   If the site is in an identified floodplain where the
limits of the floodway and fringe have not yet been determined and the
drainage area upstream of the site is less than one square mile, the
Floodplain Administrator shall require the applicant to provide an
engineering analysis showing the limits of the floodway, fringe and 100-year
flood elevation for the site; and



      (2)   Upon receipt, the Floodplain Administrator may issue the
local floodplain development permit, provided the provisions contained in
§§ 152.055 through 152.061 have been met.



   (C)   The total cumulative effect of the proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the regulatory flood more than 0.14 of one foot and will not
increase flood damages or potential flood damages.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



VARIANCE PROCEDURES



§ 152.075  DESIGNATION OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by Town Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.076  DUTIES OF VARIANCE AND APPEALS BOARD.



   The Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in
any requirement, decision or determination is made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. Any
person aggrieved by the decision of the Board may appeal such decision to the
County Circuit Court, as provided by statute.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.077  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   In passing upon such applications, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:



   (A)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;



   (B)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;



   (C)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (D)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;



   (E)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



   (F)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



   (G)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program for that area;



   (H)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (I)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment of transport of the floodwaters at the site; and



   (J) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.078  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances shall only be issued when there is:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship; and



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.



   (B)   No variance for a residential use within a floodway subject to
§§ 152.059 or 152.061(A) may be granted.



   (C)   Any variance granted in a floodway subject to §§ 152.059 or
152.061(A) will require a permit from the Indiana Department of Natural
Resources.



   (D)   Variances to the provisions for flood hazard reduction of §
§§ 152.059 may be granted only when a new structure is to be located on a
lot of one-half acre or less in size, contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the flood protection grade.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (F)   Variances may be granted for the reconstruction or restoration
of any structure individually listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Indiana State Register of Historic Sites and Structures.



   (G)   Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and
the elevation to which the lowest floor is to be built and stating that the
cost of the flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (See § 152.079.)



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency or the Indiana Department of Natural Resources upon request. (See §
152.079.)



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.079  VARIANCE NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;
and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall by recorded by the
Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.



   (B)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such
variances issued in the community’s biennial report submission to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.080  HISTORIC STRUCTURE.



   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an “historic
structure” and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.081  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.



   Upon the consideration of the factors listed in §§ 152.075 through
152.080, and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of a floodplain development permit
or conditions of a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter. All violations shall be considered a common nuisance and be treated
as such in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   All violations shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$2,500.



      (1)   A separate offense shall be deemed to occur for each day
the violation continues to exist.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 25-2009, passed 8-24-2009)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE



Section



   153.01   Subdivision Control Ordinance



   Appendix A:   Subdivision Control Ordinance



§ 153.01  SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   The Subdivision Control Ordinance of the town (Ord. 22-97), and all
amending legislation, is set forth in Appendix A of this chapter.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed
10-9-2006)



CH. 153, APPENDIX A:  SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE



Section



Article 1. Basic Provisions



   1.1   Title



   1.2   Authority



   1.3   Purpose



   1.4   Effective date



   1.5   Repealer



   1.6   Severability



   1.7   Exclusion



   1.8   Interpretation



   1.9   Jurisdiction



   1.10   Findings



   1.11   Private provisions



   1.12   Saving provision



   1.13   Transition rules for applications for primary plat approval,
secondary plat approval or the vacation of plats or parts of plats



   1.14   Amendments



   1.15   Compliance



   1.16   Definitions



   1.17   Improvement location permits



   1.18   Recording required for issuance of an improvement location
permit



   1.19   Incorporation by reference



   1.20   Appeals



Article 2.1. General Procedures



   2.1A   Conceptual plat review



   2.1B   Filing for primary plat approval



   2.1C   Filing for secondary plat approval



   2.1D   Special provision for nonresidential incremental subdivisions



   2.1E   Recording and filing of recorded secondary plat



   2.1F   Special provisions for the amendment of a secondary plat



Article 2.2. Required Plans



   2.2   Required plans



   2.2A   General



   2.2B   Sketch plans for conceptual plat review



   2.2C   Plans for primary plat approval of major residential
subdivisions



   2.2D   Plans required for primary plat approval of minor residential
subdivisions



   2.2E   Plans for primary plat approval of nonresidential subdivisions



   2.2F   Plans required for primary approval of nonresidential
incremental subdivisions



   2.2G   Plans for secondary approval of subdivisions



   2.2H   Construction plans



   2.2I   Plans for amended secondary approval of subdivisions



Article 2.3. Completion and Maintenance of Improvements



   2.3   Completion and maintenance of improvements



   2.3A   Completion of improvements, installations and lot improvements



   2.3B   Surety for improvements, installations and lot improvements



   2.3C   Proof of compliance



   2.3D   Completion letter



   2.3E   Maintenance bond



   2.3F   Use of bond funds



   2.3G   Deferral or waiver of required improvements



   2.3H   Approval of construction plans



Article 3.1: General Improvements



   3.1   General improvements



Article 3.2. Lots



   3.2A   Lot arrangement



   3.2B   Block and lot numbering



   3.2C   Lot dimensions



   3.2D   Lot orientation



   3.2E   Double frontage lots



   3.2F   Triple frontage lots



   3.2G   Lot access



   3.2H   Lot drainage



   3.2I   Debris and waste



   3.2J   Soil preservation, final grading and lawn preparation



   3.2K   Waterbodies and watercourses



   3.2L   Fencing



   3.2M   Building setback lines



   3.2N   Lot addressing



Article 3.3. Streets



   3.3A   Classification



   3.3B   General requirements for street design



   3.3C   Design standards for all public streets



   3.3D   Excess right-of-way



   3.3E   Bridges



   3.3F   Design standards for all private streets



   Table 3.3-A:  Minimum Design Standards for Streets



Article 3.4. Sidewalks



   3.4A   Sidewalk location



   3.4B   Pedestrian/bike path alternative



   3.4C   Sidewalks and pedestrian/bike path standards



   3.4D   Pedestrian access easements



Article 3.5. Monumentation



   3.5   Monumentation



   3.5A   Street monuments



   3.5B   Subdivision boundary monuments



   3.5C   Lot monuments



Article 3.6. Drainage



   3.6A   General drainage requirements



   3.6B   Nature of storm water facilities



   3.6C   Dedication of drainage easements



   3.6D   Connection to town drainage utilities



   3.6E   Maintenance responsibility for detention/retention facilities



Article 3.7. Water Facilities



   3.7A   General requirements



   3.7B   Individual wells and central water system



Article 3.8. Sewage Facilities



   3.8A   General requirements



   3.8B   Individual disposal system requirements



   3.8C   Connection to town sanitary sewer system



Article 3.9. Utilities



   3.9A   Underground utility location required



   3.9B   Utility easements



Article 3.10. Public Sites



   3.10   Public sites



Article 4. Waivers



   4.1   General



   4.2   Waivers of Subdivision Control Ordinance regulations



   4.3   Waiver guidelines



   4.4   Procedures for review of waiver requests



   4.5   Jurisdiction of waivers



Article V. Vacation of Land in a Plat



   5.1   Jurisdiction



   5.2   Approval of a vacation of land in a plat by the Plan Commission



   5.3   Disapproval of a vacation of land in a plat



   5.4   Appeals



   Form A:  Performance bond



   Form B:  Irrevocable letter of credit



   Form C:  Maintenance bond



   Form D:  Release of performance bond



   Form E:  Release of irrevocable letter of credit



   Form F:  Release of maintenance bond



   Form G:  Letter of compliance



   Form H:  Completion letter



   Form I:  Dedication statement



   Form J:  Surveyor certification



   Form K:  Plan Commission approval



   Form L:  Findings of fact



ARTICLE 1. BASIC PROVISIONS



§ 1.1  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall hereinafter be known and cited as “Town of
Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.2  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained
in I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.



   (B)   Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a
section of the Indiana Code and that section is later amended or superseded,
this ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the
section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.3  PURPOSE.



   In adopting this ordinance, the Town Council is acting for the purpose
of:



   (A)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and general welfare;



   (B)   Guiding the future development of the town in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan and related policies and objectives;



   (C)   Securing adequate light, air, convenience of access, and
safety from fire, flood and other danger;



   (D)   Lessening or avoiding congestion in public ways;



   (E)   Providing adequate and efficient public and private facilities
and the conservation of natural resources;



   (F)   Providing for the safety, comfort and soundness of the built
environment; and



   (G)   Otherwise accomplishing the purposes of I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.4  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This ordinance shall be effective at 12:01 a.m., on February 1, 1998.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.5  REPEALER.



   The Plainfield Subdivision Regulations for the town, as adopted by the
Town Council of the town, on April 10, 1989, as Ord. 9-89, and all amendments
thereto, are repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.6  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are
severable and, if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases of this ordinance because the same would have been enacted
without the incorporation into this ordinance of such unconstitutional or
invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.7  EXCLUSION.



   Nothing in this ordinance or in any rules, regulations or orders issued
pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to
authorize any unit of government, legislative body, Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the
exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any agency of the
state, or the use of property owned or occupied by the state or any agency of
the state.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.8  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and the general welfare of
the public. In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between two or more
provisions of this ordinance or any other ordinance of the town, the
provision which imposes the greater or higher or more restrictive standard of
performance shall control.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.9  JURISDICTION.



   The Town Plan Commission shall have exclusive control over the approval
of plats, replats and the vacation of plats or parts of plats involving all
real property located within the corporate boundaries of the town upon:



   (A)   Adoption of this ordinance by the Town Council; and



   (B)   The effective date of this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.10  FINDINGS.



   In adopting this ordinance, the Town Council have paid reasonable
regard to:



   (A)   The general polices and patterns of development set out in the
Comprehensive Plan for the town;



   (B)   Current conditions and the character of current structures and
uses in each zoning district;



   (C)   The conservation of property values throughout the town; and



   (D)   The responsible development and growth of the town.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.11  PRIVATE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.12  SAVING PROVISION.



   Except as shall be expressly provided for in this ordinance, the
adoption of this ordinance shall not:



   (A)   Abate any action pending under, or by virtue of, any prior
Subdivision Control Ordinance;



   (B)   Discontinue, abate, modify or alter any penalty accruing or
about to accrue under, or by virtue of, any prior Subdivision Control
Ordinance;



   (C)   Affect the liability of any person, firm or corporation under,
or by virtue of, any prior Subdivision Control Ordinance;



   (D)   Waive any right of the town under any section or provision of
any prior Subdivision Control Ordinance; or



   (E)   Vacate or annul any rights obtained by any person, firm or
corporation by lawful action of the town under, or by virtue of, any prior
Subdivision Control Ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.13  TRANSITION RULES FOR APPLICATIONS FOR PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL,
SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL OR THE VACATION OF PLATS OR PARTS OF PLATS.



   Any application for primary plat approval, secondary plat approval or
the vacation of plats or parts of plats which has been filed with the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning and which application is
full and complete under the provisions of the Plainfield Subdivision
Regulations (Ord. 9-89, as amended) prior to the effective date of this
ordinance shall continue to be processed to completion pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the Plainfield Subdivision Regulations (Ord. 9-89, as
amended).



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.14  AMENDMENTS.



   In its continuing administration of the purposes set forth in Article
1.3 above, the Town Council may find it reasonable and necessary to propose
and adopt amendments to the text of this ordinance. All such amendments shall
be considered and adopted in compliance with I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq., the
provisions of this ordinance and any applicable rules of procedure
subsequently adopted by the Plan Commission or the Town Council governing
such procedures.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.15  COMPLIANCE.



   Compliance with the terms and provision of this ordinance shall be a
prerequisite for the use and development of real property within the town.
Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall be
deemed to be a civil zoning violation enforceable by the Plan Commission as
provided for in I.C. 36-7-4 et seq. and Article XII of the Plainfield Zoning
Ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.16  DEFINITIONS.



   The interpretation of terms or words and the definition of terms or
words contained in this ordinance shall be in accordance with Article XIII:
Definitions of the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance, as the same may be amended
from time to time, which Article is hereby incorporated into and made a part
of this ordinance by this reference.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.17  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.



   No improvement location permit shall be issued for any building,
structure or improvement unless the location of the building, structure or
improvement conforms with the applicable provisions of the Plainfield Zoning
Ordinance and this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.18  RECORDING REQUIRED FOR ISSUANCE OF AN IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   (A)   No improvement location permit for any building, structure or
improvement shall be issued for any lot within a subdivision prior to a copy
of the properly signed and recorded secondary plat of that subdivision being
filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning.



   (B)   Exception: a conditional improvement location permit and
certificate of zoning compliance for the construction and use of a permitted
temporary use (including a model home, sales office, construction office or
similar related use) within the real estate affected by a subdivision may be
issued by the Director after all construction plans for required improvements
have been approved by the town. If the temporary use is a model home, the
model home shall not be converted to a residential use prior to the
installation, inspection and approval of all required improvements that
directly or indirectly affect the model home.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.19  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Throughout the various articles of this ordinance, reference is made to
other regulations of the town, and each such regulations is hereby
incorporated by this reference into this ordinance. Two copies of each such
regulation of the town are on file in the office of the Clerk-Treasurer and
are available for public inspection.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 1.20  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Plan Commission relating to
the Subdivision Control Ordinance may appeal said decision as provided by
state law. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the
decision upon which the grievance is based.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 2.1. GENERAL PROCEDURES



§ 2.1A  CONCEPTUAL PLAT REVIEW.



      (1)   A pre-filing conference with staff to perform a
conceptual plat review is required prior to filing for primary plat approval
for all nonresidential incremental subdivisions. A pre-filing conference,
however, is not required prior to filing for primary plat approval for all
other subdivisions.



      (2)   At a pre-filing conference to perform a conceptual plat
review, the subdivider shall provide four copies of a preliminary sketch plan
capable of depicting the conceptual layout of the major features of the
proposed subdivision (streets, drainage features, water lines, sewer lines
and other utility services). Staff may take up to ten business days to review
the proposed sketch plan and provide comments back to the subdivider. The
subdivider is encouraged to incorporate the comments received from staff into
the design of the subdivision prior to filing for primary plat approval.



      (3)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance to
the contrary, neither the staff’s conceptual plat review of the proposed
sketch plan submitted at a pre-filing conference nor staff’s comments to
the petitioner relating thereto shall be considered a denial, approval or
decision concerning the proposed primary plat.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.1B  FILING FOR PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL.



      (1)   Subdivision plats shall be initiated by the filing of a
notarized petition, in a form as prescribed by the Department of Planning and
Zoning, signed by the owners or an authorized agent of the owners of the land
involved in the petition. An authorized agent shall file a written statement
with the Department, signed by the owner on a form acceptable to the
Department, at the time of filing a petition which authorizes the agent to
act on the owner’s behalf.



      (2)   Petitions for primary plat approval shall be filed with
the Department of Planning and Zoning no later than 12:00 noon on the day of
the filing deadline set forth below:



 


Type of Petition

 

Filing Deadline*



Residential subdivisions
 
 


   Minor
 

37 days



   Major
 

60 days



Nonresidential subdivisions
 

60 days



* Note:   The filing deadline shall mean the number of days prior to the
initial hearing before the Plan Commission at which the petition is to be
considered



 



      (3)   Each petition for primary plat approval shall be
accompanied by four folded copies of the primary plat. A copy of the proposed
primary plat shall be submitted to each checkpoint agency prior to filing
with the Department of Planning and Zoning.



      (4)   All petitions shall be on forms provided by the
Department of Planning and Zoning. In addition, site plans, surveys, legal
descriptions, proposed commitments and any other relevant supporting
documentation shall be of a usable scale and quality as specified below.



      (5)   When findings of fact are required by this ordinance,
the petitioner shall prepare proposed detailed written findings of fact which
shall be filed at the time of filing of the petition.



      (6)   All petitions shall specify the approvals requested. Any
items, including proposed waivers of the standards set forth in this
ordinance, even if indicated on the proposed plans, shall not be considered a
part of the request presented to the Plan Commission for its consideration
unless such waivers are specified in the petition.



      (7)   Each petition filed in proper form pursuant to the
guidelines established by the Department of Planning and Zoning shall, within
30 days of filing, be numbered and docketed by the Director for an review by
the Technical Advisory Committee and for initial hearing by the Plan
Commission.



      (8)   After review and comment is received from the members of
the Technical Advisory Committee, the Director shall inform the subdivider of
the review comments. The subdivider shall make revisions to the primary plat,
as appropriate, and resubmit 12 folded copies of the primary plat to the
Director not less than 14 days prior to the date of the Plan Commission
hearing.



      (9)   Standards for approval: primary plats shall only be
approved by the Plan Commission upon determination that the primary plat is
in full compliance with all terms and provisions of this ordinance, the
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance and that:



         (a)   Adequate provisions have been made for regulation
of minimum lot width, minimum lot depth and minimum lot area;



         (b)   Adequate provisions have been made for the widths,
grades, curves and coordination of subdivision public ways with current and
planned public ways; and



         (c)   Adequate provisions have been made for the
extension of water, sewer and other municipal services.



      (10)   Conditions of approval: the Plan Commission may specify
reasonable conditions on the approval of a primary plat related to the
following:



         (a)   The manner in which public ways shall be laid out,
graded and improved. The Plan Commission may determine the need for
additional street rights-of-way and improvements based upon existing plans,
reports or studies undertaken by the Plan Commission, or other county, state
or federal agency’s reports or studies. The Plan Commission may require
additional studies to be done by the subdivider or other professional
consulting firms to determine the need for additional street rights-of-way
and improvements as a result of the proposed development and its impact on
the surrounding areas;



         (b)   A provision for water, sewage and other utility
services;



         (c)   A provision for lot size, number and location;



         (d)   A provision for drainage design; and



         (e)   A provision for other services specified in this
ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.1C  FILING FOR SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL.



      (1)   The secondary plat submitted for approval must:



         (a)   Conform to the primary plat in terms of design and
conditions of approval imposed on the primary plat by the Plan Commission;



         (b)   Be in a form approved for recording by the County
Recorder; and



         (c)   Include the all information specified below for
secondary plats.



      (2)   Authority is hereby delegated to the Director to
administratively grant final approval of a secondary plat in accordance with
the criteria set forth in this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.1D  SPECIAL PROVISION FOR NONRESIDENTIAL INCREMENTAL SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   The secondary plat approval process for nonresidential
incremental subdivisions is intended to provide for the phased approval of
nonresidential lots of a size and configuration required to serve the needs
of development while safeguarding the needs and interests of the public for
proper infrastructure design and installation.



      (2)   Any nonresidential incremental subdivision electing to
not utilize this incremental secondary plat approval process set forth herein
shall be required to follow the full primary and secondary plat approval
process outlined above.



         (a)   Incremental approval process.



            1.   Any subdivider who proposes to utilize the
incremental approval process shall indicate the intention to utilize the
incremental approval process at the pre-filing conference for conceptual plat
review with staff as required below.



            2.   Any subdivision for nonresidential land uses
may be divided into two or more increments or phases for the purpose of
secondary plat approval. In connection with a primary plat approval intending
to utilize the incremental approval, the Plan Commission shall condition its
primary plat approval upon the following requirements:



               a.   All lots created by an incremental
secondary plat shall have either:



                  i.   Direct access to and from a
public street; or



                  ii.   Gain access to and from a public
street across a perpetual recorded access easement through portions of the
real estate included in the primary plat.



               b.   All lots created by an incremental
secondary plat shall either contain within the limits of the incremental
secondary plat or have legal access to adequate infrastructure to accommodate
the fully developed needs of the incremental plat (i.e., storm water
management, sanitary sewer, water, electric, gas, telephone and the like).



            3.   The Plan Commission may impose any other
reasonable conditions on the primary plat approval of a nonresidential
incremental subdivision deemed necessary to assure the orderly development of
the nonresidential incremental subdivision. Such reasonable conditions may
include the completion of, or posting a bond or other surety in lieu thereof
for, improvements necessary to support each incremental secondary plat but
which improvements may not be located within the bounds of the proposed
incremental secondary plat.



         (b)   Improvements in incremental secondary plats. Each
incremental secondary plat shall be considered a separate secondary plat and
the recording of easements, dedication of rights-of-way, infrastructure
improvements or other required improvements proposed in the remaining
sections of the primary plat may be deferred by the subdivider and completed
in connection with the appropriate future incremental secondary plat,
provided, however, the recording of easements, dedication of rights-of-way,
construction of infrastructure improvements or other required improvements
proposed in the primary plat which are determined by the Plan Commission as
required to protect the public health, safety and welfare may be required
prior to approval of the proposed incremental secondary plat.



         (c)   Filing requirements for nonresidential primary
plats proposing to utilize an incremental secondary plat approval process.
Any subdivider who proposes to utilize the incremental secondary plat
approval process shall indicate the intention to utilize the incremental
secondary plat approval process at the pre-filing conference for conceptual
plat review and on the application for a nonresidential primary plat.



         (d)   Review procedures for nonresidential primary plats
proposing incremental secondary plat approval.



            1.   The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan for
the proposed nonresidential subdivision for conceptual plat review by the
staff at a pre-filing conference prior to filing a petition for primary plat
approval with the Plan Commission.



            2.   Staff shall review the sketch plan and shall
notify the subdivider of any comments related to the design or contents of
the sketch plan within ten business days of the submittal for conceptual plat
review.



            3.   Notwithstanding anything contained in this
ordinance to the contrary, neither the staff’s conceptual plat review of
the sketch plan submitted at a pre-filing conference nor staff’s comments
to the petitioner relating thereto shall be considered a denial, approval or
decision concerning the proposed primary plat.



            4.   Petitioner may modify the sketch plan and
file a petition for primary plat approval after the expiration of the ten
business day period referred to above.



         (e)   Incremental secondary plat approval. Incremental
secondary plat approval is hereby delegated to the Director, provided that
any and all conditions imposed by the Plan Commission on the primary plat
have been fully complied with by the subdivider.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.1E  RECORDING AND FILING OF RECORDED SECONDARY PLAT.



   All subdivisions shall follow one of the following procedures in the
recording and filing of recorded secondary plats with the Department of
Planning and Zoning.



      (1)   Completion of improvements prior to recording.



         (a)   After:



            1.   Completion of all required improvements,
installations or lot improvements within a subdivision pursuant to approved
construction plans;



            2.   The submission of “as built” construction
plans;



            3.   The inspection and acceptance of all
improvements, installations or lot improvements by the town; and



            4.   The posting of a maintenance bond for all
improvements, installations or lot improvements, the President and Secretary
of the Plan Commission shall sign and certify the secondary plat of a
subdivision which shall then be recorded in the office of the Recorder of the
county within 30 days of signing.



         (b)   One mylar copy of the recorded secondary plat and
four blueline copies of the recorded secondary plat shall be filed with the
Director within five business days of recording.



      (2)   Surety for improvements prior to recording. After the
posting of surety for required improvements, installations or lot
improvements which is acceptable to the Plan Commission, the President and
Secretary of the Plan Commission shall sign the secondary plat of a
subdivision which shall be recorded in the office of the Recorder of the
county within 30 days of signing. One mylar copy of the recorded secondary
plat and four blueline copies of the recorded secondary plat shall be filed
with the Director within five business days of recording.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.1F  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE AMENDMENT OF A SECONDARY PLAT.



   An administrative procedure is hereby established for the approval of
an amendment to a recorded secondary plat to address minor corrections or
adjustments to a recorded secondary plat where such corrections or
adjustments are consistent with the intent, terms and conditions of the
original primary plan as approved by the Plan Commission.



      (1)   Approval of an amendment to a secondary plat. Approval
of a minor amendment to a secondary plat is hereby delegated to the Director,
provided that:



         (a)   Any and all conditions imposed by the Plan
Commission on the primary plat have been fully complied with by the
subdivider;



         (b)   The nature of the minor amendment is consistent
with the determination of minor amendments set forth below.



      (2)   Procedures. Amendments authorized by this Article 2.1F
shall be filed in the same manner as a secondary plat, including, but not
limited to:



         (a)   Secondary plat application;



         (b)   Filing fees; and



         (c)   Consent of all owners of the land included in the
proposed amendment.



      (3)   Determination of minor amendments. The following
corrections and adjustments to a secondary plat shall be considered minor
amendments and may be approved through the use of the special provisions of
this Article 2.1F:



         (a)   Correction of a typographical error in a legal
description;



         (b)   Correction of a bearing, distance or curve data,
provided such correction does not alter the location or boundary of any lot
or easement;



         (c)   Correction of a misspelling;



         (d)   Correction of an incorrect or missing signature(s);



         (e)   Correction or change of an address assigned to a
lot;



         (f)   Correction or change of an assigned street name;



         (g)   Addition, deletion or modification of a note on a
secondary plat that does not affect the use or enjoyment of a lot;



         (h)   The addition, deletion or modification of the
delineation of a feature (e.g., notations regarding areas subject to the
national flood insurance program);



         (i)   The name of a recorded subdivision;



         (j)   Modification of the function of an easement to
increase the use of the easement (e.g., change of a “sewer easement” to a
general “drainage and utility easement”);



         (k)   The combination of two or more lots to create one
or more lots that are all larger than the original lots being joined;



         (l)   The enlargement of a recorded nonresidential
incremental lot to include abutting land which was part of the applicable
primary plat but which abutting land has not yet been included in a recorded
secondary plat; and



         (m)   The division of one or more nonresidential
incremental lots into two or more nonresidential incremental lots in
compliance with the terms and conditions of:



            1.   The applicable primary plat;



            2.   The terms and condition of the applicable
District; and



            3.   The provisions of Article 2.1D - Special
Provisions for Nonresidential Incremental Subdivisions of this ordinance.



      (4)   Scope of minor amendments. Minor amendments to a
recorded secondary plat may apply to an entire recorded secondary plat or
only that portion of a recorded secondary plat which is impacted by the
amendment.



      (5)   Limitations on amendments. The provisions of this
Article 2.1F shall not be applicable to any of the following changes to a
recorded secondary plat:



         (a)   The vacation of a plat or portion of a plat,
including plat covenants required by the Plan Commission;



         (b)   The vacation of a public place;



         (c)   The vacation of a platted easement;



         (d)   The vacation of a public way or platted
right-of-way; and



         (e)   The vacation of any public lands or public places.



      (6)   Duration of approval. The applicant shall record an
amendment of a secondary plat within 60 days of approval. If the amended
secondary plat is not recorded with the prescribed period, the approval shall
be considered null and void.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE 2.2. REQUIRED PLANS



§ 2.2  REQUIRED PLANS.



   All plans prepared for primary or secondary plat approval shall be
prepared in accordance with the following specifications.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2A  GENERAL.



   If more than one page is used, each page shall be numbered
sequentially. All plans must be legible and of sufficient quality to provide
for quality reproduction or recording.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2B  SKETCH PLANS FOR CONCEPTUAL PLAT REVIEW.



      (1)   A sketch plan submitted for conceptual plat review may
be an engineered drawing or a hand drawn plan, prepared at a useable scale
(typically no smaller than one inch = 100 feet), which depicts:



         (a)   Property boundaries, nearby or adjacent streets,
and surrounding land uses sufficient to clearly identify the location of the
proposed subdivision;



         (b)   Major site features (i.e., streets, easements,
drainage ways, substantial topography, burial grounds, wooded areas, wetlands
or existing structures);



         (c)   Conceptual layouts of proposed streets, lots,
common areas, tree preservation areas, open space, sidewalks (or alternate
plan for pedestrian ways), drainage features and the like;



         (d)   Proposed uses for the lots*;



         (e)   Location, size and capacity of major utility
sources proposed to service the subdivision*;



         (f)   Proposals for street or roadway improvements
required to support the subdivision;



         (g)   Proposed easements necessary to service all lots,
including, but not limited to utilities, drainage features and access;



         (h)   Required setbacks or proposed building lines;



         (i)   Potential for future extension of streets, sewers
and drainage systems to surrounding tracts; and



         (j)   Nature and extent of any development incentives
pursuant to the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance or waivers of the Plainfield
Subdivision Control Ordinance proposed for the subdivision.*



      * Denotes items which may be provided in text form as a
supplement to the sketch plan.



      (2)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive
or relax any of the sketch plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2C  PLANS FOR PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL OF MAJOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   A plan of the proposed primary plat of a major
residential subdivision shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch =
100 feet and shall include:



         (a)   Scale, date and north arrow;



         (b)   Legal description of the real estate to be
subdivided;



         (c)   Area map insert showing the general location of
the proposed subdivision with reference to major streets and section lines as
well as all school district lines and the zoning district properly designated;



         (d)   Name of the subdivision (if a replat of an
existing subdivision), proposed name for the subdivision (which shall not
duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously recorded or any
subdivision plat for which primary approval is still in effect), or name by
which property is locally known;



         (e)   Name, address, telephone number of the owner. If
applicable, name address and telephone number of the agent representing the
owner. Citation of last deed of record conveying title to each parcel
involved in the proposed subdivision, including name of grantor, grantee,
date and recording information;



         (f)   Name, address and telephone number of the
developer and any design professional(s) responsible for the design of the
subdivision, design of public improvements or for surveys;



         (g)   The complete text of any existing covenants on the
property (if applicable);



         (h)   Accurate boundary lines of the proposed
subdivision showing distances, bearings, angles and references to section
corners, township and range lines;



         (i)   Location, width, dimension from the centerline and
name of all existing and proposed public or private streets, access easements
and rights-of-way located on and adjacent to the site;



         (j)   Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of all
existing utility facilities and easements, including, but not limited to,
sanitary sewer, water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and
cable;



         (k)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing
sanitary sewer, water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and
cable utilities;



         (l)   Layout, number and dimensions of all lots with
proposed setback lines;



         (m)   Location, delineation and elevation of all
floodway and floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the subdivision;



         (n)   Proposed finished floor elevation of all building
pads adjacent to or within the floodplain;



         (o)   Drainage plan for all watersheds in and around the
proposed subdivision, indicating the general drainage pattern of streets and
lots, the location of all drainage channels and sub-surface drainage
structures, the proposed method of disposing of all storm water runoff from
the proposed subdivision including data to show that the proposed outlet(s)
are adequate to accommodate the drainage requirements of the subdivision, and
all existing and proposed detention facilities;



         (p)   Names of all legal ditches and streams on or
adjacent to the subdivision;



         (q)   A preliminary erosion control plan for all areas
of site disturbance;



         (r)   Topographic contour every two feet superimposed
upon the proposed subdivision plat; provided, that the Director may require
one-foot intervals on very flat land or permit five-foot intervals on very
steep slopes;



         (s)   Traffic study, if required by the terms and
provisions of Ord. 18-97, “Access Permit Ordinance”, as codified in §§
93.15 through 93.27 of this code of ordinances;



         (t)   All improvements to the street system on-site and
off-site, including measurement of curb radius and taper;



         (u)   Stop sign plan indicating the proposed location of
all stop signs within the proposed subdivision;



         (v)   Sidewalk plan (or alternate plan for pedestrian
ways, when applicable);



         (w)   Preliminary plans and specifications for all
infrastructure improvements and installations required or proposed in the
subdivision;



         (x)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of
all parcels of land proposed to be reserved for park, conservation, wetland,
common area, lake or other similar uses for the use of property owners within
the proposed subdivision;



         (y)   Proposed covenants, commitments, conditions and
restrictions for the subdivision;



         (z)   If the subdivision is to be developed in sections,
an indication of the approximate section boundaries;



         (aa)   A proposed address plan for the subdivision
consistent with the address patterns established for the town and county; and



         (bb)   Any other information requested in writing by the
Director, members of the Technical Advisory Committee or the Plan Commission
deemed important to the development of the subdivision.



      (2)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive
or relax any of the requirements listed above for a primary plat of a major
residential subdivision, as circumstances dictate.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2D  PLANS REQUIRED FOR PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL OF MINOR RESIDENTIAL
SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   A plan of the proposed primary plat of a minor
residential subdivision shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one inch =
100 feet and shall include:



         (a)   Scale, date and north arrow;



         (b)   Legal description of the real estate to be
subdivided;



         (c)   Area map insert showing the general location of
the proposed subdivision with reference to major streets and section lines as
well as all school district lines and zoning districts properly designated;



         (d)   Proposed name of the subdivision;



         (e)   Name, address, telephone number of the owner. If
applicable, name address and telephone number of the agent representing the
owner. Citation of last deed of record conveying title to each parcel
involved in the proposed subdivision, including name of grantor, grantee,
date and recording information;



         (f)   Accurate boundary lines of the proposed
subdivision showing distance, bearings, angles and references to section
corners, township and range lines;



         (g)   Names, centerlines and right-of-way widths of all
existing streets, alleys and easements affecting or providing service to the
proposed subdivision;



         (h)   Layout, number and dimension of all lots with
proposed setback lines;



         (i)   The complete text of any existing covenants on the
property (if applicable);



         (j)   Location, delineation and elevation of all
floodway and floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the subdivision;



         (k)   Location of all existing and proposed utility
facilities and easements, including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer,
water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and cable, if
applicable;



         (l)   All improvements to the street system on-site and
off-site, including measurement of curb radius and taper;



         (m)   Sidewalk plan (or alternate plan for pedestrian
ways, when applicable);



         (n)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of
all parcels of land proposed to be reserved for park, conservation, wetland,
common area, lake or other similar uses for the use of property owners within
the proposed subdivision;



         (o)   Proposed covenants, commitments, conditions and
restrictions for the subdivision;



         (p)   A proposed address plan for the subdivision
consistent with the address patterns established for the town and county; and



         (q)   Any other information requested in writing by the
Director, members of the Technical Advisory Committee or the Plan Commission
deemed important to the development of the subdivision.



      (2)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive
or relax any of the requirements listed above for a primary plat of a minor
residential subdivision, as circumstances dictate.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2E  PLANS FOR PRIMARY PLAT APPROVAL OF NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   A primary plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a
scale no smaller than one inch = 100 feet which includes:



         (a)   Scale, date and north arrow;



         (b)   Legal description of the real estate to be
subdivided;



         (c)   Area map insert showing the general location of
the proposed subdivision with reference to major streets and section lines as
well as all school district lines and zoning district properly designated;



         (d)   Name of the subdivision (if a replat of an
existing subdivision), proposed name for the subdivision (which shall not
duplicate the name of any subdivision plat previously recorded or any
subdivision plat for which primary approval is still in effect) or name by
which property is locally known;



         (e)   Name, address, telephone number of the owner. If
applicable, name address and telephone number of the agent representing the
owner. Citation of last deed of record conveying title to each parcel
involved in the proposed subdivision, including name of grantor, grantee,
date and recording information;



         (f)   Name, address and telephone number of the
developer and any design professional(s) responsible for the design of the
subdivision, design of public improvements or for surveys;



         (g)   The complete text of any existing covenants on the
property (if applicable);



         (h)   Accurate boundary lines of the proposed
subdivision showing distance, bearings, angles and references to section
corners, township and range lines;



         (i)   Location, width, dimension from the centerline and
name of all existing and proposed public or private streets, access easements
and rights-of-way located on and adjacent to the site;



         (j)   Location, sizes, elevations and slopes of all
existing utility facilities and easements, including, but not limited to,
sanitary sewer, water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and
cable;



         (k)   Preliminary proposals for connection with existing
sanitary sewer, water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and
cable utilities;



         (l)   Layout, number and dimension of all lots and out
lots with proposed setback lines;



         (m)   Location, delineation and elevation of all
floodway and floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the subdivision;



         (n)   Proposed finished floor elevation of all building
pads adjacent to or within the floodplain;



         (o)   Drainage plan for all watersheds in and around the
proposed subdivision, indicating the general drainage pattern of streets and
lots, the location of all drainage channels and sub-surface drainage
structures, the proposed method of disposing of all storm water runoff from
the proposed subdivision including data to show that the proposed outlet(s)
are adequate to accommodate the drainage requirements of the subdivision, and
all existing and proposed detention facilities;



         (p)   Names of all legal ditches and streams on or
adjacent to the subdivision;



         (q)   A preliminary erosion control plan for all areas
of site disturbance;



         (r)   Topographic contour every two feet superimposed
upon the proposed subdivision plat; provided, that the Director may require
one-foot intervals on very flat land or permit five-foot intervals on very
steep slopes;



         (s)   Traffic study, if required by the terms and
provisions of Ord. 18-97, “Access Permit Ordinance”, as codified in §§
93.15 through 93.27 of this code of ordinances;



         (t)   All improvements to the street system on-site and
off-site, including measurement of curb radius and taper;



         (u)   Stop sign plan indicating the proposed location of
all stop signs within the proposed subdivision;



         (v)   Sidewalk plan (or alternate plan for pedestrian
ways, when applicable);



         (w)   Preliminary plans and specifications for all
infrastructure improvements and installations required or proposed in the
subdivision;



         (x)   The approximate location, dimensions and area of
all parcels of land proposed to be reserved for park, conservation, wetland,
common area, lake or other similar uses for the use of property owners within
the proposed subdivision;



         (y)   Method and depiction of access for each lot or out
lot (i.e., direct public street, private street, blanket easement or
specifically located easement);



         (z)   Designation of common site facilities to benefit
all lots or out lots (i.e., parking areas, loading areas, interior access
drives, private streets, storm water management, sanitary sewer, water,
electric, gas, telephone, cable and the like);



         (aa)   Proposed covenants, commitments, conditions and
restrictions for the subdivision;



         (bb)   If the subdivision is to be developed in
sections, an indication of the approximate section boundaries;



         (cc)   A proposed address plan for the subdivision
consistent with the address patterns established for the town and county; and



         (dd)   Any other information requested in writing by the
Director, members of the Technical Advisory Committee or the Plan Commission
deemed important to the development of the subdivision.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the requirements listed above for a primary plat of a
nonresidential subdivision, as circumstances dictate.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2F  PLANS REQUIRED FOR PRIMARY APPROVAL OF NONRESIDENTIAL INCREMENTAL
SUBDIVISIONS.



   A primary plat application which proposes to utilize the incremental
secondary plat approval process shall, in addition to the items specified
above for the primary approval of nonresidential subdivisions, include the
following items:



      (1)   An indication of the approximate or conceptual
boundaries of lots or out lots to be developed and submitted for secondary
plat approval on an incremental basis; and



      (2)   Indication of the staging or phasing of the extension of
required improvements and installations to service each lot, out lot or phase
of development, including, but not limited to, public or private street
extensions, storm water management, sanitary sewer, water, electric, gas,
telephone and cable.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2G  PLANS FOR SECONDARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   All sheets shall be of such size as is acceptable for
filing in the office of the County Recorder (no larger than 18 by 24 inches).



      (2)   All plans submitted for secondary plat approval shall be
prepared by a state licensed land surveyor and shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   Name of subdivision (and section number, if
applicable);



         (b)   Name of the surveyor and developer;



         (c)   Surveyor’s stamp, address and phone number on
all pages except pages showing only covenants or special conditions;



         (d)   Scale, date and north arrow;



         (e)   Legal description of the real estate to be
subdivided;



         (f)   Wherever lines are required to have a dimension in
these regulations, the length of all required lines shall be specified in
feet and two decimal places thereof and the value of all required true
bearings shall be specified in degrees, minutes and seconds;



      (7)   Name of each public or private street within and
adjacent to the subdivision. For each street, include lengths and bearings
for the centerline and rights-of-way;



      (8)   Notarized certification by owner(s) of all real estate
subject to the subdivision clearly and precisely stating whether the
improvements contained within the subdivision are to be dedicated to and
maintained by the town, or whether said improvements are to be owned and
maintained by a private entity or owners’ association;



      (9)   Clear outline of any property which is offered for
dedication to public use shall be depicted with all dimensions by lengths and
bearings with the area marked “public”, “common area” or other
appropriate title;



      (10)   The lines of all lots or out lots shall be fully
depicted by lengths and bearings;



      (11)   Any building setback lines in excess of those required
by the Town Zoning Ordinance required for the subdivision;



      (12)   Location, delineation and elevation of all floodway and
floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the subdivision;



      (13)   Proposed finished floor elevation of all building pads
adjacent to or within the floodplain;



      (14)   Names of all legal ditches and streams on or adjacent
to the subdivision;



      (15)   All utility easements as approved by the Plan
Commission;



      (16)   Signature and certification of the President and
Secretary of the Plan Commission on all pages;



      (17)   All covenants, conditions and restrictions that are:



         (a)   Either imposed by the Plan Commission or offered
by the owner; and



         (b)   Which the Plan Commission accepts the right to
enforce.



      (18)   In the case of a re-plat, the recording information of
any previously recorded subdivision shall be shown on the front page of the
plat;



      (19)   For single-family or two-family subdivisions, address
of each lot as approved by the Plan Commission or the Director; and



      (20)   In the case of a secondary plat approval of a lot in a
nonresidential incremental subdivision, one copy of an overall plan for all
real estate contained in the primary plat, updated to show: all previously
approved lots, rights-of-way or easements; and the proposed lot.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2H  CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   Construction plans for all improvements, installations and lot
improvements required by this ordinance, the Plan Commission or other
applicable ordinances of the town, including, but not limited to street base,
street binder, curbs, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, street topcoat, street
signs, sidewalks, monumentation, lot drainage, soil preservation, erosion
control, fencing, debris and waste removal, and final grading and lawn
preparation shall contain the details required for review of such
improvements, installations and lot improvements as specified in Ord. 18-97,
“Access Permit Ordinance”, as codified in §§ 93.15 through 93.27 of
this code of ordinances, Town Standards, Ord. 3-86 , “Sewer Use
Ordinance”, as codified in §§ 51.01 through 51.16 of this code, Ord.
19-97, “Water Use Ordinance”, as codified in §§ 55.01 through 55.16 of
this code, Ord. 17-97, “Drainage and Erosion Control Ordinance”, as
codified in §§ 54.01 through 54.15 of this code, and Ord. 25-2009,
“Management of the Floodplain and Other Areas of Special Flood Hazard in
the Town of Plainfield”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 2.2I  PLANS FOR AMENDED SECONDARY APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISIONS.



   All plan sheets submitted as part of an amended secondary plat
application shall, in addition to the items specified above for secondary
plat approval, include the following information:



      (1)   The name of the subdivision shall begin with the words
“amended secondary plat for                                
          (include section number, if applicable)”; and



      (2)   A note shall be added to each page which identifies or
describes the nature of the amendment.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE 2.3. COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS



§ 2.3  COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   All improvements, installations and lot improvements required by this
ordinance shall either be:



   (A)   Complete; or



   (B)   Assurance for their completion and maintenance shall be
provided as set forth below, for all subdivisions which involve the
dedication and extension of any easement or public improvement, or the
acceptance of any easement or public improvement by the town. Minor
residential subdivisions which do not involve the dedication and extension of
any easement or public improvement shall be exempt from the provisions of
this Article 2.3.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3A  COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS, INSTALLATIONS AND LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   Before the secondary plat is signed by the President and Secretary of
the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall complete, in accordance with the
Plan Commission’s decision and to the satisfaction of the town, all public
improvements (including, but not limited to: street, street signs, sanitary
sewer, storm drainage, sidewalk and water) and lot improvements (including,
but not limited to: erosion control, final grading and soil preservation, lot
drainage, removal of debris and waste, fencing and lawn seeding or sodding),
as required by this ordinance and specified in the secondary plat approved
pursuant to this ordinance, and dedicate the public improvements to the town,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and
public improvements.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3B  SURETY FOR IMPROVEMENTS, INSTALLATIONS AND LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Before the secondary plat is signed by the President and
Secretary of the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall post a performance
bond or irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the Plan
Commission in which the subdivider covenants to complete all required
sanitary sewer, water system, street base, binder and curbs and storm
drainage improvements no later than two years following the date on which the
President and Secretary of the Plan Commission sign and certify the secondary
plat, and to complete all other required improvements, installations and lot
improvements, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, erosion control,
fencing, debris and waste removal, soil preservation, lot drainage, final
grading and lawn preparation, street signs, monumentation and street topcoat
improvements. The subdivider shall covenant to maintain each required
improvement and also shall warrant that all required improvements will be
free from defects for a period of three years following the acceptance by the
town of the dedication of the last completed improvement. The performance
bond shall provide that the covenants contained in the performance bond shall
run with the land and bind all heirs, executors, administrators, successors
and assigns of the subdivider. The performance bond shall contain such other
terms and conditions as agreed to by the subdivider and the Plan Commission.



   (B)   The subdivider shall provide a performance bond or irrevocable
letter of credit before the seal of the Plan Commission is affixed and
attached to the secondary plat.



   (C)   A performance bond shall:



      (1)   Run jointly and severally to the Town Council and the
Plan Commission;



      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 100% of the cost, as
established pursuant to an estimate submitted to and approved by the Town
Engineer and the Director, for the completion of all improvements and
installations required by this ordinance;



      (3)   Provide surety satisfactory to the Plan Commission;



      (4)   Be in effect until compliance with the terms and
provisions of the performance bond and the execution of a written release of
performance bond by the Director;



      (5)   Specify that all improvements and installations shall be
completed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of this
ordinance:



         (a)   For single-family or two-family subdivisions,
prior to the time that single- family or two-family dwellings are upon 90% of
the lots shown upon the secondary plat or within three years after the date
on which the President of the Plan Commission and the Secretary sign said
secondary plat, whichever occurs first; or



         (b)   For multi-family, commercial or industrial
subdivisions, within three years after the date on which the President of the
Plan Commission and the Secretary sign said secondary plat.



      (6)   Provide that upon completion of said improvements and
installations, but prior to acceptance thereof for public maintenance by the
town, the subdivider shall provide a maintenance bond as required by this
ordinance;



      (7)   Said performance bond shall be filed on bond or letter
of credit forms approved for use by the Plan Commission; and



      (8)   The beneficiary of all performance bonds shall be the
Town Council.



   (D)   An irrevocable letter of credit shall:



      (1)   Run jointly and severally to the Town Council and the
Plan Commission;



      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 100% of the cost, as
established pursuant to an estimate submitted to and approved by the Town
Engineer and the Director, for the completion of all improvements and
installations required by this ordinance;



      (3)   Provide surety satisfactory to the Plan Commission;



      (4)   Be in effect until:



         (a)   The execution of a written release of irrevocable
letter of credit by the Director;



         (b)   Compliance with the terms and provisions of this
ordinance;



         (c)   All improvements and installations have been
completed in accordance with the requirements and specifications of this
ordinance:



            1.   For single-family or two-family subdivisions,
prior to the time that single-family or two-family dwellings are upon 90% of
the lots shown upon the secondary plat or within three years after the date
on which the President of the Plan Commission and the Secretary sign said
secondary plat, whichever occurs first; or



            2.   For multi-family, commercial or industrial
subdivisions, within three years after the date on which the President of the
Plan Commission and the Secretary sign said secondary plat.



         (d)   The provision by the subdivider of a maintenance
bond as required by this ordinance prior to acceptance of improvements and
installations for public maintenance by the town.



      (5)   Said irrevocable letter of credit shall be filed on
letter of credit forms approved for use by the Plan Commission; and



      (6)   The beneficiary of all irrevocable letters of credit
shall be the Town Council.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3C  PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.



   Upon completion of all improvements and installations as required by
this ordinance, the subdivider shall furnish the Plan Commission with
appropriate documentation indicating that said improvements, installations
and lot improvements have been constructed, installed and completed in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, the requirements of the
Plan Commission and the provisions of other applicable ordinances of the
town. The Plan Commission shall, by rule, prescribe the procedures for
determining whether all improvements, installations and lot improvements have
been constructed and completed as required by this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3D  COMPLETION LETTER.



   Upon acceptance of a required improvement or installation, the
accepting agency or department of the town shall provide a completion letter
to the subdivider stating that the required improvements and installations
for which that agency or department is responsible have been accepted for
maintenance by the town, subject to the terms of a maintenance bond, as
required below, and shall file a copy of such completion letter with the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3E  MAINTENANCE BOND.



   Upon completion of all required improvements and installations, but
prior to the acceptance of such improvements and installations for public
maintenance, the subdivider shall provide a three year maintenance bond, with
the subdivider or some other person satisfactory to the Plan Commission as
principal, which shall:



      (1)   Run jointly and severally to the Town Council and the
Plan Commission;



      (2)   Be in an amount equal to 10% of the amount of the
performance bond for the improvements and installations subject to the
maintenance bond;



      (3)   Provide surety satisfactory to the Plan Commission;



      (4)   Warrant the workmanship and materials used in the
construction, installation and completion of said improvements and
installations to be of good quality and have been constructed and completed
in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the standards, specifications and
requirements of this ordinance and the satisfactory construction plans and
specifications therefore submitted to the Director of the Department of
Planning and Zoning;



      (5)   Provide that for a period of three years after formal
acceptance, the subdivider shall, at the subdivider’s expense, make all
repairs to said improvements and installations, or the foundations thereof,
which may become necessary by reason of improper workmanship or materials,
but not including any damage to said improvements and installations resulting
from forces or circumstances beyond the control of said subdivider or
occasioned by the inadequacy of the standards, specifications or requirements
of this ordinance;



      (6)   Maintenance bonds shall be filed on forms approved for
use by the Plan Commission; and



      (7)   The beneficiary of all maintenance bonds shall be the
Town Council.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3F  USE OF BOND FUNDS.



   Any funds received from the performance bonds for subdivision
improvements and installations or from the maintenance bonds for the
maintenance of improvements and installations required by this ordinance
shall be used only for the purpose of making improvements, installations or
repair for which said bonds were provided in accordance with the standards,
specifications and this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3G  DEFERRAL OR WAIVER OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The Plan Commission shall have the authority to defer or
waive, in its discretion, at the time of primary plat approval and subject to
any appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all of the public
improvements required by this ordinance which, in the judgement of the Plan
Commission, are:



      (1)   Not required to protect the public health, safety and
general welfare;



      (2)   Inappropriate because of incompatible grades, future
planning, the inadequacy or non-existence of connecting facilities; or



      (3)   Inappropriate for other reasons presented to and agreed
to by the Plan Commission. Any determination to defer or waive the provisions
of any public improvements or installations required by this ordinance shall
be accomplished by way of a motion, approved by a majority vote of the Plan
Commission at a public hearing, which motion shall include the reasons for
the deferral or waiver.



   (B)   When the Plan Commission, in its discretion, determines that a
deferral of an improvement or installation is appropriate, the subdivider
shall post a separate performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit, in an
amount determined by the Plan Commission, guaranteeing completion of the
deferred improvements or installations upon demand by the town.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 2.3H  APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS.



   No construction of any improvement, installation or lot improvement
within a subdivision required by this ordinance, the Plan Commission or any
other applicable ordinance of the town shall commence prior to the approval
of construction plans by the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.1: GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS



§ 3.1  GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   In addition to the requirements established in this ordinance, the
subdivider is required to follow other laws, rules and regulations, which
have been duly adopted under state law, which apply to all subdivision plats.
In particular, the subdivider is required to comply with the following laws,
rules and regulations:



   (A)   All applicable state and local statutory provisions;



   (B)   The Town Zoning Ordinance, Building and Housing Codes, and all
other applicable laws and ordinances of the appropriate jurisdictions;



   (C)   The Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Master Water Plan,
Master Sewer Plan and Capital Improvements Program, including all streets,
drainage systems and parks shown on the Comprehensive Plan;



   (D)   The special requirements of this ordinance and any applicable
rules of the County Health Department and appropriate state agencies;



   (E)   The standards, rules and regulations of the Indiana Department
of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abut a
state highway or frontage street;



   (F)   The standards and specifications adopted by the Town Engineer
and all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the town; and



   (G)   All pertinent standards contained within still valid planning
guides published and adopted by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.2. LOTS



§ 3.2A  LOT ARRANGEMENT.



      (1)   The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing improvement location permits or building permits to build on all
lots in compliance with the Town Zoning Ordinance, Building Code or other
applicable local, state or federal regulations.



      (2)   The design, character, grade, location and orientation
of all lots, shall be appropriate for the uses proposed, and logically
related to existing and proposed topography.



      (3)   Every lot shall have sufficient and adequate access to a
street constructed, or to be constructed, in accordance with the provisions,
standards and specifications of this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2B  BLOCK AND LOT NUMBERING.



      (1)   Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in
alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing
the same name shall be numbered and lettered consecutively throughout the
several additions.



      (2)   All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered.
Out lots shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or
lettered, out lots shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2C  LOT DIMENSIONS.



      (1)   Lot dimensions, including, but not limited to, lot
width, lot depth and lot area, shall comply with the minimum standards of the
applicable zoning ordinance, zoning commitment, variance grant or development
plan approval.



      (2)   Land reserved for any proposed street, drainage pond,
wetland or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be counted in
satisfying the minimum yard and lot area requirements of the Town Zoning
Ordinance.



      (3)   In general, lots shall be arranged so that:



         (a)   Side lot lines are at right angles to street lines
(or radial to curving street lines) unless a deviation from this rule will
give a better street or lot plan;



         (b)   Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to
allow for the erection of buildings while observing the minimum required
front yard setback applicable on each street frontage; and



         (c)   Commercial or industrial lots shall be of adequate
size and configuration to provide for off-street parking, off-street loading,
bufferyards and other applicable requirements of the Town Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2D  LOT ORIENTATION.



   The lot line common to the street right-of-way line shall be the front
lot line. All lots shall, whenever practical, face the front lot line.
Whenever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear lot lines do not
abut the side lot line of an adjacent lot.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2E  DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS.



   Double frontage lots shall be avoided whenever practical. Double
frontage lots may be acceptable when necessary to provide for the separation
of a development and its related access points from the traffic on a
bordering primary or secondary street or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography and orientation affecting the subdivision.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2F  TRIPLE FRONTAGE LOTS.



   Triple frontage lots (i.e., those lots which have frontage on three
streets) shall be prohibited in residential subdivisions unless a waiver a
granted by the Plan Commission.







 



   Single, Double and Triple Frontage Lots



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2G  LOT ACCESS.



      (1)   Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively
from a primary or secondary street. Where a driveway from a primary or
secondary street is determined to be necessary, the Plan Commission may
require that such driveway be developed as a common driveway or frontage
street in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the primary or secondary
street. Where possible, driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to
avoid requiring or encouraging vehicles to back into traffic on primary or
secondary streets.



      (2)   Regulations governing the approval of new or modified
access to public streets shall be in accordance with Ord. 18-97, “Access
Permit Ordinance”, as codified in §§ 93.15 through 93.27 of this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2H  LOT DRAINAGE.



   All lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from
all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm water drainage pattern for the subdivision. Drainage shall be
designed so as to avoid the concentration of storm water runoff from a lot
onto adjacent lots. Each lot owner shall maintain the lot grade, as it
relates to storm water drainage, in compliance with the approved construction
plans.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2I  DEBRIS AND WASTE.



   No junk, rubbish or other waste materials of any kind, whether natural
(i.e., cut trees, debris or rocks) or construction related (i.e., concrete or
building materials) shall be buried in any land at any time, nor shall these
materials be left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the
release of the maintenance bond. No items and materials described above shall
be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of dedication
of public improvements.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2J  SOIL PRESERVATION, FINAL GRADING AND LAWN PREPARATION.



      (1)   No final certificate of zoning compliance shall be
issued until final grading and seeding or sodding has been completed for the
entire lot including the area between the street curb and the sidewalk in
accordance with approved construction plans, except those portions of the lot
covered by buildings, parking areas, interior access drives or other
improvements authorized by improvement location permit, or where the grade
has not been changed and natural vegetation has not been damaged.



      (2)   It is recommended that all lawn areas not provided with
automatic irrigation systems should be seeded or sodded during the planting
seasons of between March 15 and May 15, or between August 15 and September 30
of each year.



      (3)   The Director may issue a temporary certificate of zoning
compliance between October 1 and March 15, or between May 15 and August 15 of
each year conditioned upon the completion of seeding or sodding during the
next planting season.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2K  WATERBODIES AND WATERCOURSES.



   No part of the minimum lot area required under the applicable zoning
ordinance, zoning commitment, variance grant or development plan approval may
be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse separates the
buildable area of the lot from the street by which it has access, provisions
shall be made for the installation of a culvert or other appropriate
structure, of a design approved by the Town Engineer. If a subdivision
contains an existing or to be developed waterbody, watercourse, or portion
thereof, appropriate documentary assurances acceptable to the Plan Commission
shall be provided for the maintenance of such waterbody or watercourse.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2L  FENCING.



   The Plan Commission may, in its discretion, require the subdivider to
install fencing on or around such lot, block, common area or other portion of
a proposed subdivision in order to mitigate a potential hazard. Fencing so
required shall be installed in accordance with standards required by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2M  BUILDING SETBACK LINES.



   Minimum building setback lines shall be regulated by the setback
provisions of the Town Zoning Ordinance applicable to the subdivision.
Setbacks in excess of such zoning ordinance standards may be platted,
however, such excess setback requirements will not be enforced by the Plan
Commission unless such excess setback requirement is part of a zoning
commitment, variance grant or development plan approval.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 3.2N  LOT ADDRESSING.



      (1)   Addresses for all lots within a subdivision shall
conform as closely as practical to the address grid pattern established for
the town. The east/west baseline grid shall be Vine Street. The north/south
baseline grid shall be U.S. 40. Wherever possible, the grid pattern for new
subdivisions shall be laid out so as to reserve one address number for each
20 feet of frontage of a lot. Addresses shall conform to the nearest number
which approximates the location of the proposed driveway, building or
entrance doorway on a lot. Numbers assigned to the west side of north/south
streets and the north side of east/west streets shall be even numbers.
Numbers assigned to east side of north/south streets and the south side of
east/west streets shall be odd numbers.



      (2)   Any areas within the planning jurisdiction of the town
but which falls under the county address system, shall adapt the above
guidelines to the address grid for the county.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 3.3. STREETS



§ 3.3A  CLASSIFICATION.



   All proposed subdivision plats submitted for Plan Commission approval
pursuant to this ordinance shall allocate adequate areas for streets in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and shall designate and label all such
streets thereon in accordance with the street classifications set forth below.



 


Street Classifications





Collector street


Limited access street


Local collector street


Local street


Primary arterial street


Private street


Public street


Secondary arterial street




 



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.3B  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREET DESIGN.



   All streets, whether public or private, shall comply with the following
general requirements for street design.



      (1)   Street names. Streets which are extensions or a
continuation of, or obviously in alignment with, any existing streets, either
constructed or appearing on any validly recorded plat or survey, or valid
plat previously approved by the Plan Commission, shall bear the names of such
existing streets. Names for all other streets shall be sufficiently different
in sound and in spelling from other streets in the town or other nearby areas
so as to avoid confusion.



      (2)   Alleys. Alleys may be proposed in such instances where
the use of alleys was indicated on a development plan approved by the Plan
Commission, or where the development represents an in-fill situation and the
use of alleys would be compatible with the development pattern of the area
surrounding the proposed subdivision.



      (3)   Access to areas abutting thoroughfares. If the proposed
subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial
street, secondary arterial street or limited access street, the street plan
shall provided vehicular access to each lot abutting such streets by one of
the following means:



         (a)   A frontage street running generally parallel to
the primary, secondary or limited access street and whose right-of-way is
separate from the right-of-way of such primary, secondary or limited access
street;



         (b)   A local or collector street running generally
parallel to the primary, secondary or limited access street with the rear of
the lots backing up to the primary, secondary or limited access street and no
access shall be provided to the primary, secondary or limited access street;
or



         (c)   A series of cul-de-sac streets, U-shaped streets
or short loop streets entered from and designed generally at right angles to
a local or collector street running generally parallel to the primary,
secondary or limited access street, with the rear lines of their terminal
lots backing onto the primary, secondary or limited access street.



      (4)   Secondary means of access.



         (a)   Secondary access to a subdivision. Any major
residential subdivision which contains 30 or more lots shall:



            1.   Provide a secondary means of access from an
improved perimeter public street; or



            2.   Provide a divided local collector street as
the means of access from an improved perimeter public street back to a point
of intersection with an internal street network where all lots can be
accessed by more than one direction.







 



   SECONDARY MEANS OF ACCESS



         (b)   Secondary access within a subdivision. Within a
major residential subdivision, no portion of the subdivision shall include
more than 30 lots which cannot be accessed from more than one  direction.



         (c)   Remote secondary access. Any major residential
subdivision which contains 60 or more lots shall provide a remote secondary
means of access which complies with the Town Access Control Ordinance and is
separated from at least one other access point into the subdivision by a
distance apart equal to not less than one-half of the length of the maximum
overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in
a straight line between access points.



         (d)   Exception. In any major residential subdivision
where all dwelling units within the subdivision are served by a residential
sprinkler system in compliance with either:



            1.   NFPA 13 Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems;



            2.   NFPA 13D Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes; or



            3.   NFPA 13R Standard for the Installation of
Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories
in Height, the maximum number of lots which may be developed without being
required to provide a remote secondary means of access shall be increased to
120 lots.



         (e)   Design of remote secondary access.



            1.   A remote secondary means of access may be
designed as:



               a.   A dedicated public street; or



               b.   A gated or un-gated emergency vehicle
access easement providing direct access to an improved perimeter public
street or connecting to a public street in an abutting subdivision which
provides access to an improved perimeter public street.



            2.   If a remote secondary means of access is
provided by way of an emergency vehicle access easement, such emergency
vehicle access easement shall be designed to comply with the requirements for
a “fire apparatus access road”, including having a minimum pavement width
of 20 feet and being constructed of a heavy duty pavement section of asphalt,
concrete or other driving surface approved by the Town Fire Chief or his or
her designee, and capable of supporting an imposed load of fire apparatus
weighing at least 75,000 pounds.



      (5)   Dead end streets. Permanently dead-end streets (except
for cul-de-sac streets provided in compliance with the provisions of this
ordinance) shall be prohibited. A temporary dead-end street may be permitted
in any case in which a street is proposed to be and should logically be
extended beyond the limits of the subdivision, but is not yet constructed
beyond said subdivision limits. The right-of-way of a temporary dead-end
street shall extend to the property line of the subdivision. An adequate
easement for turn-around shall be provided for any such temporary dead-end
street which extends 250 feet or more, with a temporary turn-around provided.
A notation on the plat shall state that the land outside the normal street
right-of-way shall revert to the abutting lots and property owners when the
street is continued, constructed and, if a public street, accepted by the
town.



      (6)   Frontage on improved streets.



         (a)   No subdivision shall be approved unless the area
to be subdivided shall have frontage on and gain access from:



            1.   An existing town, county or state street; or



            2.   A street shown upon a plat approved by the
Plan Commission and recorded in the office of the County Recorder.



         (b)   Such street must be improved as required by the
rules, regulations or specifications of the responsible agency, or be secured
by a performance bond as required by this ordinance, with the width of the
right-of-way and pavement to be in compliance with the thoroughfare and this
ordinance.



      (7)   Grading and improvement plan. Streets shall be graded
and improved to conform with the construction standards and specifications
set forth the town standards and in Table 3.3-A: Minimum Design Standards for
Streets. Such construction standards and specifications shall be indicated on
construction plans required prior to secondary plat approval and shall be
approved as to design and specification by the Town Engineer.



      (8)   Topography and arrangement.



         (a)   Streets shall be appropriately related to site
topography. All streets shall, wherever practical, be arranged so as to
maximize the number of lots located at, or above, the street grades. Street
grades shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A
combination of steep grades and sharp curves shall be avoided wherever
practical.



         (b)   All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as
established in the Thoroughfare Plan.



         (c)   Local streets shall be laid out to conform to as
much as possible to the topography, to discourage use by through traffic, to
permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum
number of streets necessary to provide convenient, safe and efficient access
to the subdivision.



         (d)   Proposed collector streets shall, where
appropriate, be extended to the boundary lines of the subdivision unless such
extension is prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless,
in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the purpose of coordinating with existing street layouts or
providing for the most advantageous development of future tracts.



         (e)   Streets, access drives, driveways, interior access
driveways and interior access drives shall be planned in connection with the
groupings of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of
public or private alleys, truck loading areas and truck maneuvering areas,
walkways, bikeways and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement
between the various types of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



      (9)   Street signs, pavement markings and traffic control
signs. The subdivider shall provide street signs at every street intersection
within the subdivision. The subdivider shall also provide pavement markings
and traffic control signs at required locations. All street signs, pavement
markings and traffic control signs shall conform to the town standards and
the Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways as published by the Indiana Department of Transportation.



      (10)   Street lights. The subdivider shall provide and install
street lights within the subdivision to conform with the town construction
standards and specifications for street lights. Street light plans shall be
approved by the Town Council.



      (11)   Reserve strips. Except where specifically authorized by
the Plan Commission for the purpose of minimizing traffic conflicts with
primary or secondary arterial streets or railroads, the creation of reserve
strips adjacent to the right-of-way which may be used to deny access to a
street shall not be permitted.



      (12)   Arrangement of streets. In order to provide for the
convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient
provision of utilities or where such connection is in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, streets shall be arranged so as to provide for the
continuation of collector streets and larger streets between adjacent
subdivisions.



      (13)   Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets, when approved
by the Plan Commission, shall not normally be located nearer to a subdivision
boundary than 50 feet. All cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with adequate
rights-of-way and pavement width in accordance with the design specifications
of the town construction standards and specifications set forth in the town
standards and Table 3.3-A: Minimum Design Standards for Streets. The Plan
Commission may, however, require the provision of appropriate easements
between the end of the cul-de-sac and the subdivision boundary necessary to
accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian ways or utilities. In no event
shall a cul-de-sac measure more than 800 feet in length, measured from
centerline of an intersecting street (excluding another cul-de-sac) to the
center point of the radius of the turn-around.



      (14)   New perimeter streets. Street systems in new
subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter
half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision,
the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
subdivider. The Plan Commission may authorize a new perimeter street around a
proposed subdivision where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire
required right-of-way width within the boundary of said proposed subdivision.



      (15)   Widening and realignment of existing streets. Where a
subdivision borders an existing narrow street or when the Thoroughfare Plan
indicates plans for realignment or widening of a street that would required
use of some of the land in the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required
to dedicate that portion of such existing street which is contained within
the land subject to the secondary plat of the subdivision to the full width
required by this ordinance, and improve such street as required by the Plan
Commission. Land reserved for any street purposes shall not be counted in
satisfying the minimum yard or lot area requirements of the Town Zoning
Ordinance.



      (16)   Dedication. All public streets shall be dedicated to
the town on the secondary plat free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
by use of the following language: “All streets shown on this plat, and not
heretofore dedicated, are hereby dedicated to the Town of Plainfield,
Indiana”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.3C  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL PUBLIC STREETS.



   In order to provide for streets which are of a suitable location,
width, material and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford
satisfactory access to police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation and
road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate streets so as to compose a
convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, all
streets which are to be dedicated to, and accepted for maintenance by the
town shall be designed and constructed in accordance with:



      (1)   Table 3.3-A: Minimum Design Standards for Streets;



      (2)   Current town standards as approved by the Town Council;



      (3)   Ord. 18-97, “Access Permit Ordinance”, as codified
in §§ 93.15 through 93.27 of this code of ordinances;



      (4)   American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO): A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets
(commonly referred to as the “Green Book”);



      (5)   Indiana Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications; and



      (6)   Indiana Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.3D  EXCESS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Right-of-way widths in excess of those recommended by the Thoroughfare
Plan and required by this ordinance shall be required whenever, due to
topography, additional width is necessary to provide for adequate and stable
earthen side slopes. Such earthen side slopes shall not be in excess of one
foot vertical for each three feet horizontal.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.3E  BRIDGES.



   Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Plan
Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider
without reimbursement from the town. The sharing of expense for the
construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as
determined by the Plan Commission, will be fixed by special agreement between
the town and the subdivider.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.3F  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR ALL PRIVATE STREETS.



   Private streets (which are not intended to be dedicated to or accepted
by the town for maintenance), which have been authorized for use by zoning
commitment, variance grant or development plan approval, shall comply with
the minimum pavement width standards set forth in Article 4.13 of the
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance and the minimum depth and materials standards set
forth in the town standards.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



TABLE 3.3-A:  MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR STREETS.



 


Table 3.3-A: Minimum Design Standards for Streets





 

All Uses

 

Commercial/Industrial Uses

 

Residential Uses





 

Divided Arterial

 

Primary Arterial

 

Secondary Arterial

 

Collector

 

Commercial Use/ Local

 

Industrial Use/Local

 

Collector

 

Local Collector

 

Local






Right-of-way

 

100 ft.

 

80 ft.

 

70 ft.

 

70 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

60 ft.

 

70 ft.

 

60 ft.

 

50 ft.




Pavement width

 

2 @ 24 ft.

 

48 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

36 ft.

 

26 ft.

 

28 ft.

 

36 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

26 ft.




Median

 

16 ft.

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No

 

No




Curb and gutter

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes

 

Yes




Back-to-back of curb

 

2 @ 28 ft.

 

52 ft.

 

44 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

32 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

34 ft.

 

30 ft.




Depth and materials

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)




Sidewalks

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft. (1)

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 6 ft.

 

Yes - 4 ft.




Maximum grade

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

6.0%

 

6.0%

 

6.0%

 

6.0%

 

6.0%

 

6.0 %




Minimum grade (5)

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5 %




Curve radius

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

75 ft.




Length of tangent

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

150 ft.

 

150 ft.

 

100 ft.




Sight distance

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

240 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

240 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

200 ft.




Corner radius

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

40 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

25 ft.

 

20 ft.




Transition curve (3)

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

70 ft./60 ft.

 

70 ft./60 ft.

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

50 ft./4 0 ft.




Cul-de-sac (4)

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

140 ft./120 ft.

 

140 ft./120 ft.

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

100 ft./80 ft.




(1)   Sidewalks not required in I-2, I-3 and I-4 Districts




(2)   Standards as required by Town Engineer or Indiana DOT Design
Standards




(3)   Transition curve listed in terms of radius to right-of-way/back of
curb




(4)   Cul-de-sac listed in terms of diameter of right-of-way/back-to-back
of curb diameter




(5)   Minimum length of vertical curve - 100 ft., but not less than 20 ft.
for each percent of algebraic difference in grade or as required by AASHTO





 



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 40-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE 3.4. SIDEWALKS



§ 3.4A  SIDEWALK LOCATION.



   (A)   Sidewalks shall be located along each side of a street within
the dedicated, non-paved portion of the street right-of-way.



   (B)   Exception: sidewalks shall not be required along local streets
which serve only I-2, I-3 or I-4 Districts.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.4B  PEDESTRIAN/BIKE PATH ALTERNATIVE.



   Under circumstances considered appropriate by the Plan Commission or
when approved for use as part of a development plan approval, an alternative
pedestrian/bike path may be proposed in lieu of sidewalks. Pedestrian/bike
paths shall be a minimum of six feet in width to a maximum of 18 feet in
width and may be located in easements reserved for such use outside of the
street right-of-way.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.4C  SIDEWALKS AND PEDESTRIAN/BIKE PATH STANDARDS.



   (A)   Sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the town
standards.



   (B)   Pedestrian/bike paths may be constructed of concrete, asphalt
or other material approved by the Plan Commission and installed in compliance
with the requirements specified by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.4D  PEDESTRIAN ACCESS EASEMENTS.



   In order to facilitate pedestrian access from streets to schools,
parks, playgrounds or other nearby streets, the Plan Commission may require,
perpetual, unobstructed pedestrian access easements at least 20 feet in
width. Such pedestrian access easements shall be indicated on the secondary
plat.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.5. MONUMENTATION



§ 3.5  MONUMENTATION.



   The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the
subdivision as required by this ordinance and as approved by a state
registered land surveyor to provide interior and exterior control as well as
lot location within the subdivision. The control is to be established so as
to provide a record of the registered land surveyor who is responsible for
the location of the monumentation. All markers installed shall meet the
spirit and intent of this Article while providing specific reference to the
registration number of the survey professional.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.5A  STREET MONUMENTS.



   The subdivider shall have set under the supervision of a registered
land surveyor appropriate permanent monuments at all angle points and
intersections of street centerlines providing horizontal street control
throughout the subdivision. Such permanent monuments shall be set as soon as
practical after the potential for damage by continued construction activity
has ended. The permanent monuments shall be presented complete and correct in
location at the time of subdivision acceptance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.5B  SUBDIVISION BOUNDARY MONUMENTS.



   The subdivider shall have set under the supervision of a registered
land surveyor appropriate permanent monuments at all corners, angle points or
other horizontal control along the outside boundary of the subdivision. Such
permanent monuments shall be set following the final grading and utility
installation for each development phase or section of the subdivision. The
permanent monuments shall be presented complete and correct in location at
the time of subdivision acceptance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.5C  LOT MONUMENTS.



   The subdivider shall have set under the supervision of a registered
land surveyor appropriate permanent monuments at all lot corners. Such
permanent monuments shall be set prior to the issuance of an improvement
location permit for any building, structure or improvement on the lot. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant for the improvement location
permit to maintain or replace, under the supervision of a state registered
land surveyor, the permanent monuments located at all lot corners that may be
damaged during construction.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.6. DRAINAGE



§ 3.6A  GENERAL DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   The Plan Commission shall not approve any subdivision
which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff
channels or basins.



      (2)   The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system.



      (3)   Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the
rational method, or other methods as approved by the Town Engineer, and a
copy of the design computations shall be submitted along with the
construction plans.



      (4)   Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not
carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of greater that
400 feet on local streets, 300 feet on collector streets, and as indicated by
approved calculations submitted to the Town Engineer based upon a ten year
design storm and maximum spread as provided by the Town Engineer on arterial
streets. Additional inlets shall be required when encroachment of storm water
into the street disrupts traffic under the ten year design storm.



      (5)   The subdivider shall provide a grading plan at a maximum
scale of one inch = 60 feet showing surface water drainage patterns on each
lot and street.



      (6)   The subdivider shall provide storm water conveyance
facilities in accordance with the town standards, Ord. 17-97, “Drainage and
Erosion Control Ordinance” as codified in §§ 54.01 through 54.15 of this
code of ordinances, and the Storm Water Drainage Manual by Christopher B.
Burke, Highway Extension and Research Project for Indiana Counties and
Cities, School of Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 3.6B  NATURE OF STORM WATER FACILITIES.



      (1)   Location.



         (a)   The subdivider may be required by the Plan
Commission to carry away, by pipe or open ditch, any spring or surface water
that may exist, either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the street right-of-way or in
perpetual, unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the town construction standards and
specifications.



         (b)   1.   Whenever a change of land use occurs,
concentrated storm water discharge to adjacent areas shall not be permitted
unless the discharge is conveyed through a suitable drainage feature to:



               a.   An approved outlet within the
right-of-way;



               b.   An existing drainage easement;



               c.   A defined drainageway as approved by
the Town Engineer; or



               d.   An open ditch which appears as a dashed
or solid blue line on the 7.5 Minute Series Topographic Quadrangle Map as
published by the United States Geological Survey.



            2.   The drainage feature used to convey the site
discharge to the approved outlet shall be located in the right-of-way or
easement of appropriate width.



      (2)   Public storm sewers. With the exception of storm water
conveyance along nonresidential local streets within the I-2, I-3 and I-4
Districts, all storm water conveyance within or parallel to and adjacent to
the public right-of-way shall be fully contained in storm sewers with an
adequate and approved outlet. Residential subdivisions containing lots of
less than 15,000 square feet and nonresidential subdivisions shall be
provided with storm sewers to convey all on-site drainage. However, on-site
drainage swales with required conveyance capacity of less than five cubic
feet per second under the ten year post-development design storm may be
allowed.



      (3)   Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert,
storm sewer, open ditch or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be
large enough to convey potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage
area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The minimum conveyance
provided for upstream, off-site drainage areas shall be the runoff resulting
from the 100-year storm over the present state of upstream, off-site drainage
areas. The conveyance provided for upstream waters may be decreased to the
extent that hydrograph routing and detention on land controlled by the
subdivider and dedicated to the town as a drainage easement allows for
decreased capacity; provided, that the runoff resulting from the 100-year
storm is staged less than one foot above the stage on the natural drainage
way at the interface of the development with the upstream drainage area.
Culvert capacities for conveyance under interior local, collector and
arterial streets without roadway overtopping shall be the runoff resulting
from the 25-year, 50-year and 100-year storms respectively over off-site
areas in present state and on-site areas in post development state. Driveway
culvert capacities shall be the capacities required for the street
classification to which the driveway connects. Greater culvert capacity shall
be required to protect the finished floor elevation of buildings from the
post-development 100-year storm when, in the opinion of the design engineer
or the Town Engineer, the finished floor elevation is threatened. It is
recommended that drainage of loading docks or other building features which
are proposed at an elevation lower than adjacent roadways be considered with
respect to culvert drainage impacts.



      (4)   Effect on downstream drainage areas. The release rate of
storm water from development, redevelopment and new construction shall not
exceed the storm water runoff rate from the land in its present state of
development.



      (5)   Areas of poor drainage. Areas which are not in the
floodplain, but which contain soils subject to flooding, may be approved for
subdivision by the Plan Commission, provided that the subdivider fills the
affected areas of said subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place
building sites and streets two feet above the ponding levels.



      (6)   Areas of high seasonal water tables. In areas
characterized by soils having a high seasonal water table as determined by
the County Soil and Water Conservation District, lots shall be limited to
slab type construction unless the Plan Commission determines that appropriate
engineering techniques will be applied to alleviate the subsurface problem.



      (7)   Special flood hazard areas. If any portion of a proposed
subdivision lies within the floodplain, the subdivision shall comply with
Ord. 25-2009, “Management of the Floodplain and Other Areas of Special
Flood Hazard of the Town of Plainfield”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 3.6C  DEDICATION OF DRAINAGE EASEMENTS.



      (1)   General requirements.



         (a)   When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, a storm water easement or drainage
right-of-way shall be provided granting or dedicating to the town said area
in an amount conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and
of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose of
accommodating drainage and providing for the maintenance of the right-of-way.



         (b)   Wherever possible, it is desirable that the
drainage be maintained as an open channel with landscaped banks and adequate
width for maximum potential volume of flow.



         (c)   All storm water easements and drainage
rights-of-way which are to be dedicated to the town on the secondary plat
shall use the following language: “All storm water easements and drainage
rights-of-way shown on this plat are hereby dedicated to the Town of
Plainfield, Indiana”.



      (2)   Drainage easements.



         (a)   Where topography or other conditions are such as
to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within street
rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements for drainage facilities
measuring at least 15 feet in width shall be provided across property outside
of street right-of-way lines. All drainage easements shall provide access to
a public street. Drainage easements shall extend from the street to a natural
watercourse or to other drainage facilities.



         (b)   The subdivider shall dedicate, either in fee or by
drainage or conservation easement to the town, land on both sides of existing
watercourses of a width to be determined by the Plan Commission and, in the
case of legal drains, by the County Drainage Board.



         (c)   When a proposed drainage system will carry water
across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights
satisfactory to the Plan Commission shall have been secured and indicated on
the secondary plat.



         (d)   Low-lying land along watercourses subject to
flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in
areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state
as drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic flooding shall not
be counted in satisfying the minimum yard or lot area requirement of the Town
Zoning Ordinance.



         (e)   All drainage easements shall be indicated on the
secondary plat and which are to be dedicated to the town shall use the
following language: “All drainage easements shown on this plat are hereby
dedicated to the Town of Plainfield, Indiana”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 3.6D  CONNECTION TO TOWN DRAINAGE UTILITIES.



   Whenever practical, all subdivisions within the town shall connect to
drainage utilities provided by the town. In those instances where the Plan
Commission determines that connection to town drainage utilities would pose
an unusual or unnecessary hardship at the time of development, the Plan
Commission may make a recommendation to the Town Council to approve a
connection to another public or semi-public drainage utility, provided,
however, that all drainage facilities are installed to town standards or
alternative standards approved by the Town Engineer, and, provision is made
in the design and layout of the drainage facilities for connection to the
town drainage utilities at such time as the town extends drainage utility
facilities to the subdivision.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 3.6E  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY FOR DETENTION/RETENTION FACILITIES.



      (1)   The subdivider shall be responsible for the maintenance
of all detention and retention facilities during construction. After
construction, the owner of the real estate shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all detention and retention facilities.



      (2)   Assignment of the responsibility for maintaining a
detention or retention facility which serves more than one lot or land
holding shall be permitted only where:



         (a)   Such assignment of maintenance responsibility for
the detention or retention facilities has been documented by properly
executed and recorded covenants or deed restrictions; or



         (b)   A public body is informed of the desire to have
public maintenance of the detention or retention facilities at the time of
filing for primary plat approval, the final drainage plans are approved by
such public body prior to construction, and the public body formally accepts
the maintenance responsibility for the detention or retention facilities.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



ARTICLE 3.7. WATER FACILITIES



§ 3.7A  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   The subdivider shall take all actions necessary to
extend or create a water supply system capable of providing for domestic
water use and fire protection.



      (2)   All mainline water mains, whether public or private,
shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter, provided, however, a dead-end
mainline water main serving a permanent residential cul-de-sac street which
is less than 400 feet in length and which serves no more than 12 equivalent
dwelling units may be six inches in diameter.



      (3)   Water capacity allocations shall be approved by the Town
Council.



      (4)   The location of all fire hydrants, water supply
improvements and boundary lines of proposed districts indicating all
improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the primary plat and
the cost of installing all fire hydrants and water supply improvements shall
be included in the performance bond furnished by the subdivider.



      (5)   Fire hydrants with isolation valves shall be provided
along all water mains at a spacing of every 350 feet to 450 feet. Actual
spacing shall be determined by the Town Engineer, Superintendent of Public
Works for the town and Town Fire Chief based upon the land use being served
and the physical characteristics of the land and buildings served.



      (6)   All water easements which are to be dedicated to the
town on the secondary plat shall use the following language: “All water
easements shown on this plat are hereby dedicated to the Town of Plainfield,
Indiana”.



      (7)   The subdivider shall provide water facilities in
accordance with the standards set forth in the town standards, Ord. 19-97,
“Water Use Ordinance”, as codified in §§ 55.01 through 55.16 of this
code of ordinances, and the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of
State Public Health and Environmental Managers, Recommended Standards for
Water Facilities. The design shall be approved by the appropriate town,
local, state and federal agencies where required by those agencies.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.7B  INDIVIDUAL WELLS AND CENTRAL WATER SYSTEM.



      (1)   In the AG, RR and R-1 Districts, if a public water
system is not available, the Plan Commission, in its discretion, may approve
the use of individual wells or a central water system provided in such a
manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every
lot in the subdivision. Water sample test results shall be submitted to the
County Health Department for approval.



      (2)   All individual wells and central water systems shall be
approved by the County Health Department or the Indiana State Board of Health
prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit for any building or
structure on a lot.



      (3)   In those instances where the Plan Commission determines
that connection to town water facilities would pose an unusual or unnecessary
hardship at the time of development, the Plan Commission may make a
recommendation to the Town Council to approve a connection to another public
or semi-public water utility, provided, however, that such water facilities
are installed to town standards or alternative standards approved by the Town
Engineer, and provision is made in the design and layout of the water
facilities for connection to the town water facilities at such time as the
town extends public water facilities to the subdivision.



      (4)   The minimum standard for fire protection for residential
areas served by either individual wells or central water systems shall be 500
gallons per minute in excess of the design maximum hourly flow at 20 pounds
per square inch at grade level at all points in the distribution system. A
separate fire protection main served by untreated surface water or ground
water will be considered. Fire hydrants shall not be installed on water mains
which are not capable of delivering the flow and pressure specified by this
division (4).



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.8. SEWAGE FACILITIES



§ 3.8A  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley
right-of-ways or in perpetual, unobstructed easements. When sanitary sewer
facilities are located in easements, access easements to all manholes shall
be provided. Whenever sewer lines in private easements cross a public street
or alley right-of-way, a manhole shall be provided in such public
right-of-way.



      (2)   A minimum horizontal distance of ten feet shall be
maintained between parallel water lines and sewer lines. Perpendicular or
angled crossings of water and sewer lines shall generally be at a spacing of
not less than 18 inches. If the minimum spacing cannot be met, special design
details (such as encasement in sleeves) may be approved by the Town Engineer
and the Superintendent of Public Works for the town.



      (3)   Sanitary sewer capacity allocations shall be approved by
the Town Council.



      (4)   All sanitary sewer easements which are to be dedicated
to the town on the secondary plat shall use the following language: “All
sanitary sewer easements shown on this plat are hereby dedicated to the Town
of Plainfield, Indiana”.



      (5)   The subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer facilities
in accordance with the town standards, Ord. 3-86, “Sewer Use Ordinance”,
as codified in §§ 51.01 through 51.16 of this code of ordinances, and the
Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and
Environmental Managers, Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities. The
design shall be approved by the appropriate town, local, state and federal
agencies where required by those agencies.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.8B  INDIVIDUAL DISPOSAL SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   In the AG, RR and R-1 Districts, if a public or
semi-public sewer system is not available, the Plan Commission, in its
discretion, may approve the use of individual disposal systems for each lot.



      (2)   An individual disposal system shall be approved by the
County Health Department prior to the issuance of an improvement location
permit for any building or structure on a lot.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.8C  CONNECTION TO TOWN SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



      (1)   Sanitary sewer facilities whenever practical, shall
connect to a public sanitary sewer facility provided by the town. In those
instances where the Plan Commission determines that connection to town sewer
facilities would pose an unusual or unnecessary hardship at the time of
development, the Plan Commission may make a recommendation to the Town
Council to approve a connection to another public or semi-public sewer
utility, provided, however, that the sewer facilities are installed to town
standards or alternative standards approved by the Town Engineer, and
provision is made in the design and layout of the sewer facilities for
connection to the town sewer facilities at such time as the town extends
public sewer facilities to the subdivision.



      (2)   All semi-public sanitary sewer systems shall be approved
by the County Health Department or the Indiana State Board of Health prior to
the issuance of an improvement location permit for any building or structure
on a lot.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.9. UTILITIES



§ 3.9A  UNDERGROUND UTILITY LOCATION REQUIRED.



      (1)   All new utility facilities, including, but not limited
to, gas, electric, telephone, and cable television shall be located
underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever practical, existing utility
facilities which are located above ground, except when existing in public
street rights-of-way, shall be removed and placed underground. All utility
facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on
the plans submitted for primary plat approval.



      (2)   Underground service connections at the street property
line shall be provided to each platted lot by the subdivider. At the
discretion of the Plan Commission, the requirement for individual service
connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be
retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same
primary use.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 3.9B  UTILITY EASEMENTS.



      (1)   As a general rule, utility easements shall be located
along all rear lot lines and those side lot lines reasonably necessary to
provide access to the utilities for maintenance and repair. Such combined
utility easements shall provide an aggregate easement width of 20 feet,
unless an alternative size is required by the Town Engineer or the applicable
utility provider.



      (2)   Utility easements located along a street right-of-way
shall have a minimum width of 20 feet, provided, however, the first five feet
of such utility easement measured from the street right-of-way shall be
reserved exclusively for use as a town utility easement for sewer and water.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 3.10. PUBLIC SITES



§ 3.10  PUBLIC SITES.



   (A)   All plats submitted under the provisions of this ordinance
may, subject to Plan Commission approval, allocate adequate areas for park,
school, recreational or other public and semi-public sites, wherever
necessary in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and as required by the
Plan Commission. The location, shape, extent, orientation, use and access to
such areas shall be appropriate for each location based upon existing and
proposed site conditions as well as the needs of the proposed subdivision.
Such areas shall be made available by one of the following methods:



      (1)   Dedication for public use;



      (2)   Reservation for use by the owners of land contained in
the subdivision by deed restriction or covenant which shall specify how and
under what circumstances the area or areas shall be used, developed and
maintained;



      (3)   Reservation for acquisition by a governmental unit or
agency, provided, however, such area shall become available for private use
if after the expiration of a period of one year from the date of recording
the secondary plat:



         (a)   No governmental unit or agency proceeds with such
acquisition within such one-year period; or



         (b)   The appropriate governmental unit releases such
area from reservation and, the secondary plat indicated the nature and extent
of the private use into which such area may be placed if such area is not
used by a governmental unit as specified.



   (B)   Any area so reserved on the secondary plat, shall be clearly
marked on the plat as “Reserved for                          
            Purposes”.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 4. WAIVERS



§ 4.1  GENERAL.



   The Plan Commission may grant waivers to the requirements, standards
and specifications of this ordinance as set forth below.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.2  WAIVERS OF SUBDIVISION CONTROL ORDINANCE REGULATIONS.



   Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these
regulations or the purposes and intent of these regulations may be served to
a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve waivers to the
standards and specifications set forth in this ordinance so that substantial
justice may be done and the public interest served, provided that such
waivers shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of
this ordinance.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.3  WAIVER GUIDELINES.



   The Plan Commission shall not approve waivers unless it shall make
written findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that:



   (A)   The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the
public safety, health or welfare, or injurious to other property;



   (B)   The conditions upon which the request for a waiver is based
are unique to the property for which a waiver is sought and are not
applicable generally to other property;



   (C)   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular
hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere
inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations are carried out;



   (D)   The waiver will not contravene the provisions of the Town
Zoning Ordinance or the Comprehensive Plan; and



   (E)   Where the waiver impacts on the design, construction or
maintenance obligations of public facilities, that the appropriate public
agency has reviewed and approved the proposed development in writing to the
Plan Commission.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.4  PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF WAIVER REQUESTS.



   At the time of filing a petition for primary plat approval for
consideration by the Plan Commission, the petitioner shall submit a detailed
written statement of all waivers of this ordinance sought which shall fully
state the grounds for the request and file proposed detailed written findings
of fact in support of such waiver request. Only those standards and
specifications specifically described in the request may be waived by the
Plan Commission.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.5  JURISDICTION OF WAIVERS.



   (A)   It is not within the powers or jurisdiction of the Board of
Zoning Appeals to grant waivers of any of the regulations of this ordinance.
Only the Plan Commission shall have the authority to waive any of the
regulations in this ordinance.



   (B)   It is not within the powers or jurisdiction of the Plan
Commission to grant a variance of use, a variance of development standards,
or to approve a special exception use. Only the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
have the authority to grant a variance of use, a variance of development
standards, or to approve a special exception use.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE V. VACATION OF LAND IN A PLAT



§ 5.1  JURISDICTION.



   Pursuant to I.C. 36-7-3 et seq., the Plan Commission has jurisdiction
to vacate all or part of a plat pertaining to land owned by the petitioner
while the Town Council has jurisdiction to vacate a public way, public place
or a platted easement.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.2  APPROVAL OF A VACATION OF LAND IN A PLAT BY THE PLAN COMMISSION.



   After a public hearing, the Plan Commission may approve a petition for
the vacation of all or part of a plat. The Plan Commission may impose
reasonable conditions as part of the approval. The Plan Commission shall make
written findings of fact that set forth the reasons for the approval of the
petition. The findings of fact shall be signed by the President of the Plan
Commission. A copy of the findings of fact shall be retained as a part of the
permanent record of the determination.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.3  DISAPPROVAL OF A VACATION OF LAND IN A PLAT.



   After a public hearing, the Plan Commission may disapprove a petition
for the vacation of all or part of a plat. The Plan Commission shall make
written findings of fact that set forth the reasons for the disapproval of
the petition. The findings of fact shall be signed by the President of the
Plan Commission. A copy of the findings of fact shall be retained as a part
of the permanent record of the determination.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.4  APPEALS.



   The approval, disapproval or imposition of a condition on the approval
of the vacation of all or part of a plat is a final decision of the Plan
Commission. The petitioner or an aggrieved party may seek review of the
decision of the Plan Commission as provided by I.C. 36-7-4-1016.



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



FORM A:  PERFORMANCE BOND.




PERFORMANCE BOND FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS




   This Performance Bond (the “Bond”), is hereby presented by (Name of
Subdivider), (the “Principal”), and (Name of Bonding Company), (the
“Surety Company”) to the Town of Plainfield Plan Commission (the “Plan
Commission”) this                           day of        
                  ,               , to induce the President
and Secretary of the Plan Commission to sign the secondary plat of a
subdivision to be known as (Name of Subdivision and Section #, if applicable)
(the “Subdivision”).



   WHEREAS, Principal has petitioned for and conditionally received
primary plat approval by the Plan Commission under Docket No.          
                for the Subdivision; and



   WHEREAS, the installation of improvements required by the Town of
Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance (Plainfield Ordinance No. 21-97)
(the “Subdivision Control Ordinance”) and the installation of
improvements required the Plan Commission as a condition of approval of the
primary plat have not been completed, constructed, and installed as required
by the Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Plan Commission; and



   WHEREAS, Surety Company has pledged surety for the actions of the
Principal related to the completion, construction and installation of the
improvements required by the Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Plan
Commission; and



   WHEREAS, Surety Company and Principal agree that the covenants
contained herein shall (i) run with the land and (ii) jointly and severally,
bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and
assigns to the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana (the
“Town”), and the Plan Commission, jointly and severally, for the
completion, construction and installation of the improvements required by the
Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Plan Commission.



   NOW, THEREFORE, Principal agrees to the following obligations for the
completion, construction and installation of the improvements, installations
and lot improvements related to the development of the Subdivision:



      1.   Principal shall construct, install and complete the
following required improvements, installations, and lot improvements for the
Subdivision in compliance with all requirements, standards and specifications
of the Subdivision Control Ordinance and other applicable Ordinances of the
Town within two (2) years from the date on which the President and Secretary
of the Plan Commission sign and certify the secondary plat.



(Check all items covered by this Bond):



 


[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 



 



      2.   Principal shall also construct, install and complete the
following improvements as required by the Plan Commission within        
                        (_) years from the date on which the
President and Secretary of the Plan Commission sign and certify the secondary
plat:



         a.                                    
                                                   
                      ;



         b.                                    
                                                   
                      ;



         c.                                    
                                                   
                      .



      3.   Principal shall construct, install and complete the
following required improvements, installations, and lot improvements for the
Subdivision in compliance with all requirements, standards and specifications
of the Subdivision Control Ordinance and other applicable Ordinances of the
Town.



         a.   for single family or two family Subdivisions, prior
to the time that single family or two family dwellings are upon ninety (90)
percent of the lots shown upon the secondary plat or within three (3) years
after the date on which the President and Secretary sign and certify the
secondary plat, whichever occurs first, or



         b.   for multifamily, commercial or industrial
Subdivisions, within three (3) years after the date on which the President
and Secretary sign and certify the Secondary Plat.



(Check all items covered by this Bond):



 


[  ]

 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 



 



      4.   Principal shall, upon completion of the improvements,
installations and lot improvements identified in paragraphs one (1.), two
(2.) and three (3.) above, but prior to acceptance thereof for public
maintenance by the Town, provide a three (3) year maintenance bond in the
amount of ten (10) percent of this bond.



         Upon receipt by the Surety Company of written notice from
the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning (the “Director”) of
the Town stating that the Principal has failed to complete, construct and
install the improvements, installations and lot improvements required by the
Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Plan Commission, the Surety Company
shall, at the option and direction of the Town, promptly and at the Surety
Company’s expense take one of the following actions:



      5.   Arrange for the Principal, with consent of the Town, to
perform and complete the construction and installation of the improvements,
installations and lot improvements required by the Subdivision Control
Ordinance and the Plan Commission;



      6.   Undertake to perform and complete the construction and
installation of the improvements, installations and lot improvements required
by the Subdivision Control Ordinance and the Plan Commission; or



      7.   Make payment to the Town in the amount to be incurred by
the Town to complete the construction and installation of the improvements,
installations and lot improvements required by the Subdivision Control
Ordinance and the Plan Commission, and the amount of this Bond shall be
credited for any payments made in good faith by the Surety Company, provided
that the Surety Company’s obligations under this paragraph three (3.) shall
not exceed (written dollar amount of bond) dollars, ($               
    ), in the aggregate.



         If Surety Company does not proceed as provided for above
with reasonable promptness, but in all events within thirty (30) days, the
Surety Company shall be deemed to be in default on this Bond fifteen (15)
days after receipt of an additional written notice from the Director to the
Surety Company demanding that the Surety Company perform its obligations
under this Bond, and the Town shall be entitled to enforce any remedy
available to the Town.



         Upon compliance with the terms and provisions of this Bond
and the execution of a written Release of Performance Bond by the Director,
this Bond shall become null and void.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed this instrument this
                        day of                      
    ,               .



             (Principal)   
                            (Surety Company)   



By:                                                
           By:                                  
               



      Signature                             
 Signature



Printed:                                            
         Printed:                                  
         



Title:                                              
           Title:                                
               



Notice Address:                                  
         Notice Address:                            
   



TOWN OF PLAINFIELD



Approved this                           day of            
              ,               .



By:                                                
                     



Printed:                                              
                 



      Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



      Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM B:  IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.




IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS




   (Name of Bank or Agency) hereby establishes our Irrevocable Letter of
Credit No.                 in favor of the Town of Plainfield, at the
request and for the account of (Name of Subdivider), for any sum or sums not
exceeding (amount of credit) dollars, ($              ), available
upon presentation by the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning of
the Town of Plainfield, or any employee acting under the Director’s
authority, of a letter signed by the President of the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission (the “Plan Commission”) enumerating any and all improvements,
installations, and lot improvements (the “Improvements”) not completed as
required by the Town of Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance (Plainfield
Ordinance No. 21-97) and the Plan Commission for the subdivision known as
(Name of Subdivision and Section #, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”),
Plan Commission Docket No.                        . The
President’s letter shall indicate the estimated cost for completing the
Improvements.



   This Letter of Credit shall be applicable to the following Improvements
(Check all items covered by this Letter):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 




 



   The drafts drawn under this Letter of Credit must state “Drawn under
Letter of Credit No.         of (Name of Subdivider), dated the      
                    day of                           ,
              “. The amounts of the drafts must be noted on the back
of this Letter of Credit by the (Name of Bank or Agency).



   This Letter of Credit is effective as of                    
      day of the                           ,           ,
and shall expire on the                           day of    
                      ,               , provided, however,
such expiration date shall be automatically extended for successive periods
of one (1) year, unless: (i) a Release of Credit is received from the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning of the Town of Plainfield;
or (ii) (Name of Bank or Agency), by certified mail, return receipt
requested, notifies both the Director of the Department of Planning and
Zoning of the Town of Plainfield and (Name of Subdivider) at least ninety
(90) days before the current expiration date, that (Name of Bank or Agency)
has decided not to extend this Letter of Credit beyond the current expiration
date. In the event of such notification by (Name of Bank or Agency), the
credit established by this Letter of Credit shall be available to the Town of
Plainfield upon its sight draft or demand for payment for ninety (90) days
after receipt of such notice by the Town of Plainfield, as shown on the
signed returned receipt.



   The credit established by this Letter of Credit and the obligation to
pay the same shall not be affected by the receivership, bankruptcy or
insolvency of (Name of Subdivider) or the attachment of his/her property. Nor
shall this credit and the obligation to pay the same be affected by any
security agreement between (Name of Subdivider) and (Name of Bank or Agency).



   Whenever this Letter of Credit is drawn on under and in compliance with
the terms of this Letter of Credit, (Name of Bank or Agency) shall pay the
amount of the draft directly to the Plan Commission or in accordance with the
instructions of the Plan Commission.



                                    (Name
of Bank or Agency)



                                    By:
                                                 



                                       �
�  Signature



                                    Printed
:                                            



                                    Title: 
                                               



                                    Date:
                                               



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM C:  MAINTENANCE BOND.




MAINTENANCE BOND FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS




   This Maintenance Bond (the “Bond”), is hereby presented by (Name of
Subdivider), (the “Principal”), and (Name of Bonding Company), (the
“Surety Company”) to the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana
(the “Town”) this                           day of      
                    ,           , to induce the Town to accept
for public maintenance certain improvements, installations, and lot
improvements within the subdivision known as (Name of Subdivision and Section
#, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”).



   WHEREAS, Principal has installed certain improvements, installations,
and lot improvements within the Subdivision, but the following improvements,
installations, and lot improvements have not been accepted for public
maintenance (Check all items covered by this Bond):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 

; and





 



   WHEREAS, Surety Company has pledged surety for the any maintenance
actions required of the Principal related to said improvements,
installations, and lot improvements; and



   WHEREAS, Surety Company and Principal jointly and severally, bind
themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns to
the Town and the Town of Plainfield Plan Commission (the “Plan
Commission”), jointly and severally, for the maintenance of the
above-listed improvements required by the Town of Plainfield Subdivision
Control Ordinance (Plainfield Ordinance No. 21-97) (the “Subdivision
Control Ordinance”) and the Plan Commission, and agree to be held and
firmly bound unto the Town and the Plan Commission.



   WHEREAS, Principal certifies that all improvements, installations, and
lot improvements within the Subdivision have been completed in accordance
with the requirements, standards and specifications of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance, other applicable Ordinances of the Town, and the
construction plans for the Subdivision as approved by the Town.



   NOW, THEREFORE, Principal:



      1.   Warrants the workmanship and materials used in the
construction, installation and completion of said improvements,
installations, and lot improvements to be of good quality and constructed and
completed in a workmanlike manner in accordance with the requirements,
standards and specifications of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, other
applicable Ordinances of the Town, and the construction plans for said
improvements, installations, and lot improvements as approved by the Town; and



      2.   Agrees to maintain said improvements, installations, and
lot improvements, at Principal’s own expense, for a period of three (3)
years after the date on which said improvements, installations, and lot
improvements are accepted for public maintenance by the Town, and shall make
all repairs thereto which may become necessary by reason of improper
workmanship or materials. This maintenance obligation shall not include any
damage to said improvements, installations, and lot improvements which
results from forces or circumstances beyond the control of the Principal or
occasioned by the inadequacy of the standards, specifications and
requirements of the Subdivision Control Ordinance or other applicable
Ordinances of the Town.



         Upon receipt by the Surety Company of written notice from
the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning (the “Director”) of
the Town stating that the Principal has failed to maintain said improvements,
installations, and lot improvements as required by the Subdivision Control
Ordinance, the Plan Commission and this Bond, the Surety Company shall, at
the option and direction of the Town, promptly and at the Surety Company’s
expense take one of the following actions:



      3.   Arrange for the Principal, with consent of the Town, to
maintain the improvements, installations and lot improvements as required by
the Subdivision Control Ordinance, the Plan Commission and this Bond;



      4.   Undertake to maintain the improvements, installations and
lot improvements as required by the Subdivision Control Ordinance, the Plan
Commission and this Bond; or



      5.   Make payment to the Town in the amount to be incurred by
the Town to maintain the improvements, installations and lot improvements as
required by the Subdivision Control Ordinance, the Plan Commission and this
Bond, and the amount of this Bond shall be credited for any payments made in
good faith by the Surety Company, provided that the Surety Company’s
obligations under this paragraph shall not to exceed (written dollar amount
of bond) dollars, ($                    ), in the aggregate.



         If Surety Company does not proceed as provided for above
with reasonable promptness, but in all events within thirty (30) days, the
Surety Company shall be deemed to be in default on this Bond fifteen (15)
days after receipt of an additional written notice from the Director to the
Surety Company demanding that the Surety Company perform its obligations
under this Bond, and the Town shall be entitled to enforce any remedy
available to the Town.



         Upon compliance with the terms and provisions of this Bond
and the execution of a written Release of Maintenance Bond by the Director,
the obligations contained herein shall become null and void.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have executed this instrument this
                        day of                      
    ,               .



             (Principal)   
                            (Surety Company)   



By:                                                
           By:                                  
               



      Signature                             
 Signature



Printed:                                            
         Printed:                                  
         



Title:                                              
           Title:                                
               



Notice Address:                                  
         Notice Address:                            
   



TOWN OF PLAINFIELD



Approved this                           day of            
              ,               .



By:                                                
                     



Printed:                                              
                 



      Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



      Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM D:  RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE BOND.




RELEASE OF PERFORMANCE BOND




   This Release of Performance Bond (the “Release”) is hereby
presented by the Director of the Town of Plainfield to (Name of Subdivider),
(the “Principal”), and (Name of Bonding Company), (the “Surety
Company”) as of this                         day of        
                  ,               .



   WHEREAS, Principal and Surety Company have posted a Performance Bond
for the improvements, installations and lot improvements (the
“Improvements”) required by the Town of Plainfield Subdivision Control
Ordinance (the “Subdivision Control Ordinance”), other applicable
Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield, and the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission (the “Plan Commission”) for the subdivision known as (Name of
Subdivision and Section #, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”); and



   WHEREAS, the Town of Plainfield has received an Letter of Compliance
from the responsible design professional representing that all Improvements
have been constructed and installed in compliance with all requirements,
standards and specifications of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, other
applicable Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield and the Plan Commission
(Check all items to be covered by this Release):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 

; and





 



   WHEREAS, the Town of Plainfield has issued a Completion Letter
indicating that the Town of Plainfield has accepted the above indicated
Improvements for maintenance.



   NOW, THEREFORE, the Performance Bond issued for the above indicated
Improvements is hereby released.



      TOWN OF PLAINFIELD



By:________________________________________



Printed:_____________________________________



      Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



      Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM E:  RELEASE OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT.




RELEASE OF IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT




   This Release of Irrevocable Letter of Credit (the “Release”) is
hereby presented by the Director of the Town of Plainfield to (Name of
Subdivider), (the “Principal”), and (Name of Bank or Agency), (the
“Surety Company”) as of this                         day of
                          ,               .



   WHEREAS, Principal and Surety Company have posted an Irrevocable Letter
of Credit, Letter of Credit No         , in favor of the Town of
Plainfield as surety for the improvements, installations and lot improvements
(the “Improvements”) required by the Town of Plainfield Subdivision
Control Ordinance (the “Subdivision Control Ordinance”), other applicable
Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield, and the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission (the “Plan Commission”) for the subdivision known as (Name of
Subdivision and Section #, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”); and



   WHEREAS, the Town of Plainfield has received an Letter of Compliance
from the responsible design professional representing that all Improvements
have been constructed and installed in compliance with all requirements,
standards and specifications of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, other
applicable Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield and the Plan Commission
(Check all items to be covered by this Release):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 

; and





 



   WHEREAS, the Town of Plainfield has issued a Completion Letter
indicating that the Town of Plainfield has accepted the above indicated
Improvements for maintenance.



   NOW, THEREFORE, the Irrevocable Letter of Credit issued for the above
indicated Improvements is hereby released.



      TOWN OF PLAINFIELD



By:________________________________________



Printed:_____________________________________



      Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



      Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM F:  RELEASE OF MAINTENANCE BOND.




RELEASE OF MAINTENANCE BOND




   This Release of Maintenance Bond (the “Release”) is hereby
presented by the Director of the Town of Plainfield to (Name of Subdivider),
(the “Principal”), and (Name of Bonding Company), (the “Surety
Company”) as of this                         day of        
                  ,               .



   WHEREAS, Principal and Surety Company have posted a Maintenance Bond
for the maintenance of improvements, installations and lot improvements (the
“Improvements”) required by the Town of Plainfield Subdivision Control
Ordinance (the “Subdivision Control Ordinance”), other applicable
Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield, and the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission (the “Plan Commission”) for the subdivision known as (Name of
Subdivision and Section #, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”); and



   WHEREAS, the Bond is applicable to the following Improvements (Check
all items to be covered by this Release):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 

; and





 



   WHEREAS, the Improvements have been maintained at Principal’s own
expense for a period of three (3) years after the date on which said
Improvements were accepted for public maintenance by the Town of Plainfield.



   NOW, THEREFORE, the Maintenance Bond issued for the above indicated
Improvements is hereby released.



      TOWN OF PLAINFIELD



By:________________________________________



Printed:_____________________________________



      Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



      Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM G:  LETTER OF COMPLIANCE.




LETTER OF COMPLIANCE




   The undersigned, being the Subdivider and Contractor responsible for
the construction of certain improvements, installations and lot improvements
(the “Improvements”) for the subdivision known as (Name of Subdivision
and Section #, if applicable) (the “Subdivision”), hereby state that the
following Improvements, to the best of their knowledge and belief, have been
constructed and installed in compliance with all requirements, standards and
specifications of the Town of Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance, other
applicable Ordinances of the Town of Plainfield, and the requirements of the
Town of Plainfield Plan Commission (Check all items covered by this Letter of
Compliance):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 






 



   The undersigned intends that the statements made herein shall be
construed as a representation made for the purpose of inducing the Town of
Plainfield to accept the Improvements for public maintenance and to release
(Name of Subdivider), from the obligations of the Performance Bond for
Subdivision Improvements applicable to the Improvements required for the
Subdivision. The undersigned expressly authorize the Town of Plainfield and
all other persons to rely on such representations.



   NAME OF SUBDIVIDER            NAME OF CONTRACTOR



Signature:                                        
         Signature:                                
         



Printed:                                            
         Printed:                                  
         



Title:                                              
           Title:                                
               



Date:                                                
         Date:                                    
           



FOR TOWN USE ONLY:



Inspections of the Improvements described above were conducted on a periodic
basis and at all critical points in the constructions process. All
Improvements were found to be in compliance with all requirements, standards
and specifications of the Subdivision Control Ordinance, other ordinances of
the Town of Plainfield and the requirements of the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission.



TOWN INSPECTOR



Signature:                                        



Printed:                                            



Title:                                                



Date:                                                



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM H:  COMPLETION LETTER.




COMPLETION LETTER




   This Completion Letter (the “Letter”) is hereby presented by the
Town of Plainfield to (Name of Subdivider), (the “Principal”) this    
                    day of                           ,
              .



   WHEREAS, the Town of Plainfield has received an Letter of Compliance
from the Subdivider and responsible contractor representing that the
following improvements, installations and lot improvements (the
“Improvements”) have been constructed and installed in the subdivision
known as (Name of Subdivision and Section #, if applicable) (the
“Subdivision”) in compliance with all requirements, standards and
specifications of the Town of Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance (the
“Subdivision Control Ordinance”), other applicable Ordinances of the Town
of Plainfield and the Town of Plainfield Plan Commission (Check all items to
be covered by this Letter):



 




[  ]

 
street base
 
[  ]
 
street binder


[  ]
 
curbs
 
[  ]
 
sanitary sewer


[  ]
 
storm drainage
 
[  ]
 
water system


[  ]
 
street topcoat
 
[  ]
 
street signs


[  ]
 
sidewalks
 
[  ]
 
monumentation


[  ]
 
lot drainage
 
[  ]
 
soil preservation


[  ]
 
erosion control
 
[  ]
 
fencing


[  ]
 
debris and waste removal
 
[  ]
 
final grading and lawn preparation


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 
 


[  ]
 
 
 
[  ]
 

; and





 



   NOW, THEREFORE, the Town of Plainfield accepts the Improvements for
maintenance subject to the posting of a Maintenance Bond for the Improvements
by the Principal as required by the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



                                 TOWN OF
PLAINFIELD



                                 By:    
                                             



                                 Printed:  
                                         



                                 Title:  
                                             



cc: Director, Department of Planning and Zoning, Town of Plainfield



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM I:  DEDICATION STATEMENT.




DEDICATION STATEMENT




NOTE:   The following language shall be incorporated into all Plats
presented for secondary plat Approval. Any underlined words in the following
language indicates optional words to be used only in the appropriate
situations. Any blanks (_________ ) used in the following language indicates
information to be provided by the Subdivider or Surveyor.



I/We                                     , do hereby
certify that I/We am/are the Owner(s) of the real property located in the
Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana, according to deed recorded in
Book               , Page               , of the official
records of the Recorder of Hendricks County, Indiana, and further described
as follows:



   (Insert Legal Description of Real Property Here)



Now therefore know all persons by these presence that I/We do hereby lay off,
plat and subdivide said Real Estate in accordance with the within Plat.



This Subdivision shall be known as ____________________             
                                              , an
addition to the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana.



All streets, alleys, ways and public open spaces shown on the within Plat not
heretofore dedicated to the public are hereby dedicated to the Town of
Plainfield for public use and maintenance, save and except for those streets,
alleys, ways and open spaces specifically identified as private on the plat
and approved by the Plan Commission to be privately owned, operated and
maintained.



Front building setback lines are hereby established as shown on the within
Plat, between which lines and street right-of-way lines no building or
structure (except for parking areas, driveways and interior access drives)
shall be erected or maintained.



All storm water, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer easements shown on this
Plat are hereby dedicated to the Town of Plainfield, save and except for
those storm water, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer easements specifically
identified as private on the plat and approved by the Plan Commission to be
privately owned, operated and maintained. Within these easements, no
structure, planting or other material shall be placed or permitted to remain
which may damage or interfere with the installation and maintenance of
utilities. The easement area of each Lot shall be continuously maintained as
a yard area by the Owner of the Lot, except for those improvements which are
the responsibility of a public authority or utility company to maintain.



Within drainage easements, no structure, planting or other material shall be
placed or permitted to remain which may change the direction of flow or
drainage channels in the easements or which may obstruct or retard the flow
of water through drainage channels in the easements. The drainage easement of
each Lot and all improvements in the drainage easement, including slope and
drainage pattern, shall be continuously maintained as a yard area by the
Owner of the Lot, except for those improvements which are the responsibility
of a public authority or utility to maintain.



The first five (5) feet of any utility easement which is located along a
street right-of-way shall be reserved for use as a Town of Plainfield utility
easement for sewer and water, and shall be used for the installation and
maintenance of fire hydrants, meter pits, and similar appurtenances approved
by the Town Engineer. All other utility companies shall have the right to
cross the first five (5) feet of said utility easement at or near
perpendicular. No other utilities or appurtenances thereto shall be installed
within the first five (5) feet of said utility easement without the written
approval of the Town Engineer.



Any private restrictive covenants, conditions or restrictions to run with the
Subdivision shall be entered here.



The foregoing plat covenants shall run with the land and shall be binding on
all parties and all persons claiming under them for a period of twenty-five
(25) years from this                          day of       
                    ,                , at which time said
plat covenants shall automatically be extended for successive periods of ten
(10) years unless by vote of a majority of the then Owners of the building
site covered by these plat covenants it is agreed to change such plat
covenants in whole or in part.



Invalidation of any one of the foregoing plat covenants by judgement or court
order shall in no way affect any of the other plat covenants which shall
remain in full force and effect.



The right to enforce these covenants by injunction, together with the right
to cause the removal by due process of law of any structure or part thereof
erected or maintained in violation hereof, is hereby dedicated to the public,
and reserved to the several Owners of the several Lots in the Subdivision and
to their heirs and assigns.



In Witness whereof, Owner has executed this instrument this            
        day of                         ,              
.



(Name of Organization If Other Than an Individual(s))



Signature:                                          



Printed:                                            



Title:                                                



   (Individual Acknowledgment)



State of                         )



         ) ss:



County of                       )



   Before me, a notary public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared                     , Owner(s) of the Real Estate, who
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been
duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and notarial seal this                      
  day of                           ,               .



                                    Signatu
re:                                          



                                    Printed
:                                            



County of Residence                                      
     



My Commission Expires                                      



   (Organization Acknowledgment)



State of                         )



         ) ss:



County of                       )



   Before me, a notary public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared                     , the                      
                  of                                
        , a(n)                                      
    , Owner(s) of the Real Estate, who acknowledged the execution of the
foregoing instrument in such capacity and who, having been duly sworn, stated
that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and notarial seal this                      
  day of                           ,               .



                                    Signatu
re:                                          



                                    Printed
:                                            



County of Residence                                      
     



My Commission Expires                                      



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)



FORM J:  SURVEYOR CERTIFICATION.




SURVEYOR CERTIFICATION




NOTE:   The following language shall be incorporated into all Plats
presented for secondary plat Approval. Any underlined words in the following
language indicates optional words to be used only in the appropriate
situations. Any blanks (_________) used in the following language indicates
information to be provided by the Surveyor.



I,                                                  
                , hereby certify that:



The within Plat is a representation of the lands surveyed, subdivided and
platted under my direct supervision and control and that it is true and
correct to the best of my knowledge and belief;



   (Insert Legal Description of Real Estate Here)



This Subdivision consists of                   Lots, numbered   
            through              , together with Common Areas,
Streets, Easements and Public Ways as shown on the within Plat;



The size of the Lots, Common Areas and Widths of Streets and Easements is/are
shown in figures denoting feet and decimal parts thereof;



All monuments shown on the within Plat actually exist and their location,
size, type and material are accurately shown;



The boundary survey of this plat is in conformity with 865 I.A.C. 1-12; and



The within Plat complies with the provisions of the Plainfield Subdivision
Control Ordinance.



Witness by signature this                         day of      
                    ,               .



___________________________________



Signature



Printed:                                              
         



Registered Land Surveyor - Indiana - #            



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM K:  PLAN COMMISSION APPROVAL.




PLAN COMMISSION APPROVAL




The Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning has reviewed this Plat
for technical conformity with the standards fixed in the Plainfield Zoning
Ordinance and the Plainfield Subdivision Control Ordinance and hereby
certifies that this Plat meets all of the minimum requirements of the
applicable ordinances and requirements of the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks
County, Indiana.



______________________________________



Printed:                                              
                 



   Director, Department of Planning and Zoning



Date:                                                
                   



We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that under authority provided by the
Indiana Planning Law, I.C. 36-7-4 et seq., enacted by the General Assembly of
the State of Indiana, and all acts amendatory thereto, the Plat depicted
herein is the Plat which was given approval by the Town of Plainfield Plan
Commission at a meeting held on the                         day
of                           ,               .



Witness by signature this                         day of      
                    ,               .



TOWN OF PLAINFIELD PLAN COMMISSION



Signature:                                        
         Signature:                                
         



Printed:                                            
         Printed:                                  
         



Title:       President                                 
      Title:       Secretary                           



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997)



FORM L:  FINDINGS OF FACT.



Address:                                          
            File:                                
         




FINDINGS OF FACT





Petition for Vacation of Land in a Plat




The Plan Commission may approve/disapprove a petition for the vacation of all
or part of a plat upon finding that:



      1.   The conditions in the platted area have/have not changed
so as to defeat the original purpose of the plat because:



 



 



      2.   It is/is not in the public interest to vacate all or part
of the plat because:



 



 



      3.   The value of that part of the land in the plat not owned
by the Petitioner will/will not be diminished by vacation because:



 



 




PLAINFIELD PLAN COMMISSION




The VACATION is hereby Approved/Disapproved this                  
      day of                           ,   20         
  .



_______________________________



Mitchell P. Haase



President, Plainfield Plan Commission



(Ord. 22-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 4-2000, passed - -2000)




CHAPTER 154:  ZONING ORDINANCE



Section



   154.01   Zoning Ordinance



   Appendix A:  Zoning Ordinance



§ 154.01  ZONING ORDINANCE.



   The Zoning Ordinance of the town (Ord. 21-97), and all amending
legislation, is set forth in as Appendix A of this chapter.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



CH. 154, APPENDIX A:  ZONING ORDINANCE



Section



Article 1. Basic Provisions



   1.1   Title



   1.2   Authority



   1.3   Purpose



   1.4   Effective date



   1.5   Repealer



   1.6   Severability



   1.7   Exclusion



   1.8   Interpretation



   1.9   Jurisdiction



   1.10   Subdivision of land



   1.11   Scope and application



   1.12   Findings



   1.13   Private provisions



   1.14   Determination of land uses not listed in this Zoning Ordinance



   1.15   Saving provision



   1.16   Transition rules



   1.17   Amendments



   1.18   Compliance



   1.19   Exemptions for transportation, communications, electric, gas,
water and sanitary services



   1.20   General regulations for residential districts



Article 2.1. RR: Rural Residential District



   2.1   Intent



   2.1A   Permitted uses



   2.1B   Development standards



Article 2.2. R-1: Low Density Residential District



   2.2   Intent



   2.2A   Permitted uses



   2.2B   Development standards



   2.2C   Development incentives



Article 2.3. R-2: Low Density Residential District



   2.3   Intent



   2.3A   Permitted uses



   2.3B   Development standards



   2.3C   Development incentives



Article 2.4. R-3: Medium Density Residential District



   2.4   Intent



   2.4A   Permitted uses



   2.4B   Development standards



   2.4C   Development incentives



Article 2.5. R-4: Medium Density Residential District



   2.5   Intent



   2.5A   Permitted uses



   2.5B   Development standards



Article 2.6. R-5: High Density Residential District



   2.6   Intent



   2.6A   Permitted uses



   2.6B   Development standards



Article 2.7. R-6: High Density Residential District



   2.7   Intent



   2.7A   Permitted uses



   2.7B   Development standards



   2.7C   Architectural review



   2.7D   Development incentives



Article 2.8. TC: Town Center District



   2.8   Intent



   2.8A   Permitted uses



   2.8B   Development standards



   2.8C   Architectural review



Article 2.9. NR: Neighborhood Retail Commercial



   2.9   Intent



   2.9A   Permitted uses



   2.9B   Development standards



   2.9C   Architectural review



   2.9D   Development incentives



Article 2.10. OD: Office District



   2.10   Intent



   2.10A   Permitted uses



   2.10B   Development standards



   2.10C   Architectural review



   2.10D   Development incentives



Article 2.11. GC: General Commercial



   2.11   Intent



   2.11A   Permitted uses



   2.11B   Development standards



   2.11C   Architectural review



   2.11D   Development incentives



Article 2.12. I-1: Research/Office Industrial



   2.12   Intent



   2.12A   Permitted uses



   2.12B   Development standards



   2.12C   Architectural review



   2.12D   Development incentives



Article 2.13. I-2: Office/Warehouse Distribution



   2.13   Intent



   2.13A   Permitted uses



   2.13B   Development standards



   2.13C   Architectural review



   2.13D   Development incentives



Article 2.14. I-3: Light Manufacturing



   2.14   Intent



   2.14A   Permitted uses



   2.14B   Development standards



   2.14C   Architectural review



   2.14D   Development incentives



Article 2.15. I-4: Heavy Manufacturing



   2.15   Intent



   2.15A   Permitted uses



   2.15B   Development standards



   2.15C   Architectural review



   2.15D   Development incentives



Article 2.16. AG: Agriculture District



   2.16    Intent



   2.16A   Permitted uses



   2.16B   Development standards



Article 2.17. R-U: Urban Residential District



   2.17   Intent



   2.17A   Permitted uses



   2.17B   Development standards



   2.17C   Architectural review



Article 2.18. MU: Mixed Use District



   2.18   Intent



   2.18A   Permitted uses



   2.18B   Development standards



   2.18C   Architectural review



Article 3.1. Noise Overlay District



   3.1A   Purpose



   3.1B   Special definitions



   3.1C   Noise compatibility zones established



   3.1D   Noise overlay zone boundaries



   3.1E   Notification of noise compatibility zones



   3.1F   Uses expressly prohibited



   3.1G   Uses available as special uses



   3.1H   Soundproofing required



   3.1I   Soundproofing design standards



   3.1J   Land-use compatibility standards



Article 3.2. P: Park District



   3.2   Intent



   3.2A   Permitted uses



   3.2B   Development standards



   3.2C   Park master plan approvals



Article 3.3. S: School Districts



   3.3   Intent



   3.3A   Permitted uses



   3.3B   Development standards



   3.3C   School master plan approvals



Article 3.4. REL: Religious Use District



   3.4   Intent



   3.4A   Permitted uses



   3.4B   Development standards



   3.4C   Religious use master plan approvals



Article 3.5. C-I: Commercial-Industrial District



   3.5   Intent



   3.5A   Permitted uses



   3.5B   Development standards



   3.5C   Architectural review



   3.5D   Development incentives



   3.5E   Master plans



Article 3.6. G: Golf



   3.6   Intent



   3.6A   Permitted uses



   3.6B   Development standards



   3.6C   Golf course master plan approvals



Article 3.7. A: Airspace Overlay District



   3.7   Intent



   3.7A   Airspace Overlay District regulations



   3.7B   Construction of language and definitions



Article 3.8. MUN: Municipal Use District



   3.8   Intent



   3.8A   Permitted uses



   3.8B   Development standards



   3.8C   Municipal use master plan approvals



Article 4.1. Accessory Uses



   4.1A   Permitted accessory uses



   4.1B   Development standards for accessory uses



   4.1C   Additional development standards for accessory uses,
buildings or structures in any “R” District



   4.1D   Additional development standards for accessory uses in all
commercial and industrial districts



   4.1E   Underground facilities



   4.1F   Game courts



   4.1G   Development standards for recycling containers in all
residential, commercial and industrial districts



Article 4.2. Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings



   4.2A   Permits required



   4.2B   Permitted temporary uses, structures and buildings



   4.2C   Duration



   4.2D   Compliance with development standards



   4.2E   Cessation of use



   4.2F   Additional regulations for garage sales/yard sales



   4.2G   Additional regulations for temporary seasonal retail sales
uses



   4.2H   Mobile classrooms



   4.2I   Temporary sales trailers and model homes for residential
subdivisions



   4.2K   Temporary storage units in all districts



   4.2L   Temporary tent sales in the GC General Commercial District



Article 4.3. Home Occupations



   4.3A   Intent



   4.3B   Required conditions



   4.3C   Prohibited home occupations



   4.3D   Permitted home occupations



   4.3E   Registration of home occupations



Article 4.4. Special Regulations for Residential Facilities for the Mentally
Ill



   4.4   Special regulations for residential facilities for the
mentally ill



Article 4.5. Special Regulations for Adult Entertainment Businesses and
Employees



   I   Purpose and intent



   II   Definitions



   III   License required



   IV   Application for license



   V   Issuance of a license



   VI   Employee license application



   VII   Issuance of adult entertainment business employee license



   VIII   Expiration and renewal of license



   IX   Suspension



   X   Revocation



   XI   Appeal rights



   XII   Transfer of license



   XIII   Additional regulations concerning the operation of an adult
entertainment business



   XIV   Penalties



   XV   Severability clause



   XVI   Effective date



Article 4.6. Special Regulations for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities



   4.6A   Application



   4.6B   Definitions



   4.6C   Procedures



   4.6D   Development standards



Article 4.7. Landscape Provisions



   4.7A   Intent



   4.7B   Landscaping of required front, side and rear yards and
required front, side and rear bufferyards in all districts except residential
districts



   4.7C   Perimeter landscaping required for residential subdivisions
in all residential districts



   4.7D   Foundation planting in the R-6 District, R-U District, all
commercial districts and all industrial districts



   4.7E   Parking lot landscaping in the R-6 District, R-U District,
all commercial districts and all industrial districts



   4.7F   Ground cover within required landscaping



   4.7G   Wall, fence or berm



   4.7H   Installation of landscaping



   4.7I   Maintenance of landscaping



   4.7J   Credit for preservation of existing trees



   4.7K   Alternate landscape plan approval



Article 4.8. Performance Standards



   4.8A   Scope and applicability



   4.8B   Performance standards



Article 4.9. Lighting Standards



   4.9A   Intent



   4.9B   Lighting regulations



Article 4.10. Off-Street Parking Regulations



   4.10A   Parking for buildings, structures or uses



   4.10B   Existing parking areas



   4.10C   Location of parking areas



   4.10D   Design and construction of parking areas



   4.10E   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces



   4.10F   Required parking for the disabled



   4.10G   Required bicycle parking



   4.10H   Land banking for reduced parking in GC, C-I, I-1, I-2, I-3
and I-4 Districts



Article 4.11. Off-Street Loading Regulations



   4.11   Intent



   4.11A   Loading for buildings, structures or uses



   4.11B   Design and construction of loading areas



   4.11C   Design of excess loading areas



   4.11D   Alternate design for loading areas



   4.11E   Location of off-street loading spaces



   4.11F   Use of required loading areas



   4.11G   Surface of loading areas



   4.11H   Minimum number of off-street loading spaces



   4.11I   Special regulations for gasoline service stations



Article 4.12. Additional Front, Side and Rear Setback Provisions



   4.12A   Additional front setback provisions



   4.12B   Side and rear yard exceptions



   4.12C   Setback exception; laterally-supported extensions



   4.12D   Exceptions for setbacks along alleys



Article 4.13. Requirements for All Private Streets and Private Alleys



   4.13   Requirements for all private streets and private alleys



Article 4.14. Vision Clearance Areas



   4.14   Vision clearance areas



Article 4.15. Commitments Required by the Plan Commission



   4.15A   Commitments



   4.15B   Modification of commitments by the Plan Commission



Article 4.16. Outdoor Display Standards



   4.16A   Applicability



Article 4.17. Outdoor Seating/Dining Standards



   4.17A   Purpose



   4.17B   Procedures



   4.17C   Standards



   4.17D   Barriers



   4.17E   Furniture



   4.17F   Town center standards along Main Street on sidewalks



Article 4.18.  Reserved



Article 4.19  Outdoor Product Display in the I-2 and I-3 Zoning Districts



   4.19A   Definitions



   4.19B   Location



   4.19C   Procedure



   4.19D   Setbacks



   4.19E   Size



   4.19F   Surface



   4.19G   Landscaping



   4.19H   Illumination



   4.19I   Product display standards



Article 5.1. Development Incentives



   5.1A   Intent



   5.1B   General procedures



   5.1C   Waiver of development requirements



Article 5.2. Development Incentives in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts



   5.2   Development incentives in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts



   5.2A   Development requirements



   5.2B   Waiver of development requirements in R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts



   5.2C   General requirements for project open space



   5.2D   Calculation of open space



   5.2E   Plan documentation and supporting information



   5.2F   Maintenance of common open space



   5.2G   Services for private drives



   5.2H   Findings



Article 5.3. Development Plans Required for Architectural and
Site Design Review in the R-6 District



   5.3   Development plans required for architectural and site design
review in the R-6 District



   5.3A   Projects with a gross density of up to 8.0 dwelling units per
acre



   5.3B   Projects with a gross density of between 8.0 dwelling units
per acre and 12.0 dwelling units per acre



Article 5.4. Development Incentives for All Commercial and Industrial
Districts
(Except TC: Town Center District)



   5.4   Development incentives for all commercial and industrial
districts (except TC: Town Center District)



   5.4A   Development requirements



   5.4B   Waiver of development requirements in commercial or
industrial districts



Article 5.5. Development Plans Required for Architectural and Site Design
Review
for All Development Located in All Commercial Districts (Except TC: Town
Center or
MU: Mixed Use District) and All Industrial Districts When Located Within
600 Feet of a Gateway Corridor or Within 600 Feet of a Residential District



   5.5   Intent



   5.5A   Applicability and review authority



   5.5B   Identification of Gateway Corridors



   5.5C   Development requirements



   5.5D   Permitted uses



   5.5E   Excluded uses



   5.5F   Legally established nonconforming buildings or structures



   5.5G   Findings



   5.5H   Waivers and findings



Article 5.6. Development Plans Required for Architectural and Site Design
Review
in the TC: Town Center District, the R-U: Urban Residential District
and the MU: Mixed Use District



   5.6   Development plans required for architectural and site design
review in the TC: Town Center District, the R-U: Urban Residential District
and the MU: Mixed Use District



   5.6A   Applicability and review authority



   5.6B   Development requirements in the TC: Town Center District



   5.6C   Development requirements in the R-U: Urban Residential
District  and the MU: Mixed Use District when located within the “Town
Center Neighborhood” as designated in The Town of Plainfield, IN, Town
Center Plan and multi-family dwelling projects in the R-U Urban Residential
District not within the “Town Center Neighborhood”



   5.6D   Findings



   5.6E   Waivers



Article 5.7. Plan Documentation and Supporting Information



   5.7   Plan documentation and supporting information



   5.7A   Site plan



   5.7B   Overall plan



   5.7C   Building elevations



   5.7D   Sign plan



   5.7E   Landscape plan



   5.7F   Lighting plans



Article 5.8. Procedures for Submission and Review of Development Plans



   5.8A   Application



   5.8B   Fees



   5.8C   Notice



   5.8D   Hearings



   5.8E   Amendments



   5.8F   Findings



   5.8G   Duration of development plan approval



Article 6.1. Planned Unit Development District



   6.1A   Intent



   6.1B   Permitted uses and development requirements



   6.1C   Procedure for approval of a planned unit development



   6.1D   Secondary review - final detailed plan



   6.1E   Modification of preliminary plan



   6.1F   Secondary plat approval



   6.1G   Maintenance of common open space



   6.1H   Extensions



Article 7.1. Sign Regulations: Intent and Application



   7.1   Intent and application



Article 7.2. Signs: Exempt



   7.2   Exemptions



Article 7.3. Signs: Prohibited



   7.3   Prohibited signs



Article 7.4. Signs: On-Premise Signs: Commercial, Industrial Districts
(Except for the
TC: Town Center District and MU: Mixed Use District)



   7.4A   Freestanding identification signs for single use sites



   7.4B   Freestanding identification signs for integrated centers



   7.4C   Freestanding identification signs for out lots in an
integrated center



   7.4D   Building identification signs



   7.4E   Incidental signs



   7.4F   Suspended signs in integrated centers



   7.4G   Signs on light poles



   7.4H   Roof signs for large warehouses in the I-2 and I-3 districts



Article 7.5. On-Premises Signs: TC and MU Districts



   7.5A   Freestanding identification signs



   7.5B   Building identification signs



   7.5C   Sidewalk signs



   7.5D   Incidental signs



   7.5E   Temporary signs



Article 7.6. Signs: On-Premises, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RU and AG
Districts



   7.6A   Single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, residential
facilities for the mentally ill, residential facilities for the
developmentally disabled and child care home uses



   7.6B   Multi-family dwelling uses



   7.6C   Recorded, platted residential subdivision uses



   7.6D   Business and other uses permitted in residential districts by
special exception



   7.6E   Incidental signs



   7.6F   Temporary signs



Article 7.7. Signs: Off-Premises Advertising



   7.7A   Districts allowed



   7.7B   Type of signs



   7.7C   Number



   7.7D   Maximum sign surface area for off-premises signs



   7.7E   Minimum setback



   7.7F   Maximum height of off-premises signs



   7.7G   Spacing of off-premises signs



Article 7.8. Signs: General Regulations



   7.8A   Additional regulations by type of sign



   7.8B   Calculation of sign surface area



   7.8C   Maintenance of signs and areas around signs



   7.8D   Substitution



Article 8. Districts and Maps



   8.1   Official zone map



   8.2   Identification of the official zone map



   8.3   Official zone map changes



   8.4   Retention and preservation of records



   8.5   Interpretation of the official zone map



   8.6   Zoning of newly annexed land



Article 9.1. Nonconforming Lots, Uses, Buildings, Structures or Signs



   9.1A   Intent



   9.1B   Incompatibility of legally established nonconforming uses



   9.1C   Avoidance of undue hardship



   9.1D   Legally established nonconforming lot of record



   9.1E   Legally established nonconforming building or structures
(excluding signs)



   9.1F   Legally established nonconforming uses of land



   9.1G   Discontinuation of legally established nonconforming use of
land



   9.1H   Legally established nonconforming uses within legally
established nonconforming buildings or structures



   9.1I   Repairs and maintenance of legally established nonconforming
buildings or structures (excluding signs)



   9.1J   Legally established nonconforming signs



   9.1K   Determination of fair market value or replacement cost



   9.1L   Reconstruction, remodeling or enlargement of a legally
established nonconforming single- family dwelling or two-family dwelling



   9.1M   Additions along a legally established nonconforming setback
for a single-family dwelling located in the Town Center neighborhood



   9.1N   Legally established building, structure, freestanding
identification sign or outdoor operations after acquisition by a governmental
agency



   9.1O   Legally established nonconforming buildings or structures
within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor or residential district



Article 10.1. Administration: Town Council



   10.1   Town Council



Article 10.2. Administration: Plan Commission



   10.2A   Establishment



   10.2B   Membership, qualification and terms



   10.2C   Duties and powers



Article 10.3. Administration: Board of Zoning Appeals



   10.3A   Establishment



   10.3B   Membership, qualification and terms



   10.3C   Duties and powers



Article 10.4. Administration: Staff Agencies



   10.4A   Establishment



   10.4B   Administration of planning and zoning authority



   10.4C   Duties and powers of the Director



   10.4D   Staff



Article 10.5. Administration: Design Review Committee



   10.5A   Establishment and purpose



   10.5B   Duties and powers



   10.5C   Membership, terms, vacancies and removal



   10.5D   Meetings, hearings and procedures



   10.5E   Records



Article 10.6. Administration: Hearing Officer



   10.6A   Establishment



   10.6B   Powers and duties



   10.6C   Appointment and term



   10.6D   Removal



   10.6E   Vacancy



   10.6F   Rules of procedure



   10.6G   Conditions and commitments



   10.6H   Appeals



Article 11.1. Review: Required Permits



   11.1   Required permits and approvals



Article 11.2. Review: Improvement Location Permits



   11.2A   Improvement location permit required



   11.2B   Duration of improvement location permit



   11.2C   Review of improvement location permit application



   11.2D   Public or semi-public sanitary sewer required



   11.2E   Appeal of determination



   11.2F   Record of permits



   11.2G   Amended improvement location permit



   11.2H   General exemptions



   11.2I   Revocation in event of violation



Article 11.3. Review: Compliance with Other Laws



   11.3   Compliance with other laws, ordinances, rules or regulations



Article 11.4. Review: Application and Approval



   11.4A   Application and site plan requirements



Article 11.5. Review: Certificate of Zoning Compliance



   11.5A   Certificate of zoning compliance required



   11.5B   Issuance of certificate of zoning compliance



   11.5C   Temporary certificate of zoning compliance



Article 11.6. Review: Fees



   11.6   Fees



Article 12. Enforcement



   12.1   Authority



   12.2   Alleged violations



   12.3   Responsibility for violations



   12.4   Inspection of property; right of entry



   12.5   Stop work order



   12.6   Violations



   12.7   Penalties for violation



Article 13. Definitions



   13.1   Interpretation of terms or words



   13.2   Definitions



   Exhibit A



   Exhibit B



   Exhibit C



   Exhibit D



ARTICLE 1. BASIC PROVISIONS



§ 1.1  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall hereinafter be known and cited as “Town of
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance”.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.2  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained
in I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.



   (B)   Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a
section of the Indiana Code and that section is later amended or superseded,
this ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the
section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.3  PURPOSE.



   In adopting this ordinance, the Town Council is acting for the purpose
of:



   (A)   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and general welfare;



   (B)   Guiding the future development of the town;



   (C)   Securing adequate light, air, convenience of access, and
safety from fire, flood and other danger;



   (D)   Lessening or avoiding congestion in public ways;



   (E)   Ensuring that the needs of agriculture, industry and business
be recognized in future growth;



   (F)   Ensuring that residential areas provide healthful surroundings
for family life;



   (G)   Ensuring that growth be commensurate with and promotive of the
efficient and economical use of public funds; and



   (H)   Otherwise accomplishing the purposes of I.C. 36-7-4 et seq.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.4  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This ordinance shall be effective at 12:01 a.m., on February 1, 1998.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.5  REPEALER.



   The Plainfield Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks
County, Indiana, as adopted by the Town Council on April 10, 1989, as Ord.
8-89, and all amendments thereto, are repealed as of the effective date of
this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.6  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are
severable and, if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses or phrases of this ordinance because the same would have been enacted
without the incorporation into this ordinance of such unconstitutional or
invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.7  EXCLUSION.



   Nothing in this ordinance or in any rules, regulations or orders issued
pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to restrict or regulate or to
authorize any unit of government, legislative body, Plan Commission or Board
of Zoning Appeals now or hereafter established, to restrict or regulate the
exercise of the power of eminent domain by the state or by any agency of the
state, or the use of property owned or occupied by the state or any agency of
the state.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.8  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of
the health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience and the general welfare of
the public. In the case of any conflict or inconsistency between two or more
provisions of this ordinance (e.g., the restrictions set forth in an overlay
district versus the restrictions set forth in a primary zoning district) or
any other ordinance of the town, the provision which imposes the greater or
higher or more restrictive standard of performance shall control.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.9  JURISDICTION.



   The Town Plan Commission shall be the duly authorized Plan Commission
for the incorporated areas of the town pursuant to the Advisory Planning Law
of the Indiana Code, and the ordinance shall apply to all real property
located within the corporate boundaries of the town upon:



   (A)   Adoption of this ordinance by the Town Council; and



   (B)   The effective date of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.10  SUBDIVISION OF LAND.



   The subdivision of land may occur in any and all zoning districts
established by this ordinance. Whenever a subdivision occurs, the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance shall
apply.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.11  SCOPE AND APPLICATION.



   Except as expressly provided otherwise in this ordinance:



   (A)   No person may use or occupy any land, building, structure or
improvement or authorize or permit the use or occupancy of any land,
building, structure or improvement under his or her control except in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this ordinance; and



   (B)   No land, building, structure or improvement shall be used and
no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other than a use
which is permitted in the zoning district in which such land, building,
structure or improvement is located.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.12  FINDINGS.



   In adopting this ordinance, the Town Council have paid reasonable
regard to:



   (A)   The general policies and patterns of development set out in
the Comprehensive Plan for the town;



   (B)   Current conditions and the character of current structures and
uses in each zoning district;



   (C)   The most desirable use for which the land in each zoning
district is adapted;



   (D)   The conservation of property values throughout the town; and



   (E)   The responsible development and growth of the town.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.13  PRIVATE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.14  DETERMINATION OF LAND USES NOT LISTED IN THIS ZONING ORDINANCE.



   (A)   It is recognized that this ordinance may require
interpretation to assign all possible land uses to individual zoning
districts. Therefore, any land use which is not specifically set forth in
this ordinance shall be reviewed by the Director for consistency with the
intent set forth in each zoning district and for compatibility with land use
characteristics typical of land uses permitted within those districts and the
Director shall determine the appropriate zoning district for any use which is
not specifically set forth herein. In case of disagreement with the
determination of the Director in assigning a land use to an appropriate
zoning district, any aggrieved party may file an appeal with the Board of
Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provisions of Article X of this ordinance.



   (B)   If it is:



      (1)   Determined by the Director and no appeal of the
Director’s decision is filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to
the provisions of Article X of this ordinance; or



      (2)   Determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals that a
particular use is not permitted in any agricultural, residential, commercial,
industrial or other zoning district provided for in this ordinance, then such
use shall be deemed to require the PUD Zoning District and shall be
considered to be a permitted use only in a PUD Zoning District in which such
use is specifically included and described in a petition for zone map change
to the PUD Zoning District.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.15  SAVING PROVISION.



   Except as shall be expressly provided for in this ordinance, the
adoption of this ordinance shall not:



   (A)   Abate any action pending under, or by virtue of, any prior
zoning ordinance;



   (B)   Discontinue, abate, modify or alter any penalty accruing or
about to accrue under, or by virtue of, any prior zoning ordinance;



   (C)   Affect the liability of any person, firm or corporation under,
or by virtue of, any prior zoning ordinance;



   (D)   Waive any right of the town under any section or provision of
any prior zoning ordinance; or



   (E)   Vacate or annul any rights obtained by any person, firm or
corporation by lawful action of the town under, or by virtue of, any prior
zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.16  TRANSITION RULES.



   (A)   Site plan review/improvement location permits.



      (1)   Any application for site plan review by the Plan
Commission or application for an improvement location permit which has been
filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning of the town and which
application is full and complete under the provisions of the Plainfield
Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended) prior to the effective date of this
ordinance shall continue to be processed to completion pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended).



      (2)   In the case of a site plan review, an application for an
improvement location permit shall be filed with the Department of Planning
and Zoning of the town within 90 days after final site plan approval by the
Plan Commission or such site plan approval shall be deemed null and void.
Such application for an improvement location permit shall be full and
complete under the provisions of the Plainfield Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 8-89,
as amended).



   (B)   Zone map amendments. Any application for zone map amendment
which has been filed with the Department of Planning and Zoning of the town
and which application is full and complete under the provisions of the
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended) prior to the effective
date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue to be processed to
completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Plainfield Zoning
Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended), provided, however, if the proposed use
would no longer be permitted in the proposed zoning classification as a
result of changes to that zoning classification resulting from the adoption
of this ordinance, such application shall be deemed amended to request the
zoning classification of this ordinance in which the proposed use is first
permitted.



   (C)   Special exception use, variance of use, variance of
development standards. Any application before the Board of Zoning Appeals
(i.e., special exception use, variance of use or variance of development
standards) which has been filed with Department of Planning and Zoning of the
town and which application is full and complete under the provisions of the
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended) prior to the effective
date of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue to be processed to
completion pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Plainfield Zoning
Ordinance (Ord. 8-89, as amended), provided, however:



      (1)   If such application is no longer required by the terms
of this ordinance, such application shall be considered dismissed for lack of
jurisdiction; or



      (2)   If the proposed use or development requires additional
approvals from the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this ordinance (and which additional approvals from the Board
of Zoning Appeals were not required by the terms and conditions of the
Plainfield Zoning Ordinance, Ord. 8-89, as amended), such application shall
be deemed amended to include only those additional approvals which are
minimally required and within the jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals
to grant for the proposed use or site plan for the development.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.17  AMENDMENTS.



   In its continuing administration of the purposes set forth in Article
1.3 above, the Town Council may find it reasonable and necessary to propose
and adopt amendments to the text of this ordinance or determine changes to
the zone maps incorporated into this ordinance. All such amendments shall be
considered and adopted in compliance with I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq., the
provisions of this ordinance and any applicable rules of procedure
subsequently adopted by the Plan Commission or the Town Council governing
such procedures.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.18  COMPLIANCE.



   Compliance with the terms and provision of this ordinance shall be a
prerequisite for the use and development of real property within the town.
Failure to comply with the terms and provisions of this ordinance shall be
deemed to be a civil zoning violation enforceable by the Plan Commission or
the Board of Zoning Appeals, as provided for in I.C. 36-7-4 et seq., and
Article XII of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.19  EXEMPTIONS FOR TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC, GAS, WATER
AND SANITARY SERVICES.



   (A)   Service easements, including, but not limited to, those
providing for roadways, railroad lines, pipelines, electric power lines,
telephone lines, relay stations, water lines, pumping stations, sewer lines,
lift stations and the like, shall be exempt from the provisions of this
ordinance.



   (B)   Bus stations, railway terminals, gas storage tanks, power
stations, treatment plants and the like, shall be subject to all use and
development standards regulations of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 1.20  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Dismantling, repairing or restoring, or performing any work on
any motor vehicle, machine, motor or similar device in RR, R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-U Districts. Notwithstanding any provision in this
ordinance to the contrary, no person shall dismantle, repair, restore or
otherwise perform any work on any motor vehicle, machine, motor or similar
device not owned or leased by that person or a member of that person’s
family, on any real estate zoned to any RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 or
R-U District. In addition, any work performed shall be:



      (1)   Incidental to a permitted use; and



      (2)   Completely within an accessory building or garage; or



      (3)   Completely within an areas wholly enclosed from the view
of surrounding lots and rights-of-way by a solid structural barrier (either a
wall or fence of ornamental stone, brick, wood or a combination thereof),
with a maximum height above grade of not less than six feet, nor greater than
eight feet.



   (B)   Storing, maintaining or keeping a motor vehicle, machine,
motor or similar device in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-U
Districts. Notwithstanding any provision in this ordinance to the contrary,
no motor vehicle, machine, motor or similar device from which any part
material to the operation of the vehicle has been removed, or which is
inoperable for any reason, shall be stored, maintained or kept on any
property in any RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-U District unless such
device is:



      (1)   Owned or leased by the resident of the property on which
the device is stored or by a member of that person’s family; and



      (2)   Completely within an accessory building or garage.



   (C)   Parking, storing, maintaining or keeping a commercial motor
vehicle or trailer in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-U Districts.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in this ordinance to the
contrary, no commercial motor vehicle or trailer shall be parked, stored,
maintained or kept on any property in any RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 or
R-U District unless the vehicle:



         (a)   Has a maximum load capacity of three-quarters of a
ton or less;



         (b)   Serves as the sole vehicular transportation of a
resident of the property upon which it is parked, stored, maintained or kept;
and



         (c)   Is stored within an accessory building or garage
which complies with all the standards and regulations of this ordinance.



      (2)   Commercial motor vehicles that are in the course of
making normal and reasonable service calls are exempt from this provision.



   (D)   Parking, storing, maintaining or keeping of any recreational
vehicle including, but not limited to, motor homes, campers, boats,
motorcycles, ATVs, jet-skis and the like in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
R-6 and R-U Districts. Notwithstanding any provision in this ordinance to the
contrary, no recreational vehicle shall be parked, stored, maintained or kept
on any property in any RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-U District
unless in compliance with the following:



      (1)   Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored:



         (a)   Inside an accessory building or garage; or



         (b)   Outside in such a manner that no part of any such
recreational vehicle shall project into any required side or rear yard or in
the front yard of the lot other than on the hardsurfaced area of the driveway
or interior access drive.



      (2)   Not more than two motor homes shall be permitted to be
parked or stored in the open on the same lot at any one time; and



      (3)   Parked or stored motor homes shall not be occupied or
used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes in any RR, R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-U District.



   (E)   Parking of operable motorized vehicles in the R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, R-6 or R-U Districts. All operable motorized vehicles shall be
parked:



      (1)   Inside an accessory building or garage; or



      (2)   Outside in such a manner that no part of any such
operable motorized vehicle shall project into any required side or rear yard
or in the front yard of the lot other than on the hardsurfaced parking space,
driveway and public or private street where parking on the street is allowed.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 2.1. RR: RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.1  INTENT.



   The RR: Rural Residential Districts are intended to provide for the
development of single-family dwellings compatible with rural and agricultural
environs. The development standards and range of permitted uses are designed
to provide for residential living at a density of less than one-half dwelling
unit per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 2.1A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Kindergarten;



            2.   Child care center; and



            3.   School - public or private.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state;



            3.   Maintenance facility; and



            4.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



         (g)   Residential. Group home.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 2.1B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. 65,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 150 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 90 feet on a public street and
gain direct access from said public street or an abutting alley.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. 10%.



      (5)   Maximum lot depth to width ratio. Three to one.



      (6)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard of 30 feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



         (c)   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard of
75 feet shall be provided on all lots.



         (d)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

20 ft.



Primary building
 

35 ft.




 



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 feet.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,700 square feet; and



         (b)   Two or more story building. 1,200 square feet,
provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,700 square
feet.



      (9)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (10)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



ARTICLE 2.2. R-1: LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.2  INTENT.



   The R-1: Low Density Residential Districts are intended to protect,
promote and maintain areas that are developing or have been developed with
single-family dwellings and limited public and institutional uses that are
compatible with a low density residential neighborhood. The development
standards and range of permitted uses are designed to provide for residential
living at a density of approximately 0.5 to 2.0 dwelling units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 2.2A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Kindergarten;



            2.   Child care center; and



            3.   School - public or private.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state;



            3.   Maintenance facility; and



            4.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



         (g)   Residential. Group home.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 2.2B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. 30,000 square feet. Attachment to
public or semi-public water and sanitary sewers facilities shall be mandatory
for development in this District.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 50 feet on a public street and
gain direct access from said public street or an abutting alley.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. 20%.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard of ten feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



         (c)   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard of
25 feet shall be provided on all lots.



         (d)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

10 ft.



Primary building
 

25 ft.




 



      (6)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 feet.



      (7)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,700 square feet; and



         (b)   Two or more story building. 1,200 square feet,
provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,700 square
feet.



      (8)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (9)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



§ 2.2C  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed single-family dwelling subdivision located in the R-1
District shall be eligible to utilize the development incentives set forth in
Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003)



ARTICLE 2.3. R-2: LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.3  INTENT.



   The R-2: Low Density Residential Districts are established to protect,
promote and maintain the development of single-family dwellings and limited
public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of permitted
uses are designed to provide for residential living at a density of
approximately 1.5 to 3.0 dwelling units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.3A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Kindergarten;



            2.   Child care center;



            3.   Public library; and



            4.   School - public or private.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Cemetery - without crematory, funeral home or
mortuary;



            2.   Community center;



            3.   Public park; and



            4.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.3B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   For all lots in any subdivision which were included in a
primary plat that received approval prior to January 1, 2007, and which were
included in an approved, recorded secondary plat within three years of the
date of primary plat approval, and if the subdivision is developed in more
than one section, approval for each subsequent section shall be filed for
within three years of the approval of the prior section, the development
standards set forth below shall be deemed to be modified to read as follows:
the minimum lot width shall be 80 feet, the minimum side yard shall be eight
feet, and the minimum aggregate side yard shall be 20 feet.



         (2)   For lots in any subdivision approved after the
dates or not meeting the requirements for the approval of subsequent section
as specified above, the development standards set forth below shall apply:



         (a)   Minimum lot area. 15,000 square feet. Attachment
to public or semi-public water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be
mandatory for development in this District.



         (b)   Minimum lot width. 90 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot frontage. 40 feet on a public street
and gain direct access from said public street or an abutting alley.



         (d)   Maximum lot coverage. 35%.



         (e)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



            1.   Front. A minimum front yard and building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



            2.   Side. A minimum side yard of 12 feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



            3.   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard
of 25 feet shall be provided on all lots.



            4.   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided
along all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

10 ft.



Primary building
 

25 ft.




 



      (6)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 feet.



      (7)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,500 square feet.



         (b)   Two or more story building. 1,200 square feet,
provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,500 square
feet.



      (8)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (9)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.3C  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed single-family dwelling subdivision located in the R-2
District shall be eligible to utilize the development incentives set forth in
Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 2.4. R-3: MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.4  INTENT.



   The R-3: Medium Density Residential Districts are established to
promote and maintain the development of single-family dwellings and limited
public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood. The development standards and range of permitted
uses are designed to provide for residential living at a slightly higher
density of development than that of the R-2 District with a density of
approximately 3.0 to 4.0 dwelling units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.4A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.4B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   For all lots in any subdivision which were included in a
primary plat that received approval prior to January 1, 2007, and which were
included in an approved, recorded secondary plat within three years of the
date of primary plat approval, and if the subdivision is developed in more
than one section, approval for each subsequent section shall be filed for
within three years of the approval of the prior section, the development
standards set forth below shall be deemed to be modified to read as follows:
the minimum lot width shall be 70 feet, the minimum side yard shall be six
feet, and the minimum aggregate side yard shall be 15 feet.



      (2)   For lots in any subdivision approved after the dates or
not meeting the requirements for the approval of subsequent section as
specified above, the development standards set forth below shall apply:



         (a)   Minimum lot area. 10,000 square feet. Attachment
to public or semi-public water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be
mandatory for development in this District.



         (b)   Minimum lot width. 80 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot frontage. 35 feet on a public street
and gain direct access from said public street or an abutting alley.



         (d)   Maximum lot coverage. 35%.



         (e)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



            1.   Front. A minimum front yard and building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



            2.   Side. A minimum side yard of ten feet shall
be provided along all side lot lines.



            3.   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard
of 20 feet shall be provided on all lots.



            4.   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided
along all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

5 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.




 



         (f)   Maximum building height.



            1.   Primary building. 35 ft.



            2.   Accessory building. 25 ft.



         (g)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor
area of the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and
open porches:



            1.   One-story building. 1,300 square feet; and



            2.   Two or more story building. 1,100 square
feet, provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,300
square feet.



      (8)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (9)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



§ 2.4C  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed single-family dwelling subdivision located in the R-3
District shall be eligible to utilize the development incentives set forth in
Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 2.5. R-4: MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.5  INTENT.



   The R-4: Medium Density Residential Districts are established to
promote and maintain the development of single-family dwellings and limited
public and institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding
residential neighborhood. The R-4 District is designed and intended for use
primarily in the “Town Center Neighborhoods” as designated in the Town
Center Plan. The use of the R-4 District outside of the “Town Center
Neighborhoods” shall be justified in the larger context of the
compatibility with Comprehensive Plan and surrounding development. The
development standards and range of permitted uses in this District provides
housing opportunities with a density of approximately 4.0 to 5.0 dwelling
units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.5A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast home.



         (g)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



         (h)   Residential. Assisted living facility.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.5B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. 6,000 square feet. Attachment to
public or semi-public water and sanitary sewer facilities shall be mandatory
for development in this District.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 60 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 25 feet on a public street and
gain direct access from said public street or an abutting alley.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. 40%.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Interstate street

 

80 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.



Collector street
 

30 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard of six feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



         (c)   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard of
12 feet shall be provided on all lots.



         (d)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

5 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 ft.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 ft.



      (7)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,200 square feet; and



         (b)   Two or more story building. 900 square feet,
provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,200 square
feet.



      (8)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (9)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.6. R-5: HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.6  INTENT.



   The R-5: High Density Residential Districts are established to promote
and maintain the development of a variety of housing types including
single-family and two-family dwellings and limited public and institutional
uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood. The
R-5 District is designed and intended for use primarily in the “Town Center
Neighborhoods” as designated in the Town Center Plan. The use of the R-5
District outside of the “Town Center Neighborhoods” shall be justified in
the larger context of compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and
surrounding development. The development standards and range of permitted
uses in this District provide for a mixture of housing opportunities similar
in scale to single-family dwellings with a density of approximately 5.0 to
7.0 dwelling units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.6A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   One single-family dwelling;



         (b)   One two-family dwelling;



         (c)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (d)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (e)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



         (g)   Residential. Assisted living facility.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.6B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling. 5,000 square feet.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling. 10,000 square feet.
Attachment to public or semi-public water and sanitary sewer facilities shall
be mandatory for development in this District.



      (2)   Minimum lot width.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling. 50 feet.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling. 70 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. On a public street and gain direct
access from said public street or an abutting alley.



         (a)   Single-family dwelling. 25 feet.



         (b)   Two-family dwelling. 35 feet.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. 40%.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard of six feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



         (c)   Aggregate side. A minimum aggregate side yard of
12 feet shall be provided on all lots.



         (d)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

5 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 ft.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 ft.



      (7)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,000 square feet per dwelling
unit; and



         (b)   Two or more story building. 720 square feet per
dwelling unit, provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least
1,000 square feet.



      (8)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (9)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2003, passed 5-29-2003; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.7. R-6: HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.7  INTENT.



   The R-6: High Density Residential Districts are established to promote
the development of multi- family dwellings and limited public and
institutional uses that are compatible with the surrounding residential
neighborhood. The development standards and range of permitted uses are
designed to encourage clustering in order to promote establishing on-site
amenities and to allow multi-family dwelling development with a density of up
to 8.0 dwelling units per gross acre.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.7A  PERMITTED USES.



   (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Multi-family dwellings;



         (b)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (c)   Residential facility for the mentally ill;



         (d)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home); and



         (e)   Assisted living facility.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Telephone exchange;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake;



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast; and



            3.   Boarding house.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.7B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All uses permitted in the R-6 District shall conform to the following
development standards.



      (1)   Maximum project gross density. Eight dwelling units per
acre. Attachment to public or semi-public water and sanitary sewer facilities
shall be mandatory for development in this District.



      (2)   Minimum project frontage. 150 feet on a public street
and gain access from said public street.



      (3)   Minimum setbacks and perimeter yard requirements. A
minimum setback and perimeter yard shall be provided along all property lines
of the project as follows.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yards. 30 feet.



         (c)   Rear yards. 30 feet.



      (4)   Use of minimum yards. All minimum yards shall be
landscaped in compliance with the requirements for perimeter yard landscaping
as set forth in Article 4.7 - Landscape Regulations of this ordinance and
shall remain free from buildings or structures except where expressly
permitted below or by other provisions of this ordinance:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include: driveways;
walkways with a maximum width of up to six feet, or signs as regulated by
Article 7.06 - On-Premises Signs: Residential Districts of this ordinance,
and shall otherwise be maintained as open space free from buildings or
structures;



         (b)   Minimum side yards. Shall be maintained as open
space free from buildings or structures; and



         (c)   Minimum rear yards. Shall be maintained open space
free from buildings or structures.



      (5)   Minimum interior yards. In projects containing two or
more buildings, interior yards shall be provided as follows:



         (a)   Around buildings containing dwelling units, the
greater of:



            1.   Fifteen feet; or



            2.   Ten feet plus one additional foot for each
ten feet of aggregate length of any wall of a building.



         (b)   Around accessory buildings or uses: five feet;



         (c)   The distance between buildings shall be the sum of
each applicable minimum interior yard;



         (d)   Interior yards shall be measured perpendicular to
the building or structure at all points; and



         (e)     Interior yards shall not overlap any required
perimeter yards.







 



      (6)    Use of interior yards.



         (a)   Required interior yards around buildings
containing dwelling units may be used for:



            1.   Individual interior access drives leading to
attached garages serving individual dwelling units;



            2.   Open space;



            3.   Foundation landscaping;



            4.   Walkways not exceeding six feet in width; or



            5.   Interior access drives, parking areas, open
balconies, uncovered porches and patios which do not project more than 50%
into the required interior yard.



         (b)   Required interior yards around accessory buildings
or uses, may be used for:



            1.   Open space;



            2.   Foundation landscaping;



            3.   Walkways not exceeding six feet in width; or



            4.   Interior access drives leading to carports or
overhead garage doors.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, but not to exceed two
stories containing a dwelling unit.



         (b)   Accessory buildings. 25 feet.



      (8)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of each
multi-family dwelling unit, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and
open porches shall be:



         (a)   Seven hundred and twenty square feet for dwelling
units located on one story; and



         (b)   Five hundred square feet per floor for dwelling
units located on more than one floor.



      (9)   Off-street parking. See Article IV.



      (10)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (11)   Landscaping and screening requirements. See Article IV.



      (12)   Developed recreational open space requirements.



         (a)   Developed recreational open space areas equal to,
at a minimum, 10% of the total lot area of the project shall be required.
Developed recreational open space may include, but not be limited to, such
facilities as: playgrounds; tot lots; swimming pools; tennis, volleyball or
basketball courts; and common recreational buildings. Developed recreational
open space areas shall not overlap any required interior yards or perimeter
yards.



         (b)   If the project is located adjacent to any portion
of the Greenway Plan as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, a direct linkage
to such greenway from the open space shall be provided.



      (13)   Requirements for all private streets, interior access
driveways, and interior access drives for multi-family dwelling projects.
Individual buildings and dwelling units located within a multi- family
dwelling project may be served by private streets, interior access driveways,
and interior access drives developed in compliance with the standards set
forth in Article IV of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.7C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   All multi-family dwelling projects located in the R-6 District shall be
subject to the requirements for the filing of a development plan for
architectural and site design review as set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.7D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed multi-family dwelling development located in the R-6
District shall be eligible to utilize the development incentives set forth in
Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.8. TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT



§ 2.8  INTENT.



   TC: Town Center District is established to promote and maintain the
commercial buildings of the original core of the town and to create a special
mixed-use area of small-scale pedestrian oriented commercial, retail and
office uses in the symbolic center of the town.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -; Ord. 32-2005, passed
5-9-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 2.8A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Automobile service. Gasoline service station
without repair.



         (b)   Clothing service.



            1.   Dressmaking;



            2.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment;



            3.   Millinery shop (fabric shop);



            4.   Self-service laundry;



            5.   Shoe repair shop; and



            6.   Tailor and pressing shop.



         (c)   Communication/utilities. Telephone exchange.



         (d)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Day nursery;



            3.   Kindergarten;



            4.   Library;



            5.   Nursery school;



            6.   School - commercial, trade or business; and



            7.   School - public or private.



         (e)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Bakery - retail;



            2.   Convenience store;



            3.   Dairy - retail;



            4.   Delicatessen;



            5.   Farmer’s market;



            6.   Grocery;



            7.   Meat market; and



            8.   Restaurant without alcoholic beverages.



         (f)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office.



         (g)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Bus station;



            2.   Clinic, medical, dental or optometrists;



            3.   Electrical repair;



            4.   Hospital/sanitarium/ rehabilitation center;



            5.   Hotel;



            6.   Mortuary/funeral home/crematories;



            7.   Print shop;



            8.   Sign painting; and



            9.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (h)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            5.   Construction companies, contractors and home
remodeling companies (office only);



            6.   Dentist;



            7.   Design services;



            8.   Engineer;



            9.   Insurance agent;



            10.   Lawyer;



            11.   Musician;



            12.   Physician;



            13.   Pharmacist;



            14.   Photographic studio;



            15.   Professional offices;



            16.   Real estate office;



            17.   Service organization office; and



            18.   Travel agency.



         (i)   Personal service.



            1.   Barber shop;



            2.   Beauty shop;



            3.   Health spa or fitness center; and



            4.   Tanning salon.



         (j)   Public facilities.



            1.   Museum;



            2.   Parking lot;



            3.   Public park; and



            4.   Religious use.



         (k)   Recreation.



            1.   Arcade;



            2.   Bait sales;



            3.   Billiard room;



            4.   Dancing, aerobics, gymnastics studio;



            5.   Swimming pool - private or public (indoor);



            6.   Theater, indoor; and



            7.   Video store.



         (l)   Residential. Dwelling units located in upper
stories of buildings.



         (m)   Retail.



            1.   Antique shop;



            2.   Apparel shop;



            3.   Appliance store;



            4.   Convenience store;



            5.   Department store;



            6.   Drug store;



            7.   Electrical supplies;



            8.   Floor coverings;



            9.   Flower shop;



            10.   Furniture store;



            11.   Gift shop;



            12.   Hardware store;



            13.   Jewelry store;



            14.   Liquor store;



            15.   Music store;



            16.   Newsdealer;



            17.   Paint store;



            18.   Plumbing supplies;



            19.   Radio, TV, music service and sales;



            20.   Retail showroom;



            21.   Shoe store;



            22.   Stationery and book store;



            23.   Sporting goods;



            24.   Variety store; and



            25.   Wall coverings.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Alcoholic beverage sales. Any permitted use which
includes the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption or carry out.



         (b)   Automobile service.



            1.   Automobile repair - minor;



            2.   Automobile parts sales (new); and



            3.   Gasoline service station with repair.



         (c)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (d)   Educational use. Child caring institution.



         (e)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Drive-in/drive-through restaurant;



            2.   Restaurant with alcoholic beverages; and



            3.   Roadside food sales stand.



         (f)   Governmental use. Penal or correctional
institution.



         (g)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Motel; and



            2.   Veterinary hospital, without boarding.



         (h)   Professional services.



            1.   Electrical contractors; and



            2.   Plumbing contractors.



         (i)   Public facilities.



            1.   Neighborhood recycling collection point; and



            2.   Parking garage.



         (j)   Recreation.



            1.   Banquet hall;



            2.   Bowling alley;



            3.   Fraternal organization;



            4.   Lodge or private club;



            5.   Night club; and



            6.   Social club.



         (k)   Residential.



            1.   Multi-family dwelling (See Article 2.8B(10)
for applicable development standards);



            2.   Single-family dwelling (See Article 2.8B(11)
for applicable development standards); and



            3.   Two-family dwelling (See Article 2.8B(12) for
applicable development standards).



         (l)   Retail.



            1.   Heating and cooling sales and service;



            1.   Liquor store; and



            1.   Satellite dish sales and service.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -; Ord. 32-2005, passed
5-9-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 2.8B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum lot width and frontage on a public street of 25
feet.



      (2)   Yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A front yard and building setback measured
from the greater of the proposed right-of-way or existing right-of-way shall
be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

0 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local/cul-de-sac street
 

0 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

0 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

0 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and minimum rear yard.



            1.   Abutting an alley. Five feet.



            2.   Abutting a lot line. There shall be no
minimum side or rear setback required, provided, however, if a side or rear
setback is provided along any side or rear lot line not abutting an alley,
such setback shall be not less than five feet.



         (c)   Minimum side bufferyard and minimum rear
bufferyard. Five feet.



      (3)   Use of yards and bufferyards. All yards and bufferyards,
when provided, shall be landscaped in compliance with the requirements set
forth in Article 5.6B(4) and shall remain free from structures except where
expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards.



            1.   Along all interstate streets. May include:
parking areas, loading areas, interior access drives or interior access
driveways, provided that no portion of such area may be located closer to the
right-of-way than 15 feet; or signs as regulated by Article VII - Sign
Regulations of this ordinance, and shall be otherwise maintained as open
space free from buildings or structures; and



            2.   Along all primary arterial streets or
secondary arterial streets, collector streets, local streets or cul-de-sac
streets. May include: driveways; walkways from the sidewalk to a building
entrance; or signs as regulated by Article VII - Sign Regulations of this
ordinance, and shall otherwise be maintained as open space or plazas.



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include: driveways;
walkways from the sidewalk to a building entrance; or signs as regulated by
Article VII - Sign Regulations of this ordinance, and shall otherwise be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures;



         (c)   Side yards and rear yards. If provided, may
include driveways, interior access driveways, parking areas, loading areas,
walkways or other pedestrian way connections to adjoining lots; and



         (d)   Minimum side bufferyards and rear bufferyards. May
include walkways or other pedestrian way connections to adjoining residential
areas provided that the remainder of said yards shall be landscaped and
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures.



      (4)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary structure. 50 feet.



         (b)   Accessory structure. 25 feet.



      (5)   Parking.



         (a)   Nonresidential uses. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street
Parking Regulations; provided, however:



            1.   The total number of required off-street
parking spaces for a single use site or integrated center in the TC District
shall be reduced by 50%;



            2.   A single use site or integrated center in the
TC District may include:



               a.   On-street parking located immediately
adjacent to the single use site or integrated center, if the design and
location of such adjacent on-street parking is approved by the Town Engineer
and Indiana Department of Transportation, as applicable; or



               b.   One row of parking spaces located along
and accessed directly from an alley abutting a side lot line or a rear lot
line, if the design and location of such adjacent alley accessed parking is
approved by the Town Engineer.



            3.   If on-street parking spaces or alley accessed
parking spaces are approved and provided, the amount of off-street parking
spaces required by this ordinance for the single use site or integrated
center shall be deemed to be further reduced by the number of on-street
parking spaces and alley accessed parking spaces provided immediately
adjacent to the single use site or integrated center.



         (b)   Dwelling uses. All dwelling uses located in the
TC: Town Center District shall provide parking spaces at a ratio of one
parking space per dwelling unit. Such parking spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Article IV, provided, however, such parking spaces may be
accessed directly from an alley abutting a side lot line or a rear lot line,
if the design and location of such adjacent alley accessed parking is
approved by the Town Engineer.



      (6)   Loading.



         (a)   All off-street loading areas shall be located
either on the lot served or within 50 feet of the lot served.



         (b)   Each off-street loading area shall be designed and
located in a manner which will not interfere with traffic movements and will
not result in any vehicle, or part thereof, encroaching into any sidewalk,
alley, street or public right-of-way.



         (c)   Off-street loading facilities shall comply with
the requirements of Article IV.



      (7)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (8)   Landscaping. All lots within the TC: Town Center
District shall be landscaped in compliance with requirements of Article
5.6B(4).



      (9)   Outdoor operations.



         (a)   Except for the following uses which may be
conducted outdoors, all uses and operations in the TC District shall be
conducted completely within enclosed buildings:



            1.   Off-street parking, off-street loading and
delivery;



            2.   Walk-up customer service windows and
drive-through customer service windows;



            3.   Outdoor seating and dining areas; and



            4.   Sidewalk sales of goods and merchandise.



         (b)   Provided, however, outdoor seating and dining
areas or sidewalk sales areas shall:



            1.   Not reduce the useable sidewalk width in the
public right-of-way to less than five feet at any point;



            2.   Be completely confined to the lot or retail
space or the area immediately in front of the lot or retail space occupied by
said use; and



            3.   If located in a public right-of-way, be
subject to the approval of the applicable agency (i.e., Indiana Department of
Transportation or the Town Engineer) for activity in a public right-of-way.



      (10)   Development standards for multi-family dwellings.
Notwithstanding anything in this TC District to the contrary, a multi-family
dwellings building which is not a mixed use building shall be subject to the
development standards of the R-U District.



      (11)   Development standards for single-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this TC District to the contrary, a single-family dwelling which is located
on an individual lot shall be subject to the development standards of the R-4
District.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this TC District to the contrary, a single-family
dwelling which is part of a larger multi-family dwelling project shall be
subject to the development standards of the R-U District.



      (12)   Development standards for two-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this TC District to the contrary, a two-family dwelling which is located on
an individual lot and which is not part of a larger multi-family dwelling
project shall be subject to the development standards of the R-5 District
applicable to a two-family dwelling.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this TC District to the contrary, a two-family
dwelling which is part of a larger multi-family dwelling project shall be
subject to the development standards of the R-U District.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -; Ord. 32-2005, passed
5-9-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 2.8C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   All lots located in the TC: Town Center District shall be subject to
the requirements for: the filing of a development plan for architectural and
site design review; and compliance with the development requirements, both as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -; Ord. 32-2005, passed
5-9-2005; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 2.9. NR: NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL COMMERCIAL



§ 2.9  INTENT.



   The NR: Neighborhood Retail Commercial Districts are established to
promote development of areas for convenience uses which tend to meet the
daily needs of the residents of the immediate residential districts. Uses
within the NR Districts are regulated in character to assure harmonious
development with the residential districts served and are limited in size and
scale to promote pedestrian access.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.9A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Clothing service.



            1.   Dressmaking;



            2.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment;



            3.   Millinery shop (fabric shop);



            4.   Self-service laundry;



            5.   Shoe repair shop; and



            6.   Tailor and pressing shop.



         (b)   Communication/utilities. Telephone exchange.



         (c)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Day nursery;



            3.   Kindergarten;



            4.   Library;



            5.   Nursery school;



            6.   School - commercial, trade or business; and



            7.   School - public or private.



         (d)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Bakery - retail;



            2.   Convenience store (no gas sales);



            3.   Dairy - retail;



            4.   Delicatessen;



            5.   Grocery;



            6.   Meat market; and



            7.   Restaurant without alcoholic beverages.



         (e)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office.



         (f)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Clinic, medical, dental or optometrists; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (g)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            5.   Dentist;



            6.   Design services;



            7.   Engineer;



            8.   Insurance agent;



            9.   Lawyer;



            10.   Musician;



            11.   Physician;



            12.   Pharmacist;



            13.   Photographic studio;



            14.   Professional offices;



            15.   Real estate office;



            16.   Service organization office; and



            17.   Travel agency.



         (h)   Personal service.



            1.   Barber shop;



            2.   Beauty shop;



            3.   Health spa or fitness center; and



            4.   Tanning salon.



         (i)   Public facilities.



            1.   Public park; and



            2.   Religious use.



         (j)   Recreation. Dancing, aerobics, gymnastics studio.



         (k)   Residential.



            1.   Assisted living facility;



            2.   Convalescent home; and



            3.   Nursing home.



         (l)   Retail.



            1.   Apparel shop;



            2.   Convenience store (no gas sales);



            3.   Drug store;



            4.   Flower shop;



            5.   Gift shop;



            6.   Newsdealer; and



            7.   Stationery and book store.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Automobile service. Gasoline service station
without repair.



         (b)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (c)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Drive-in/drive-through restaurant;



            2.   Restaurant with alcoholic beverages; and



            3.   Roadside food sales stand.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Print shop.



         (e)   Public facilities. Neighborhood recycling
collection point.



         (f)   Recreation. Lodge or private club.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.9B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum lot width and frontage on a public street of 50
feet.



      (2)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

15 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear yard

 
10 ft.


Minimum rear bufferyard
 
15 ft.



 



         (d)   Minimum yards for out lots. Out lots within an
integrated center shall provide a minimum yard of five feet along all lot
lines in common with other out lots or with the main portion of the
integrated center. If any portion of an out lot abuts the perimeter of the
integrated center, that portion of the out lot shall be required to comply
with the applicable minimum front, side or rear yard requirements set forth
above. The main portion of the integrated center shall not be required to
provide a minimum yard along the lot line in common with an out lot.



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include driveways and
parking areas (provided that no portion of the parking area may be located
closer to the right-of-way than ten feet; except for minimum front yards
abutting the Ronald Reagan Parkway or a frontage street parallel to the
Ronald Reagan Parkway, where parking areas shall be prohibited) and shall be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in compliance with
the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include driveways
and shall be maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in
compliance with the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth
in Article IV;



         (c)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (d)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 35 feet.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outdoor operations. All uses and operations (except
off-street parking, off-street loading and delivery, walk-up customer service
windows and drive-through customer service windows) shall be conducted
completely within enclosed buildings, except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Outdoor seating shall not be located between a
building line and a bufferyard;



         (b)   Vending machines, provided that vending machines:



            1.   Shall abut the exterior wall of the building;
and



            2.   Shall not be located in a required yard or
required bufferyard.



         (c)   Outdoor display or sales, provided that such
display or sales shall:



            1.   Be accessory to the primary use;



            2.   Not exceed 1% of the gross floor area of each
non-related and separately operated use;



            3.   Shall not be located in a required yard or
required bufferyard; and



            4.   Shall not be located so as to interfere or
conflict with walks, required parking areas, required loading areas,
driveways, interior access drives, interior access driveways, perimeter
landscape yards or foundation plantings.



         (d)   Gasoline pumps, provided that no outdoor
operations other than the dispensing or installation of gasoline, oil,
antifreeze and other similar products and the performance of minor services
for customers as related to said dispensing or installation are conducted on
the site.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



      (9)   Maximum gross floor area.



         (a)   No single use, whether freestanding or contained
in an integrated center, shall exceed 8,000 square feet of gross floor area.



         (b)   No integrated center shall exceed 24,000 square
feet of total gross floor area.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.9C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the NR
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.9D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the NR District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.10. OD: OFFICE DISTRICT



§ 2.10  INTENT.



   OD: Office Districts are established to promote the development of
areas where office uses, compatible office-type businesses, and some public
and semi-public uses are developed in close proximity with commercial areas
while serving as a buffer or transitional area between commercial areas and
existing or future residential areas. Uses within the OD Districts are
regulated in character to assure harmonious development with the residential
districts which the OD Districts buffers from more intense commercial
development.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.10A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities. Telephone exchange.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Day nursery;



            3.   Nursery school;



            4.   Kindergarten;



            5.   Library; and



            6.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office (without storage of delivery
vehicles).



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Clinic, medical, dental or
optometrists.



         (e)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            5.   Dentist;



            6.   Design services;



            7.   Engineer;



            8.   Insurance agent;



            9.   Lawyer;



            10.   Musician;



            11.   Physician;



            12.   Pharmacist;



            13.   Photographic studio;



            14.   Professional offices;



            15.   Real estate office;



            16.   Service organization office; and



            17.   Travel agency.



         (f)   Public facilities.



            1.   Museum;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (g)   Residential.



            1.   Assisted living facility;



            2.   Nursing home; and



            3.   Convalescent home.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Restaurant without alcoholic beverages; and



            2.   Restaurant with alcoholic beverages.



         (c)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Hotel.



         (d)   Personal service. Health spa or fitness center.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Neighborhood recycling collection point; and



            3.   Parking garage.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.10B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum lot width and frontage on a public street of 50
feet.



      (2)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

15 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

15 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (d)   Minimum yards for out lots. Out lots within an
integrated center shall provide a minimum yard of five feet along all lot
lines in common with other out lots or with the main portion of the
integrated center. If any portion of an out lot abuts the perimeter of the
integrated center, that portion of the out lot shall be required to comply
with the applicable minimum front, side or rear yard requirements set forth
above. The main portion of the integrated center shall not be required to
provide a minimum yard along the lot line in common with an out lot.



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include driveways and
parking areas (provided that no portion of the parking area may be located
closer to the right-of-way than the ten feet; except for minimum front yards
abutting the Ronald Reagan Parkway or a frontage street parallel to the
Ronald Reagan Parkway, where parking areas shall be prohibited) and shall be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in compliance with
the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include driveways
and shall be maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in
compliance with the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth
in Article IV;



         (c)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (d)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 35 feet.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outdoor operations. All uses and operations (except
off-street parking, off-street loading and delivery, walk-up customer service
windows and drive-through customer service windows) shall be conducted
completely within enclosed buildings.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.10C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the OD
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.10D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the OD District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.11. GC: GENERAL COMMERCIAL



§ 2.11  INTENT.



   GC: General Commercial Districts are established to provide a location
for higher volume and higher intensity commercial uses than the NR District.
Activities in this District are often large space users located along a
primary arterial street and the perimeter parkway and may include outdoor
sales or operations.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.11A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Automobile service.



            1.   Automobile sales, new or used, including
showroom, on-site service department, and wash/detail facilities;



            2.   Automobile rental services;



            3.   Automobile repair - major;



            4.   Automobile repair - minor;



            5.   Automobile parts sales (new);



            6.   Car wash (automatic and self);



            7.   Gasoline service station with minor repair
(not to exceed two accessory indoor service bays);



            8.   Gasoline service station without repair;



            9.   Motor cycle/scooter sales, service and repair;



            10.   Muffler repair shop;



            11.   Painting and customizing;



            12.   Quick lube facilities; and



            13.   Tire and auto service center.



         (b)   Clothing service.



            1.   Dressmaking;



            2.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment;



            3.   Millinery shop (fabric shop);



            4.   Self-service laundry;



            5.   Shoe repair shop; and



            6.   Tailor and pressing shop.



         (c)   Communications/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower;



            2.   Public wells; and



            3.   Telephone exchange.



         (d)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Library;



            3.   School - public or private; and



            4.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (e)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Bakery - retail;



            2.   Dairy - retail;



            3.   Delicatessen;



            4.   Drive-in/drive-through restaurant;



            5.   Grocery;



            6.   Convenience store;



            7.   Meat market; and



            8.   Restaurant.



         (f)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office, without outdoor parking of
delivery vehicles.



         (g)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Agriculture seed sales;



            2.   Bus station;



            3.   Clinic, medical, dental or optometrists;



            4.   Electrical repair;



            5.   Hospital/sanitarium/rehabilitation center;



            6.   Hotel;



            7.   Motel (not within 600 feet of a Gateway
Corridor);



            8.   Mortuary/funeral home/crematories;



            9.   Print shop;



            10.   Radio/television stations (without
transmission towers);



            11.   Sign painting;



            12.   Tool/equipment rental (without outdoor
display or storage);



            13.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast; and



            14.   Veterinary hospital, including boarding
(without outdoor pet runs or kennels).



         (h)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            5.   Construction companies, contractors, and home
remodeling companies;



            6.   Dentist;



            7.   Design services;



            8.   Engineer;



            9.   Insurance agent;



            10.   Lawyer;



            11.   Musician;



            12.   Physician;



            13.   Pharmacist;



            14.   Photographic studio;



            15.   Professional offices;



            16.   Real estate office;



            17.   Research laboratories;



            18.   Service organization office; and



            19.   Travel agency.



         (i)   Personal service.



            1.   Barber shop;



            2.   Beauty shop;



            3.   Health spa or fitness center;



            4.   Locksmith/security systems; and



            5.   Tanning salon.



         (j)   Public facilities.



            1.   Museum;



            2.   Public park;



            3.   Parking lot; and



            4.   Religious use.



         (k)   Recreation.



            1.   Arcade;



            2.   Bait sales;



            3.   Banquet hall;



            4.   Billiard room;



            5.   Bowling alley;



            6.   Dancing, aerobics, gymnastics, cheerleading
studio;



            7.   Indoor recreation;



            8.   Lodge or private club;



            9.   Night club;



            10.   Skating rink (ice and roller), indoor;



            11.   Social hall;



            12.   Tennis/racquet club, indoor;



            13.   Theater, indoor; and



            14.   Video store.



         (l)   Residential.



            1.   Assisted living facility;



            2.   Convalescent home; and



            3.   Nursing home.



         (m)   Retail.



            1.   Antique shop;



            2.   Apparel shop;



            3.   Appliance store;



            4.   Convenience store;



            5.   Department store;



            6.   Drug store;



            7.   Floor coverings;



            8.   Flower shop;



            9.   Furniture store;



            10.   Gift shop;



            11.   Gun shop and gunsmith shop;



            12.   Hardware store;



            13.   Home improvement store;



            14.   Jewelry store;



            15.   Music store;



            16.   Newsdealer;



            17.   Paint store;



            18.   Radio, TV, music service and sales;



            19.   Retail showroom;



            20.   Shoe store;



            21.   Stationery and book store;



            22.   Sporting goods;



            23.   Variety store; and



            24.   Wall coverings.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Alcoholic beverage sales. Any permitted use which
includes the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption or carry-out.



         (b)   Agricultural uses.



            1.   Commercial greenhouse;



            2.   Cropland and orchards; and



            3.   Plant nursery.



         (c)   Automobile service.



            1.   Automobile auction;



            2.   Automobile sales, new or used, without a
showroom, on-site service department or wash/detail facilities;



            3.   RV and camper sales and service;



            4.   Truck or bus sales and service; and



            5.   Truck rental services.



         (d)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (e)   Educational uses.



            1.   Child caring institution; and



            2.   Kindergarten.



         (f)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Farmers market; and



            2.   Roadside food sales stand.



         (g)   Governmental use. Post office, with outdoor
parking of delivery vehicles.



         (h)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake;



            2.   Boat sales, service and storage;



            3.   Farm equipment sales and service;



            4.   Motel (within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor);



            5.   Radio/television stations (with transmission
towers);



            6.   Self-storage (mini-) warehouse (not within
600 feet of a Gateway Corridor);



            7.   Tool/equipment rental (with outdoor display
or storage); and



            8.   Veterinary hospital, including boarding (with
outdoor pet runs or kennels).



         (i)   Personal service. Tattoo, body piercing,
scarifying and branding establishments.



         (j)   Public facilities.



            1.   Neighborhood recycling collection point;



            2.   Parking garage; and



            3.   Recycling facility.



         (k)   Recreation.



            1.   Amusement park;



            2.   Ball fields;



            3.   Driving range;



            4.   Miniature golf;



            5.   Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise;



            6.   Private recreational development;



            7.   Skating rink (ice and roller), outdoor;



            8.   Stadium/arena;



            9.   Tennis/racquet club, outdoor; and



            10.   Theater, outdoor.



         (l)   Retail.



            1.   Liquor store;



            2.   Lumber yard;



            3.   Manufactured, modular or mobile home sales
and display; and



            4.   Satellite dish sales and service.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.11B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum lot width and frontage on a public street of 50
feet.



      (2)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

20 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

20 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (d)   Minimum yards for out lots. Out lots within an
integrated center shall provide a minimum yard of five feet along all lot
lines in common with other out lots or with the main portion of the
integrated center. If any portion of an out lot abuts the perimeter of the
integrated center, that portion of the out lot shall be required to comply
with the applicable minimum front, side or rear yard requirements set forth
above. The main portion of the integrated center shall not be required to
provide a minimum yard along the lot line in common with an out lot.



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include driveways and
parking areas (provided that no portion of the parking area may be located
closer to the right-of-way than the ten feet; except for minimum front yards
abutting the Ronald Reagan Parkway or a frontage street parallel to the
Ronald Reagan Parkway, where parking areas shall be prohibited) and shall be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in compliance with
the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include driveways
and shall be maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in
compliance with the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth
in Article IV;



         (c)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (d)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees, or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 75 feet.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outdoor operations. Outdoor operations, including the
display of goods or materials for sale, lease or rental may be conducted
subject to the following regulations.



         (a)   Outdoor operations shall not be located between a
building line and a bufferyard.



         (b)   Outdoor operations shall not be located in a
required yard or required bufferyard.



         (c)   Outdoor operations shall not be located so as to
interfere or conflict with walks, required parking areas, required loading
areas, driveways, interior access drives, interior access driveways,
perimeter landscape yards or foundation plantings.



         (d)   Vending machines shall abut the exterior wall of a
building and shall not be located in a required yard or required bufferyard.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.11C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the GC
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.11D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the GC District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.12. I-1: RESEARCH/OFFICE INDUSTRIAL



§ 2.12  INTENT.



   The Research/Office Industrial Districts are established to promote the
development of research facilities, testing laboratories and administrative
facilities that are office-like in physical appearance and service
requirements. This district is used as a transitional use or buffer between
residential areas and more intense industrial uses.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.12A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses.



            1.   Commercial greenhouse;



            2.   Cropland and orchards; and



            3.   Plant nursery.



         (b)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower; and



            2.   Telephone exchange.



         (c)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center; and



            2.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (d)   Governmental use.



            1.   Police station;



            2.   Post office; and



            3.   Fire station.



         (e)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Engineering laboratories;



            2.   Flex-space; and



            3.   Research laboratories.



         (f)   Miscellaneous. Mail order distribution.



         (g)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/credit union;



            5.   Dentist;



            6.   Design services;



            7.   Engineer;



            8.   Insurance agent;



            9.   Lawyer;



            10.   Musician;



            11.   Physician;



            12.   Pharmacist;



            13.   Professional offices;



            14.   Real estate office;



            15.   Photographic studio;



            16.   Service organization office; and



            17.   Travel agency.



         (h)   Public facilities. Public park.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational uses. Kindergarten.



         (c)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Restaurant without alcoholic beverages; and



            2.   Restaurant with alcoholic beverages.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Artificial lake.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Neighborhood recycling collection point; and



            2.   Religious use.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.12B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot, integrated
center or industrial park shall have a minimum of 75 feet on a public street.



      (2)   Minimum yards and minimum building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

25 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

25 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and minimum front bufferyards.
May include driveways and shall be maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for perimeter
landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (c)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 35 feet.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outside storage and operations. All storage, servicing
and operations, except for parking and loading, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.12C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the I-1
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.12D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the I-1 District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.13. I-2: OFFICE/WAREHOUSE DISTRIBUTION



§ 2.13  INTENT.



   The I-2: Office/Warehouse Distribution Districts are established to
encourage the development of office/warehouse, warehouse/distribution,
wholesale and assembly business establishments which are: clean, quiet, free
of hazardous or objectionable elements such as noise, odor, dust, smoke or
glare; operated entirely within enclosed structures; and which require
reasonable access to arterial streets or collector streets. This District is
designed as a transitional use between manufacturing uses and other less
intense business uses.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.13A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses.



            1.   Commercial greenhouse;



            2.   Cropland and orchards; and



            3.   Plant nursery.



         (b)   Communications/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower; and



            2.   Telephone exchange.



         (c)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center as ancillary to primary
use; and



            2.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (d)   Food sales and service. Wholesale produce terminal.



         (e)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Police station; and



            3.   Post office.



         (f)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Assembly of previously manufactured parts,
sub-assemblies or components;



            2.   Bottled gas storage and distribution;



            3.   Engineering laboratories;



            4.   Distribution center;



            5.   Light assembly or repair of previously
manufactured parts:



               a.   Appliances:



                  i.   Light;



                  ii.   Portable; and



                  iii.   Household.



               b.   Bottling of beverages;



               c.   Bottling of food;



               d.   Bottling of milk products;



               e.   Clocks and watches;



               f.   Cloth products from finished cloth;



               g.   Electric hand tools;



               h.   Electric motors;



               i.   Electrical components and
sub-assemblies;



               j.   Leather products from finished leather;



               k.   Light component parts of products;



               l.   Office equipment including assembly;



               m.   Office machinery, electrical and
mechanical;



               n.   Optical goods;



               o.   Paper box and paper products from
finished paper;



               p.   Recording instruments; and



               q.   Tools and implements (electrical or
non-electrical).



            6.   Research laboratories;



            7.   Warehouse; and



            8.   Warehouse and distribution center.



         (g)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Mail order distribution; and



            2.   Wholesale business.



         (h)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Offices (related to and in conjunction with
another permitted use); and



            2.   Construction companies, contractors and home
remodeling companies (including storage of materials and equipment with
accessory offices but no retail commercial activities).



         (i)   Public facilities. Public park.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use. Freestanding child care center.



         (c)   Industrial use. Truck terminal.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake;



            2.   Self-storage (mini-) warehouse (not within
600 feet of a Gateway Corridor); and



            3.   Welding.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Neighborhood recycling collection point; and



            2.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Dancing, aerobics, gymnastics, cheerleading
studio;



            2.   Indoor recreation skating rink (ice and
roller), indoor;



            3.   Stadium/arena; and



            4.   Tennis/racquet club, indoor.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.13B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot, integrated
center or industrial park shall have a minimum of 100 feet on a public street.



      (2)   Minimum yards and minimum building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

60 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

120 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

90 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

50 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

50 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and minimum front bufferyards.
May include driveways and shall be maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for perimeter
landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (c)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 75 feet, provided however, that
the setback for that portion of the building or structure which is in excess
of 35 feet shall be increased by one foot each one foot of building or
structural height above 35 feet until the ultimate height of 75 feet is
allowed.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outside storage and operations.



         (a)   Operations. All operations, servicing and
processing located within 600 feet of either a residential district boundary
or Gateway Corridor (except outside storage, off-street parking and
off-street loading) shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



         (b)   Storage. All storage of materials or products
within 600 feet of a residential district boundary or Gateway Corridor shall
be either:



            1.   Within completely enclosed buildings; or



            2.   Effectively screened within a chain link,
lattice or similar type fenced area, with ornamental, non-solid or chain link
gates. The height of said fence shall be at least six feet and shall not
exceed eight feet. Materials or products stored within the enclosure shall
not exceed the height thereof. The storage area shall be surrounded by
landscaping installed in compliance with the provisions of Article IV for
Level 3 Perimeter Landscape Requirements.



         (c)   Amount of outside storage and operations. The
total area devoted to outside storage and operations shall not exceed 10% of
the gross floor area of enclosed structures or buildings on the lot.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.13C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the I-2
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



§ 2.13D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the I-2 District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 18-2010, passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed
2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.14. I-3: LIGHT MANUFACTURING



§ 2.14  INTENT.



   The I-3: Light Manufacturing Districts are established to encourage
development of manufacturing and processing facilities which may require
limited amounts of outside storage. These activities require extensive
community facilities, and excellent access to arterial streets or collector
streets. Permitted uses in this District may have outdoor storage/service
areas and may generate heavy traffic, but such operations shall be subject to
specific development standards.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 18-2010,
passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.14A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses.



            1.   Commercial greenhouse;



            2.   Cropland and orchards; and



            3.   Plant nursery.



         (b)   Automobile service.



            1.   Auto/truck storage (outdoor);



            2.   Painting and customizing; and



            3.   Racing and testing.



         (c)   Communications/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower;



            2.   Storage tanks - non-hazardous; and



            3.   Telephone exchange.



         (d)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center as ancillary to primary
use; and



            2.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (e)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Farmers market; and



            2.   Wholesale produce terminal.



         (f)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Police station; and



            3.   Post office.



         (g)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Assembly of previously manufactured parts,
sub-assemblies or components;



            2.   Bottled gas storage and distribution;



            3.   Distribution center;



            4.   Engineering laboratories;



            5.   Manufacture, assembly or repair of:



               a.   Alcoholic beverages;



               b.   Appliances:



                  i.   Light;



                  ii.   Major electric or gas;



                  iii.   Portable; and



                  iv.   Household.



               c.   Bottling of beverages;



               d.   Bottling of food;



               e.   Bottling of milk products;



               f.   Brewing distillation of liquor and
spirits;



               g.   Cabinets;



               h.   Cans;



               i.   Clocks and watches;



               j.   Cloth products from finished cloth;



               k.   Coating (excluding tar products);



               l.   Communication equipment and assembly;



               m.   Construction equipment and machinery;



               n.   Containers;



               o.   Cosmetics;



               p.   Dairy or milk products;



               q.   Detergents and soaps;



               r.   Electric hand tools;



               s.   Electric neon signs;



               t.   Electric materials;



               u.   Electric motors;



               v.   Electrical components and
sub-assemblies;



               w.   Elevators;



               x.   Furniture;



               y.   Jewelry (including engraving);



               z.   Leather products from finished leather;



               aa.   Light component parts of products;



               bb.   Machinery and machinery components;



               cc.   Malt products;



               dd.   Marine equipment;



               ee.   Mattresses;



               ff.   Medicine;



               gg.   Musical instruments;



               hh.   Non-alcoholic beverages;



               ii.   Office equipment including assembly;



               jj.   Office machinery, electrical and
mechanical;



               kk.   Optical goods;



               ll.   Paper box and paper products from
finished paper;



               mm.   Pharmaceutical products;



               nn.   Phonograph records and compact discs;



               oo.   Prefabricated wood building and
structural members;



               pp.   Recording instruments;



               qq.   Sports equipment;



               rr.   Starch;



               ss.   Textiles;



               tt.   Tools and implements (electrical or
non-electrical); and



               uu.   Toys.



            6.   Petroleum tank farm (commercial);



            7.   Research laboratories;



            8.   Truck terminal;



            9.   Warehouse; and



            10.   Warehouse and distribution center.



         (h)   Office/professional services. Construction
companies, contractors and home remodeling companies (including storage of
materials and equipment with accessory offices but no retail commercial
activities).



         (i)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Machine shop;



            2.   Mail order distribution;



            3.   Welding shop; and



            4.   Wholesale business.



         (j)   Public facilities. Public park.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use. Freestanding child care center.



         (c)   Governmental use. Penal or correctional
institution.



         (d)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Coatings manufacture (excluding tar products);



            2.   Concrete mixing;



            3.   Foundries;



            4.   Iron and steel production;



            5.   Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution
(commercial);



            6.   Lumber mill;



            7.   Meat and meat products:



               a.   Packing; and



               b.   Processing.



            8.   Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil
removal and storage areas;



            9.   Oil processing, refining and manufacture; and



            10.   Power plants, including:



               a.   Thermal;



               b.   Electric (utilizing efuse-derived
fuels); and



               c.   Steam (utilizing refuse-derived fuels).



         (e)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Self-storage (mini-) warehouse (not within
600 feet of a Gateway Corridor).



         (f)   Public facilities.



            1.   Recycling facility;



            2.   Religious use;



            3.   Resource recovery facility; and



            4.   Transfer station.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 18-2010,
passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.14B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot, integrated
center or industrial park shall have a minimum of 150 feet on a public street.



      (2)   Minimum yards and minimum building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

60 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

120 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

90 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

100 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

100 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and minimum front bufferyards.
May include driveways and shall be maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for perimeter
landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (c)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. Unlimited, provided however,
that the setback for that portion of the building or structure which is in
excess of 35 feet shall be increased by one foot each one foot of building or
structural height above 35 feet until the ultimate height of building or
structure is allowed.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outside storage and operations.



         (a)   Operations. All operations, servicing and
processing located within 600 feet of either a residential district boundary
or Gateway Corridor (except outside storage, off-street parking and
off-street loading) shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



         (b)   Storage. All storage of materials or products
within 600 feet of a residential district boundary or Gateway Corridor shall
be either:



            1.   Within completely enclosed buildings; or



            2.   Effectively screened within a chain link,
lattice or similar type fenced area, with ornamental, non-solid or chain link
gates. The height of said fence shall be at least six feet and shall not
exceed eight feet. Materials or products stored within the enclosure shall
not exceed the height thereof. The storage area shall be surrounded by
landscaping installed in compliance with the provisions of Article IV for
Level 3 Perimeter Landscape Requirements.



         (c)   Amount of outside storage and operations. The
total area devoted to outside storage and operations shall not exceed 25% of
the gross floor area of enclosed structures or buildings on the lot.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 18-2010,
passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.14C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the I-3
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 18-2010,
passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.14D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the I-3 District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 18-2010,
passed 11-22-2010; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.15. I-4: HEAVY MANUFACTURING



§ 2.15  INTENT.



   The I-4: Heavy Manufacturing Districts are established to encourage
development of heavy manufacturing and processing facilities which may
require substantial amounts of outside storage. These activities require
extensive community facilities, and excellent access to arterial streets or
collector streets. Permitted uses in this District may have extensive outdoor
storage/service areas and may generate heavy traffic, but such operations
shall be subject to specific development standards. The permitted uses
provided for in this District should never be located in close proximity to
residential areas.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.15A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses.



            1.   Commercial greenhouse;



            2.   Cropland and orchards; and



            3.   Plant nursery.



         (b)   Automobile service.



            1.   Auto/truck storage (outdoor);



            2.   Painting and customizing; and



            3.   Racing and testing.



         (c)   Communications/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower;



            2.   Storage tanks - non-hazardous; and



            3.   Telephone exchange.



         (d)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Farmers market; and



            2.   Wholesale produce terminal.



         (e)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Police station; and



            3.   Post office.



         (f)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Assembly of previously manufactured parts,
sub-assemblies or components;



            2.   Bottled gas storage and distribution;



            3.   Distribution center;



            4.   Engineering laboratories



            5.   Manufacture, assembly or repair of:



               a.   Alcoholic beverages;



               b.   Appliances:



                  i.   Light;



                  ii.   Major electric or gas;



                  iii.   Portable; and



                  iv.   Household.



               c.   Boiler tank;



               d.   Bottling of beverages;



               e.   Bottling of food;



               f.   Bottling of milk products;



               g.   Brewing distillation of liquor and
spirits;



               h.   Cabinets;



               i.   Cans;



               j.   Cement, lime or gypsum;



               k.   Ceramic and clay products;



               l.   Cinder block and other similar building
materials;



               m.   Clocks and watches;



               n.   Cloth products from finished cloth;



               o.   Coating (excluding tar products);



               p.   Communication equipment and assembly;



               q.   Concrete blocks and shapes production;



               r.   Concrete paving materials preparation;



               s.   Construction equipment and machinery;



               t.   Containers;



               u.   Cosmetics;



               v.   Dairy or milk products;



               w.   Detergents and soaps;



               x.   Electric hand tools;



               y.   Electric neon signs;



               z.   Electric materials;



               aa.   Electric motors;



               bb.   Electrical components and
sub-assemblies;



               cc.   Elevators;



               dd.   Furniture;



               ee.   Glass and glass products



               ff.   Jewelry (including engraving);



               gg.   Leather products from finished leather;



               hh.   Light component parts of products;



               ii.   Machinery and machinery components;



               jj.   Malt products;



               kk.   Marine equipment;



               ll.   Mattresses;



               mm.   Medicine;



               nn.   Musical instruments;



               oo.   Non-alcoholic beverages;



               pp.   Office equipment including assembly;



               qq.   Office machinery, electrical and
mechanical;



               rr.   Optical goods;



               ss.   Paper box and paper products from
finished paper;



               tt.   Pharmaceutical products;



               uu.   Phonograph records and compact discs;



               vv.   Prefabricated wood building and
structural members;



               ww.   Recording instruments;



               xx.   Sports equipment;



               yy.   Starch;



               zz.   Textiles;



               aaa.   Tools and implements (electrical or
non-electrical);



               bbb.   Toys; and



               ccc.   Veneer (veneer mills).



            6.   Millwork, planing mill and saw mill;



            7.   Petroleum tank farm (commercial);



            8.   Research laboratories;



            9.   Rolling and extruding of metal;



            10.   Truck terminal;



            11.   Warehouse; and



            12.   Warehouse and distribution center.



         (g)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Machine shop;



            2.   Mail order distribution;



            3.   Self-storage (mini-) warehouse;



            4.   Welding shop; and



            5.   Wholesale business.



         (h)   Office/professional services. Construction
companies, contractors and home remodeling companies (including storage of
materials and equipment with accessory offices but no retail commercial
activities)



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Governmental use. Penal or correctional
institution.



         (b)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Blast furnace or open hearth;



            2.   Coatings manufacture (excluding tar products);



            3.   Coke ovens;



            4.   Concrete mixing;



            5.   Foundries;



            6.   Iron and steel production;



            7.   Junk yard;



            8.   Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution
(commercial);



            9.   Lumber mill;



            10.   Manufacturing, including:



               a.   Asphalt production;



               b.   Asphaltic paving materials preparation;



               c.   Batch plant (asphalt or concrete
production);



               d.   Biological;



               e.   Gases and chemicals;



               f.   Glue;



               g.   Paper;



               h.   Railroad equipment (including repair
and service)



               i.   Rubber products;



               j.   Tar, tar paper, tar products
processing; and



               k.   Tire and inner tubes.



            11.   Meat and meat products:



               a.   Packing; and



               b.   Processing.



            12.   Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil
removal and storage areas;



            13.   Oil processing, refining and manufacture;



            14.   Power plants, including:



               a.   Thermal;



               b.   Electric (utilizing refuse-derived
fuels); and



               c.   Steam (utilizing refuse-derived fuels).



            15.   Slaughterhouse.



         (c)   Public facilities.



            1.   Public or commercial sanitary fill, refuse
dump or garbage disposal plant;



            2.   Recycling facility;



            3.   Religious use;



            4.   Resource recovery facility; and



            5.   Transfer station.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.15B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot, integrated
center or industrial park shall have a minimum of 150 feet on a public street.



      (2)   Minimum yards and minimum building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

60 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

120 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

90 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

150 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

20 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

150 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

20 ft.




 



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and minimum front bufferyards.
May include driveways and shall be maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for perimeter
landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV; and



         (c)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



      (4)   Maximum building height. Unlimited, provided however,
that the setback for that portion of the building or structure which is in
excess of 35 feet shall be increased by one foot each one foot of building or
structural height above 35 feet until the ultimate height of building or
structure is allowed.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. See Article VII.



      (7)   Outside storage and operations.



         (a)   Operations. All operations, servicing and
processing located within 600 feet of either a residential district boundary
or Gateway Corridor (except outside storage, off-street parking and
off-street loading) shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.



         (b)   Storage. All storage of materials or products
within 600 feet of a residential district boundary or Gateway Corridor shall
be either:



            1.   Within completely enclosed buildings; or



            2.   Effectively screened within a chain link,
lattice or similar type fenced area, with ornamental, non-solid or chain link
gates. The height of said fence shall be at least six feet and shall not
exceed eight feet. Materials or products stored within the enclosure shall
not exceed the height thereof. The storage area shall be surrounded by
landscaping installed in compliance with the provisions of Article IV for
Level 4 Perimeter Landscape Requirements.



         (c)   Amount of outside storage and operations. The
total area devoted to outside storage and operations shall not exceed 50% of
total lot area.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.15C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   If any portion of a lot proposed for development is located in the I-4
District and within 600 feet of a residential district or Gateway Corridor,
the entire proposed development located on that lot shall be subject to the
requirements for the filing of a development plan for architectural review as
set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 2.15D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Any proposed development located in the I-4 District shall be eligible
to utilize the development incentives set forth in Article V of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 2.16. AG: AGRICULTURE DISTRICT



§ 2.16  INTENT.



   The AG: Agriculture Districts are established to include land being
used for agricultural activities, floodplain and other rural uses, located
near the periphery of the jurisdictional boundary, which is not expected to
develop for intensive urban or suburban uses within the near future. It is
the intent of this District to allow agricultural uses, to conserve the
desirable characteristics of the land, to preserve prime agriculture land,
and to protect the open area from the encroachment of scatter urban-type uses
that may inhibit the overall development of the community in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 8-2001, passed 7-9-2001)



§ 2.16A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses; including agricultural crop
production; tree farms; agricultural livestock production and the harvesting;
storage and primary processing of agricultural products produced on the
premises; storage of farm vehicles, farm equipment, and farm materials by the
operator of such farm;



         (b)   Single-family dwelling;



         (c)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (d)   Residential facility for the mentally ill;



         (e)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home);



         (f)   Roadside food sales stand;



         (g)   Country club or golf course;



         (h)   Riding stable or trails; and



         (i)   Golf driving range.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Agricultural uses. Confinement feeding yards.



         (b)   Communications/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower;



            2.   Telephone exchange;



            3.   Public utility substation;



            4.   Sewage treatment plant;



            5.   Water treatment plant; and



            6.   Public wells.



         (c)   Educational use.



            1.   Kindergarten;



            2.   Child care center;



            3.   Public library; and



            4.   School - public or private.



         (d)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Penal or correctional institution.



         (e)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Liquid fertilizer storage and distribution
(commercial);



            2.   Mineral extraction, borrow pit, topsoil
removal and storage areas; and



            3.   Slaughterhouse.



         (f)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Cemetery or crematory;



            2.   Commercial breading and raising of non-farm
fowl and animals;



            3.   Farm equipment sales and service;



            4.   Kennel;



            5.   Plant nursery (wholesale);



            6.   Sales barn for livestock sale;



            7.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast; and



            8.   Veterinary hospital, including boarding.



         (g)   Public facilities.



            1.   Airport;



            2.   Public park;



            3.   Religious use; and



            4.   Recycling facility.



         (h)   Recreation.



            1.   Bait sales;



            2.   Lodge or private club;



            3.   Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise;



            4.   Private recreational development;



            5.   Private camp;



            6.   Campground;



            7.   Private or public swimming pool;



            8.   Ball fields;



            9.   Amusement park; and



            10.   Fairgrounds.



         (i)   Residential. Group home.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 8-2001, passed 7-9-2001)



§ 2.16B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. Five acres.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 300 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 300 feet on a public street and
gain direct access from said public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. 10%.



      (5)   Maximum lot depth to width ratio. Four to one.



      (6)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard of 50 feet shall be
provided along all side lot lines.



         (c)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Agricultural building

 

150 ft.



Residential accessory building
 

50 ft.



Residential primary building
 

50 ft.




 



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet.



         (b)   Accessory building. 25 feet.



         (c)   Agricultural building. Unlimited, provided that
for each additional foot over 50 feet in height, one additional foot shall be
added to the minimum yard and building setback requirements.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. The minimum main floor area of
the primary building, exclusive of garage, carport, deck, patio and open
porches:



         (a)   One-story building. 1,200 square feet; and



         (b)   Two or more story building. 800 square feet,
provided, that the total finished floor area shall be at least 1,200 square
feet.



      (9)   Off-street parking. Each dwelling unit shall be provided
with at least two off-street parking spaces.



      (10)   Signs. See Article VII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 8-2001, passed 7-9-2001)



ARTICLE 2.17. R-U: URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 2.17  INTENT.



   The R-U: Urban Residential District is established to protect, promote
and maintain the development of downtown, urban style dwellings and to
provide for limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with a
residential neighborhood. The development standards are designed to promote
the establishment of residential dwelling projects (including single-family
dwelling, two-family dwelling, apartment, townhouse or row house style
developments) in developed areas near the Town Center or other appropriate
“village” settings and which are served by a full range of public
amenities.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.17A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Single-family dwellings (see Article 2.17B(15) for
applicable development standards);



         (b)   Two-family dwellings (see Article 2.17B(16) for
applicable development standards);



         (c)   Multi-family dwellings;



         (d)   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



         (e)   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



         (f)   Child care home (that is used as the primary
residence of the person who operates the child care home).



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Pumping station;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant;



            4.   Telephone exchange; and



            5.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Kindergarten;



            2.   Child care ministry;



            3.   Public library; and



            4.   Schools, public or private.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state road maintenance facility;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Public park; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club or golf course; and



            2.   Private or public swimming pool.



         (g)   Residential.



            1.   Assisted living facility; and



            2.   Group home.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.17B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   All uses permitted in the R-U District shall conform to the following
development standards.



      (1)   Utilities. Connection to public water and public
sanitary sewer facilities shall be mandatory for development in this District.



      (2)   Minimum project frontage. 50 feet on a public street and
gain access from said public street or an abutting alley.



      (3)   Minimum setbacks and perimeter yard requirements. A
minimum setback and perimeter yard shall be provided along all property lines
of the project as follows:



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the greater of the proposed right-of-way or existing
right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 




 

Minimum

 

Maximum



Collector street
 

5 ft.

 

25 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.

 

NA



Local/cul-de-sac street
 

5 ft.

 

25 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.

 

NA



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.

 

NA




 



         (b)   Side. A minimum side yard shall be provided along
all side lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

6 ft.



Nonresidential uses
 

15 ft.



Residential uses
 

6 ft.




 



         (c)   Rear. A minimum rear yard shall be provided along
all rear lot lines as follows:



 


Accessory building

 

5 ft.



Primary building
 

25 ft.




 



      (4)   Use of minimum yards. All minimum yards shall be
landscaped in compliance with the requirements for perimeter yard landscaping
as set forth in Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions of this ordinance and
shall remain free from buildings or structures except where expressly
permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include: driveways;
walkways with a maximum width of up to six feet; or front stairs, stoops,
patios or open balconies which project no more than ten feet from the
building, but shall not encroach into any public right-of-way, and shall
otherwise be maintained as open space free from buildings or structures;



         (b)   Minimum side yards. Shall be maintained as open
space free from buildings or structures; and



         (c)   Minimum rear yards. May include: driveways;
walkways; parking areas; interior access drives; and interior access
driveways, and shall otherwise be maintained open space free from buildings
or structures.







 



      (5)   Minimum interior yards. In projects containing two or
more buildings, interior yards between buildings shall be provided as follows:



         (a)    Around buildings containing dwelling units: six
feet;



         (b)    Around accessory buildings, structures or uses:
five feet;



         (c)   Interior yards shall be measured perpendicular to
the building or structure at all points;



         (d)   The distance between buildings or structures shall
be the sum of each applicable minimum interior yard; and



         (e)   Interior yards shall not overlap any lot line.



      (6)   Use of interior yards.



         (a)   Around buildings containing dwelling units,
required interior yards may be used for: open space; foundation landscaping;
walkways with a maximum width of six feet; interior access drives leading to
parking areas located between the rear lot line and the rear building line;
interior access drives leading to overhead garage doors; or open balconies,
uncovered porches and patios which do not project more than five feet into
the required interior yard.



         (b)    Around accessory buildings or uses, required
interior yards may be used for: open space; foundation landscaping; walkways;
or interior access drives leading to parking spaces or overhead garage doors.







 



      (7)    Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 40 feet, but not to exceed three
stories containing a dwelling unit.



         (b)   Accessory buildings or structures. The lesser of
25 feet or the height of the primary building.



      (8)   Landscaping. See Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions.



      (9)   Lighting. See Article 4.9 - Lighting Standards.



      (10)   Signs. See Article VII - Sign Regulations.



      (11)   Parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street Parking
Regulations; provided, however:



         (a)   A project in the R-U District may include
on-street parking located immediately adjacent to the project, if the design
and location of such adjacent on-street parking is approved by the



Town Engineer;



         (b)   A project in the R-U District may include one row
of parking spaces located along and accessed directly from an alley abutting
a side lot line or a rear lot line, if the design and location of such
adjacent alley accessed parking is approved by the Town Engineer; and



         (c)   If on-street parking spaces or alley accessed
parking spaces are approved and provided, the amount of off-street parking
spaces required by this ordinance shall be deemed to be reduced by the number
of on-street parking spaces and alley accessed parking spaces provided
immediately adjacent lot.



      (12)   Loading. See Article 4.11 - Off-Street Loading
Regulations.



      (13)   Greenway connection required. If the project abuts any
portion of a greenway, a direct linkage from the project to such greenway
shall be provided.



      (14)   Requirements for all private streets, interior access
driveways and interior access drives for multi-family dwelling projects.
Individual buildings and dwelling units located within a multi- family
dwelling project may be served by private streets, interior access driveways
and interior access drives developed in compliance with the standards set
forth in Article 4.13 - Requirements for All Private Streets and Private
Alleys of this ordinance.



      (15)   Development standards for single-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this R-U District to the contrary, a freestanding single-family dwelling
which is located on an individual lot and which as not as part of a larger
multi-family project shall be subject to the applicable development standards
of the R-4 District.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this R-U District to the contrary, a
single-family dwellings which is interspersed with and located as part of a
larger multi-family project shall comply with all the development standards
specified in this Article 2.17B - Development Standards.



      (16)   Development standards for two-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this R-U District to the contrary, a freestanding two-family dwelling which
is located on an individual lot and which as not as part of a larger
multi-family project shall be subject to the applicable development standards
of the R-5 District.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this R-U District to the contrary, a two-family
dwelling which is interspersed with and located as part of a larger
multi-family project shall comply with all the development standards
specified in this Article 2.17B - Development Standards.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.17C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



      (1)   Town Center Neighborhood. All lots located in the R-U:
Urban Residential District when located within the “Town Center
Neighborhood” as designated in the Town Center Plan shall be subject to the
requirements for: the filing of a development plan for architectural and site
design review; and compliance with the development requirements, both as set
forth in Article 5.6.



      (2)   All other locations. Multi-family dwelling projects
located on a lot located in the R-U: Urban Residential District in other
areas of the town shall be subject to the requirements for: the filing of a
development plan for architectural and site design review as set forth in
Article 5.6.; and compliance with the development requirements, as set forth
in Article 5.6C(2) - Multi-family.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



ARTICLE 2.18. MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT



§ 2.18  INTENT.



   The MU Mixed Use District is established to promote the development of
an urban residential environment. The regulations are intended to encourage
single-family urban residential use and development while allowing
flexibility for minor office and commercial uses. The development standards
in this District are designed to: promote a residential character of
development; encourage the maintenance and renovation of historic structures;
encourage a pedestrian oriented design throughout the District; and maintain
an appropriate pedestrian scale, massing and relationship between buildings
and structures within the District.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.18A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Educational uses. Child care home (that is used as
the primary residence of the person who operates the child care home).



         (b)   Miscellaneous.* Bed and breakfast.



         (c)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Consultant;



            4.   Design services;



            5.   Engineer;



            6.   Insurance agent;



            7.   Lawyer;



            8.   Musician;



            9.   Photographic studio;



            10.   Real estate office; and



            11.   Travel agency.



         (d)   Personal service.*



            1.   Barber shop; and



            2.   Beauty shop.



         (e)   Residential.



            1.   Dwelling unit - upper level;



            2.   Dwelling unit - first floor with business;



            3.   Residential facility for the developmentally
disabled;



            4.   Residential facility for the mentally ill; and



            5.   Single-family dwelling (see Article 2.18B(14)
for applicable development standards).



         (f)   Retail.*



            1.   Antique shop; and



            2.   Art gallery.



* See Article 2.18B(5) for area limitations.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Clothing service.*



            1.   Costume rental;



            2.   Dressmaking;



            3.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment;



            4.   Millinery (fabric) shop;



            5.   Shoe repair shop;



            6.   Tailor and pressing shop; and



            7.   Tuxedo rental.



         (b)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Electricity relay station;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Pumping stations; and



            4.   Water towers.



         (c)   Educational uses.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Child care ministry;



            3.   Cottage school; and



            4.   Public library.



         (d)   Food sales and service.*



            1.   Bakery - retail;



            2.   Convenience store;



            3.   Dairy bar - retail;



            4.   Delicatessen;



            5.   Grocery;



            6.   Ice cream store - retail;



            7.   Restaurant with or without alcoholic
beverages and without drive-in or drive-through service; and



            8.   Yogurt store - retail.



         (e)   Government use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Municipal/state road maintenance facility;



            4.   Police station; and



            5.   Post office - without outside parking of
delivery vehicles.



         (f)   Miscellaneous.*



            1.   Bus station;



            2.   Clinic (medical, dental or optometrists); and



            3.   Electrical/electronics repair



         (g)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            2.   Bank machines - walk-up;



            3.   Dentist;



            4.   Financial institution;



            5.   Physician;



            6.   Pharmacist; and



            7.   Professional offices (any type).



         (h)   Public facilities.



            1.   Community center;



            2.   Funeral home;



            3.   Mortuary;



            4.   Neighborhood recycling collection point;



            5.   Parking lot - commercial;



            6.   Public park; and



            7.   Religious use.



         (i)   Recreation.*



            1.   Aerobics studio;



            2.   Arcade;



            3.   Banquet hall;



            4.   Billiard hall;



            5.   Dance studio;



            6.   Fraternal organization;



            7.   Gymnastics studio;



            8.   Lodge or private club;



            9.   Social club;



            10.   Swimming pool - private or public; and



            11.   Theater - indoor.



         (j)   Residential.



            1.   Assisted living facility;



            2.   Group home;



            3.   Multi-family dwelling (see Article 2.18B(13)
for applicable development standards); and



            4.   Two-family dwelling (see Article 2.18B(15)
for applicable development standards).



         (k)   Retail.*



            1.   Apparel shop;



            2.   Arts and craft store;



            3.   Bicycle sales and service;



            4.   Camera store;



            5.   Card shop;



            6.   Clock shop;



            7.   Coin and stamp shop;



            8.   Computer store;



            9.   Drug store



            10.   Flower shop;



            11.   Frame shop;



            12.   Gift shop;



            13.   Hobby shop;



            14.   Jewelry store;



            15.   Liquor store;



            16.   Music store;



            17.   Newsdealer;



            18.   Shoe store;



            19.   Stationery and book store;



            20.   Tobacco store;



            21.   Toy or game shop; and



            22.   Video store.



*See Article 2.18B(5) for area limitations.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Home occupations. See Article IV.



      (5)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.18B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum lot width and frontage on a public street of 30
feet.



      (2)   Yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front.



            1.   A front yard and building setback measured
from the greater of the proposed right-of-way or existing right-of-way shall
be provided as follows:



 




 

Minimum

 

Maximum



Collector street
 

5 ft.

 

20 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.

 

NA



Local/cul-de-sac street
 

5 ft.

 

20 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.

 

NA



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.

 

NA




 



            2.   Provided, however, on all collector streets,
local streets and cul-de-sac streets, parking areas and interior access
drives shall not be located in front of the maximum setback.



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. The minimum side
yard and setback for all integrated centers and single use sites shall be as
follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

15 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

5 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. The minimum rear
yard and setback for all integrated centers and single use sites shall be as
follows:



 


Minimum rear bufferyard

 

15 ft.



Minimum rear yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (d)   Minimum yards for out lots. All lots which are
part of an integrated center shall be considered out lots. Out lots within an
integrated center shall not be required to provide a minimum side yard or
minimum rear yard along lot lines in common with other out lots. If any
portion of an out lot abuts the perimeter of an integrated center, that
portion of the out lot shall be required to comply with the applicable
minimum front yard, minimum side yard or minimum rear yard requirements set
forth above.



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter yard landscaping as set forth in Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions
of this ordinance and shall remain free from structures except where
expressly permitted below.



         (a)   Minimum front yards.



            1.   Along all interstate streets, primary
arterial streets or secondary arterial streets. May include: parking areas,
loading areas, interior access drives, or interior access driveways, provided
that no portion of such area may be located closer to the right-of-way than
15 feet; or signs as regulated by Article VII - Sign Regulations of this
ordinance, and shall be otherwise maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures; and



            2.   Along all collector streets, local streets or
cul-de-sac streets. May include: driveways; signs as regulated by Article VII
- Sign Regulations of this ordinance; or plazas developed in compliance with
the following requirements:



               a.   Plazas shall be located adjacent to a
building;



               b.   Plazas shall be surfaced with concrete,
brick or other form of hardsurface pavers appropriate for the proposed
development, except for those areas used for lawn area, trees, foundation
landscaping or planters;



               c.   Plazas shall maintain surface areas at
a slope of less than 3%, surface areas may be stepped, where appropriate, as
necessary to accommodate natural topography; and



               d.     That portion of the plaza perime ter
located adjacent to a front lot line shall include shade or ornam ental trees
planted with a maximum spacing of 40 feet on-center. If street trees have
already been installed on an abutting lot, the on-center spacing shall be
measured from the existing street trees. Overall street tree location within
each MU District shall begin in any block with a measurement from the edge of
the nearest clear site area.







 



  Example of Tree Placement along Street Frontage







 



Plaza Location and Street Frontage Landscaping



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include: driveways;
or signs as regulated by Article VII - Sign Regulations of this ordinance,
and shall otherwise be maintained as open space free from buildings or
structures;



         (c)   Minimum side yards and rear yards. May include
driveways, interior access driveways, parking areas, loading areas, walkways
or other pedestrian way connections to adjoining lots, provided that the
remainder of said yards shall be maintained as opens space free from
buildings or structures; and



         (d)   Minimum side bufferyards and rear bufferyards. May
include walkways or other pedestrian way connections to adjoining residential
areas provided that the remainder of said yards shall otherwise be maintained
as open space free from buildings or structures.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 40 feet; not to exceed three
stories.



      (5)   Maximum gross floor area. For any use listed under the
following headings, no single use, whether freestanding or contained in an
integrated center, shall exceed 5,000 square feet of gross floor area:



         (a)   Clothing service



         (b)   Food sales and service;



         (c)   Miscellaneous;



         (d)   Personal services;



         (e)   Recreation; and



         (f)   Retail.



      (6)   Landscaping. See Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions.



      (7)   Lighting. See Article 4.9 - Lighting Standards.



      (8)   Signs. See Article VII - Sign Regulations.



      (9)   Parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street Parking
Regulations; provided, however:



         (a)   The total number of required off-street parking
spaces for a single use site or integrated center in the MU District shall be
reduced by 50%;



         (b)   A single use site or integrated center in the MU
District may include:



            1.   On-street parking located immediately
adjacent to the single use site or integrated center, if the design and
location of such adjacent on-street parking is approved by the Town Engineer;
or



            2.   One row of parking spaces located along and
accessed directly from an alley abutting a side lot line or a rear lot line,
if the design and location of such adjacent alley accessed parking is
approved by the Town Engineer.



         (c)   If on-street parking spaces or alley accessed
parking spaces are approved and provided, the amount of off-street parking
spaces required by this ordinance for the single use site or integrated
center shall be deemed to be further reduced by the number of on-street
parking spaces and alley accessed parking spaces provided immediately
adjacent to the single use site or integrated center.



      (10)   Loading. See Article 4.11 - Off-Street Loading
Regulations.



      (11)   Greenway connection required. If the lot abuts any
portion of a greenway, a direct linkage from the project to such greenway
shall be provided.



      (12)   Outdoor operations. All uses and operations (except
off-street parking, off-street loading and delivery and walk-up customer
service windows) shall be conducted completely within enclosed buildings,
except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Outdoor seating for restaurants provided that such
outdoor seating:



            1.   Shall not be located in any street
right-of-way;



            2.   Shall be permitted only along the business’
tenant bay or storefront facade; and



            3.   Shall not block an entrance or exit to or
from the business or building.



         (b)   Outdoor display or sales of merchandise:



            1.   Shall not be located in any street
right-of-way;



            2.   Shall be located against the building facade;



            3.   Shall be permitted only along the business’
tenant bay or storefront facade;



            4.   Shall not block an entrance or exit to or
from the business or building;



            5.   Shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area
of each non-related and separately operated use; and



            6.   Shall be permitted only during the hours of
operation of the business and shall be removed at the close of each business
day.



         (c)   Walk-up customer service windows or automated
teller machines (ATMs), provided that such facilities are not freestanding
and are set flush with the facade of the building.



         (d)   Vending machines, provided that vending machines:



            1.   Shall abut the exterior wall of the building;
and



            2.   Shall not be located in a required yard or
required bufferyard.



      (13)   Development standards for multi-family dwellings.
Notwithstanding anything in this MU District to the contrary, a multi-family
dwellings building, which is not a mixed use building, shall be subject to
the development standards of the R-U District.



      (14)   Development standards for single-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this MU District to the contrary, a single-family dwelling which is located
on an individual lot shall be subject to the development standards of the R-4
District.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this MU District to the contrary, a single-family
dwelling which is part of a larger multi-family dwelling project shall be
subject to the development standards of the R-U District.



      (15)   Development standards for two-family dwellings.



         (a)   On individual lots. Notwithstanding anything in
this MU District to the contrary, a two-family dwelling which is located on
an individual lot and which is not part of a larger multi-family dwelling
project shall be subject to the development standards of the R-5 District
applicable to a two-family dwelling.



         (b)   Part of a larger multi-family dwelling project.
Notwithstanding anything in this MU District to the contrary, a two-family
dwelling which is part of a larger multi-family dwelling project shall be
subject to the development standards of the R-U District.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



§ 2.18C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   All lots located in the MU: Mixed Use District when located within the
“Town Center Neighborhood” as designated in the Town Center Plan shall be
subject to the requirements for: the filing of a development plan for
architectural and site design review; and compliance with the development
requirements, both as set forth in Article V.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005)



ARTICLE 3.1. NOISE OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 3.1A  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this District is to establish a Noise Overlay Zoning
District within the town.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1B  SPECIAL DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this Article only, the following terms shall be defined as
set forth below. All other terms shall have the meaning set forth in Article
XIII, Definitions.



   DAY-NIGHT SOUND LEVEL (LDN). A cumulative aircraft noise index which
estimates the exposure to aircraft noise and relates the estimated exposure
to an expected community response. The DAY-NIGHT SOUND LEVEL noise metric
assesses a ten decibel (dB) penalty to all noise events occurring between
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   LDN CONTOUR. A line linking together a series of points of equal
cumulative noise exposure based on the Ldn metric. LDN CONTOURS are developed
based on aircraft flight patterns, number of daily aircraft operations by
type of aircraft and time of day, noise characteristics of each aircraft and
typical runway usage patterns.



   NAVIGABLE AIRSPACE. The airspace above the minimum altitudes of flight
prescribed by regulations issued under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, §
101(24), 49 U.S.C. § 11, including the airspace needed to ensure safety in
the take-off and landing of aircraft.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1C  NOISE COMPATIBILITY ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   Noise compatibility zones for the area around Indianapolis
International Airport are hereby established based on the Ldn contours for
aircraft noise developed for conditions forecast to exist in 1996 with noise
abated operating conditions.



      (1)   N-1 Zone. The N-1 Zone generally corresponds to the area
between the 65 and 70 Ldn contours.



      (2)   N-2 Zone: The N-2 Zone generally corresponds to the area
within the 70 Ldn contour.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1D  NOISE OVERLAY ZONE BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the Noise Overlay Zones are shown on the official
zoning map. The boundaries generally correspond to the 65 and 70 Ldn contours
prepared as part of the Indianapolis International Airport Noise
Compatibility Plan. The N-1 and N-2 Zones are based on the 65 and 70 Ldn
contours, as shown on the official zoning map.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1E  NOTIFICATION OF NOISE COMPATIBILITY ZONES.



   The plat of any subdivision located within the noise compatibility
boundaries as described in Article 3.1D, and approved after the effective
date of this ordinance, shall contain the following statement:



   This subdivision is located within a Noise Compatibility Zone
determined pursuant to Federal Aviation Regulation Part 150 with respect to
Indianapolis International Airport. This subdivision will experience aircraft
overflights and relatively high levels of noise resulting from such
overflights.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1F  USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   Land uses prohibited in the Noise Overlay Zones are: mobile homes;
mobile home parks; hospitals; nursing homes; public and private educational
services; auditoriums; concert halls; outdoor music facilities; and
amphitheaters.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1G  USES AVAILABLE AS SPECIAL USES.



   Land uses that are allowed in the Noise Overlay Zones only after
application for and approval of a special exception in accordance with the
requirements for a special exception as provided for in Article 10.3 of this
ordinance are: resorts; group camps; and campgrounds, provide, however, that
such land uses are indicated as either a permitted use or special exception
use in the primary zoning district.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1H  SOUNDPROOFING REQUIRED.



   (A)   Soundproofing shall be required for all new residential uses
in each of the Noise Overlay Zones. Soundproofing is required and no building
permit shall be issued for new single-family, two- family or multi-family
dwellings until the builder has demonstrated that the building design is
capable of achieving the noise level reduction required in Table 3.1-A, Land
Use Compatibility Standards. This requirement can be met in one of two ways
as described in the following divisions:



      (1)   Design standards. The builder may choose to use a design
that incorporates the design standards described in Article 3.1I, and, if so,
the design shall be considered to have met the required soundproofing
standard; and



      (2)   Performance standards. The builder may choose to use
design features other than those described in Article 3.1I, as long as the
final design is capable of achieving the noise level reduction required in
Table 3.1-A, Land Use Compatibility Standards. Such noise attenuation
capability shall be certified on the building plans by a registered
architect, structural engineer, or acoustician.



   (B)   These soundproofing requirements provided for in Articles
3.1H(1) and 3.1H(2) above are not applicable to buildings that have already
been issued a building permit on the effective date of this ordinance nor to
room additions, garages, storage buildings or commercial buildings.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1I  SOUNDPROOFING DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The construction methods and materials described in this section shall
be considered to satisfy the noise level reduction standards set forth in
Table 3.1-A, Land Use Compatibility Standards.



      (1)   Noise level reduction of 25 decibels (dB).



         (a)   If wood frame construction is used, all exterior
stud walls shall have interior and exterior surfaces of an approved material
at least as massive as one-half inch thick gypsum wallboard, and the
intervening space shall contain fibrous thermal insulation at least three
inches thick.



         (b)   The design for a habitable room shall be such that
any exterior door or window can be kept closed when the room is in use. Means
of ventilation shall be available to afford a minimum of two complete air
changes per hour.



         (c)   Any air duct or connection to out-of-doors shall
contain an interior sound absorbing lining acoustically equivalent at least
to fiberglass duct line one inch thick and length greater than five times the
diameter of the duct.



         (d)   The ceiling below an attic space shall include
gypsum board or plaster at least one-half  inch thick; fibrous thermal
insulation at least three inches thick shall be laid between the ceiling
joists.



         (e)   A forced air circulation system shall be provided
that will give a minimum of two complete air changes per hour, of which at
least one-fifth is fresh air.



         (f)   A ceiling or exhaust duct shall be provided with a
bend in the duct such that there is no direct line of sight through the duct
from outside to inside. The bend shall be lined with the equivalent of
fiberglass duct liner one inch thick.



         (g)   There shall be no direct openings, such as mail
slots, from the interior to the exterior of the building. All chimneys shall
be provided with well-fitted dampers.



         (h)   Exterior hinged doors shall be solid-core
construction. Jalousie windows shall not be permitted. The total area of
glass windows and of any exterior door to a sleeping space shall not exceed
20% of the floor area of a room.



         (i)   Workmanship on doors and operable windows shall be
such that the doors and windows are as close fitting as possible or weather
stripping seals shall be incorporated on all edges to eliminate gaps. Air
gaps and ratting shall be prevented.



         (j)   Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least
equivalent in weight to six inch lightweight concrete blocks, at least one
surface of which is painted or plastered.



         (k)   The roof deck shall weigh at least seven pounds
per square foot, containing a solid core at least one and one-half inches
thick.



      (2)   Noise level reduction 30 decibels (dB).



         (a)   Window glass shall be set in an elastomer gasket.
Double glazing shall be installed, with an air space of at least three inches
between the two panes of glass. Windows or dome skylights shall not be
permitted, unless they have a sound transmission class of at least 30.



         (b)   The top-floor ceiling construction shall consist
of plaster or gypsum board at least five-eighths inch thick supported on
resilient clips or channels. A non-hardening caulking compound shall be
provided around the entire perimeter of the suspended ceiling.



         (c)   The floor of the lowest room or area containing
the uses to which those insulation requirements apply shall be a concrete
slab, or should be similarly sealed otherwise against exterior noise.



         (d)   Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least
equivalent in weight to eight inch lightweight concrete blocks, at least one
surface of which shall be painted or plastered.



         (e)   The roof deck shall weigh at least 12 pounds per
square foot. Wood roof sheathing shall be continuous and at least
three-quarters inch thick.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



§ 3.1J  LAND-USE COMPATIBILITY STANDARDS.



   Table 3.1-A presents the levels of Day-Night Sound Level (Ldn) for the
N-1 and N-2 Noise Overlay Zones:



 


Table 3.l-A Land-Use Compatibility Standards




SLUCM No.

 

Land-Use Name

 

Noise Overlay Zones/Levels in Ldn




N-1
65-70

 

N-2
70+






10

 
Residential
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11

 
Household units
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.11

 
Single units - detached
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.12

 
Single units - semi-attached
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.13

 
Single units - attached row
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.21

 
Two units - side by side
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.22

 
Two units - over-under
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.31

 
Apartments - walk up
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




11.32

 
Apartments - elevator
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




12

 
Group quarters
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




13

 
Residential quarters
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)




15

 
Transient lodgings, hotels, motels
 

Y   (2)

 

Y   (3)




16

 
Other residential
 

25   (1)

 

30   (1)



Notes:


1.   All residences in the N-1 Noise Overlay Zone are marginally noise
compatible and shall be soundproofed to achieve a 25 dB reduction from
outdoor noise levels (NLR). All residences in the N-2 Noise Overlay Zone are
marginally noise compatible and shall be soundproofed to achieve a 30 dB NLR.
Soundproofing will not eliminate outdoor noise problems. However, building
location and site planning, design and use of berms and barriers can help
mitigate outdoor noise exposure particularly from ground level sources.
Measures that reduce noise at a site should be used wherever practical in
preference to measures which only protect interior spaces.


2.   Measures to achieve NLR of 30 shall be incorporated into the design
and construction of portions of the following buildings where the public is
received: office areas; noise sensitive areas; or where the normal noise
level is low.


Key to Table:


SLUCM - Standards Land-Use Coding Manual, U.S. Urban Renewal Administration
and Bureau of Public Roads, 1965


Y (Yes) - Land use and related structures compatible without restrictions


N (No) - Land use and related structures are not compatible and should be
prohibited


NLR - Noise level reduction (outdoor to indoor) to be achieved through
incorporation of noise attenuation into the design and construction of the
structure


25 or 30 - Land use and related structures are generally compatible; measures
to achieve NLR of 25 or 30 dB must be incorporated into design and
construction of the structure




 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010)



ARTICLE 3.2. P: PARK DISTRICT



§ 3.2  INTENT.



   The P: Park Districts are established to promote and maintain the
development of recreational opportunities within the town. The development of
new parks or the major expansion of existing parks within the P: Park
Districts shall be subject to the approval of a Park Master Plan to assure
that the development of a particular park, whether proposed for active or
passive recreational opportunities, is compatible with nearby residential
neighborhoods.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2004, passed 4-12-2004)



§ 3.2A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Park, public or private - including but not
limited to: any amphitheater, playgrounds, play fields, ball fields (i.e.,
baseball, softball, football, rugby, soccer and the like), ball courts (i.e.,
handball, racquetball, squash and the like), game courts (i.e., basketball,
tennis and the like), spray or wading pools, indoor or outdoor swimming pool,
ice or roller skating rink; velodrome/BMX track, skate board facility,
picnicking area, boating area, fishing area, wild life refuge, botanical
gardens, arboreta, scenic areas, greenways, trails (i.e., equestrian/bridle
paths, hiking, rollerblade, bicycle, walking and the like), and such other
primary park or recreational uses included in a Park Master Plan filed with
and approved by the Plan Commission; and



         (b)   Community center.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Public facilities. Religious use.



         (e)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Country club; and



            2.   Golf course.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses
shall be applicable to development within the P: Park District to the extent
that the items regulated in Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses are proposed for
development in a park.



         (b)   In addition, accessory uses in the P: Park
District may include:



            1.   Any recreational use, or use incidental to a
recreational use, which is reasonably related to the primary park uses
specified in an approved Park Master Plan; or



            2.   If no Park Master Plan exists, any
recreational use, or use incidental to a recreational use, which is
reasonably related to existing recreational facilities.



         (c)   By way of example only, accessory uses may
include: picnic shelters; concession stands; restrooms; bath house;
maintenance buildings; mechanical buildings; equipment rental buildings; gate
house/ticket booth; fencing; storage sheds; and the like.



      (4)   Temporary uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses,
Structures and Buildings shall be applicable to all temporary development
within the P: Park District to the extent that the items regulated in Article
4.2 - Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings are proposed for development
in a park.



         (b)   All temporary uses, structures and buildings, in
the P: Park District shall obtain an improvement location permit, if required
by Article 4.2A.



         (c)   In addition, temporary uses in the P: Park
District may include:



            1.   Any concert, festival, tournament or other
recreational activity related to a town-recognized special event identified
in Article 7.2 of this ordinance; or



            2.   Other temporary uses as recommended by the
Director of the Parks and Recreation Department and approved by the Director
of the Department of Planning and Zoning as being compatible with the
approved Park Master Plan or existing recreational facilities in a park.



         (d)   Unless otherwise specified above, specified in an
approved Park Master Plan, or specifically approved by the Director, no
temporary use shall exceed ten days in duration.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2004, passed 4-12-2004)



§ 3.2B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. The greater of: 5,000 square feet; or
the minimum lot area of any abutting R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 District, if
any.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 50 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 30 feet on a public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. Not applicable.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yard and rear yard. A minimum side yard and a
minimum rear yard shall be provided along all side lot lines and rear lot
lines as follows:



 


Accessory buildings or structures

 

20 ft.



Designated or improved grade level activity areas (i.e., dirt, grass or bark
trails; grass play areas and the like) excluding any hard surfaced recreation
area
 

5 ft.



Play fields, ball fields, ball courts, game courts, spray or wading pools,
outdoor swimming pool, ice or roller skating rink, skateboard facility or any
other hard surfaced recreation area
 

20 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.



Recreational equipment/playground apparatus
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where specifically permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and front bufferyards. May
include: driveways; greenways; trails; or any outdoor recreational
improvement which is comprised primarily of live vegetation (i.e., botanical
gardens, arboreta and the like), and shall otherwise be maintained as open
space free from buildings or structures; and



         (b)   Minimum side yards, minimum rear yards, minimum
side bufferyards and minimum rear bufferyards. May include: interior access
driveways; or greenways, trails, or walkways connecting to adjoining projects
or subdivisions, provided the remainder of said yards or bufferyards shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, unless a greater height
is specified in an approved Park Master Plan.



         (b)   Accessory building or structures. 22 feet, unless
a greater height is specified in an approved Park Master Plan.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. Not applicable.



      (9)   Off-street parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street
Parking Regulations.



      (10)   Signs. The regulations contained in Article 7.6D, for
“Business and Other Uses Permitted in Residential Districts by Special
Exception” shall apply to the P: Park District, provided, however,
notwithstanding anything in Article VII to the contrary:



         (a)   Scoreboards which:



            1.   May include sponsor information on the face
of the scoreboard oriented toward the playing field, not to exceed 25% of the
area of the overall scoreboard surface;



            2.   Are not illuminated, either internally or
externally, except during game or tournament play, and



            3.   Do not provide for commercial or business
advertising on any other face of the scoreboard, shall be permitted subject
to the Director’s review and approval of an improvement location permit.



         (b)   Seasonal sponsor banner signs located on the
interior of a perimeter fence of and oriented toward the interior of an
enclosed recreational facility (i.e., a ball field, skating rink, skate board
facility or similar recreational facility), and only incidentally visible
from the exterior of the recreational facility, may be permitted subject to
Director’s review and approval of an improvement location permit; or



         (c)   Other permanent signs or temporary signs included
in an overall sign program (which includes the general number, size, type and
location of signs) and which is approved by the Plan Commission as part of an
approved Park Master Plan.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2004, passed 4-12-2004)



§ 3.2C  PARK MASTER PLAN APPROVALS.



      (1)   Applicability.



         (a)   New parks. A development plan, which includes a
Park Master Plan, shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to the
development of a new park.



         (b)   Major park expansions. A development plan, which
includes a Park Master Plan, shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior
to any major expansion of recreational facilities or the development of
additional real estate at an existing park.



         (c)   Minor park expansions. Minor expansions of
existing park facilities and the addition of accessory uses or temporary uses
shall be subject only to Director’s review of an improvement location
permit application for compliance with the provisions of Article 3.2A and
Article 3.2B above.



      (2)   After approval. After a Park Master Plan has been
approved for a particular park by the Plan Commission pursuant to this
Article 3.2C, (or by the Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special
exception grant prior to the adoption of this P: Park District) all
development within that park shall be subject only to Director’s review of
improvement location permit applications for individual improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of Article
3.2A, above;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of
Article 3.2B, above;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved Park
Master Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article 3.2C(6) below (or by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special exception grant prior to
the adoption of this P: Park District).



      (3)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, a Park Master Plan shall be filed
as a development plan under same procedures as set forth in Article 5.8 of
this ordinance for architectural and site design review.



      (4)   Development requirements for the P: Park District.



         (a)   Development requirements for the P: Park District
shall include the development standards of Article 3.2B, above, and the
additional development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a P: Park
District include the following:



            1.   A Park Master Plan, which shall include, at a
minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a park, including, but not
limited to: a listing the types of recreational uses proposed; the overall
layout and design of the park (i.e., location of activity areas or
structures, including off-street parking areas and signs); conceptual
building elevations for major buildings or structures; proposed site
lighting; conceptual landscape plans; and the approximate size or scope of
proposed recreational facilities;



            2.   Each Park Master Plan shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable development standards of the P: Park District
for which a waiver is not provided for in this Article; and



            3.   Each Park Master Plan shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control
Ordinance for which a waiver has not been granted.



      (5)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a Park Master
Plan upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of P: Park District for which a waiver has not been
granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (6)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of recreational facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article 3.2B,
for: minimum lot area; minimum lot width; minimum lot frontage; minimum yards
and building setbacks; use of minimum yards and bufferyards; and off-street
parking; upon finding that the proposed park development:



         (a)   Represents and innovative development of
recreational uses, including site design features, lighting and landscaping
which will enhance the use or value of area properties;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2004, passed 4-12-2004)



ARTICLE 3.3. S: SCHOOL DISTRICTS



§ 3.3  INTENT.



   The S: School Districts are established to promote and maintain the
development of public or private school facilities to provide for the
education of students within the town. The development of new schools or the
major expansion of existing schools within the S: School Districts shall be
subject to the approval of a School Master Plan, as provided for in Article
3.3C below, to assure that the development of a particular school and related
facilities, is compatible with nearby residential neighborhoods.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 04-2005, passed 2-28-2005; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.3A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   The following are primary uses:



            1.   School, public or private (K - 12); and



            2.   College/university.



         (b)   The above primary uses may also include the
following buildings, structures or facilities which are typically related to
school campuses: classroom buildings; school related administrative offices;
gymnasiums; athletic fields and stadiums (i.e., baseball, softball, football,
rugby, soccer and the like); ball courts (i.e., handball, racquetball, squash
and the like); game courts (i.e., basketball, tennis and the like); and such
other primary school uses included in a School Master Plan filed with and
approved by the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Pre-school;



            3.   Public library;



            4.   School - commercial, trade or business; and



            5.   Vocational.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Artificial lake.



         (e)   Public facilities. Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation. Golf course.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses
shall be applicable to development within the S: School District to the
extent that the items regulated in Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses are proposed
for development at a school site.



         (b)   In addition, accessory uses in the S: School
District may include:



            1.   Any educational use (i.e., continuing
education classes; graduate equivalency degree classes; alternative school
classes and the like), or use incidental to an educational use, which is
reasonably related to the primary school uses specified in an approved School
Master Plan; or



            2.   If no School Master Plan exists, any
educational use (i.e., continuing education classes; graduate equivalency
degree classes; alternative school classes and the like), or use incidental
to an educational use, which is reasonably related to existing school
facilities.



         (c)   By way of example only, accessory uses may also
include: dining room/cafeteria; locker rooms; restrooms; maintenance
buildings; mechanical buildings or courts; shelter houses; playgrounds;
concession stands; gate house/ticket booth; fencing; storage sheds; and the
like.



      (4)   Temporary uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses,
Structures and Buildings shall be applicable to all temporary development
within the S: School District to the extent that the items regulated in
Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings are proposed for
development at a school site.



         (b)   All temporary uses, structures and buildings, in
the S: School District shall obtain an improvement location permit, if
required by Article 4.2A.



         (c)   In addition, temporary uses in the S: School
District may include:



            1.   Any concert, festival, tournament or other
recreational activity related to a town-recognized special event identified
in Article 7.2 of this ordinance; or



            2.   Other temporary uses as approved by the
Director of the Department of Planning and zoning as being compatible with
the approved School Master Plan or existing recreational facilities at a
school site.



         (d)   Unless otherwise specified above, specified in an
approved School Master Plan, or specifically approved by the Director, no
temporary use shall exceed ten days in duration.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.3B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area
requirement provided sufficient land area is available for all buildings,
parking areas, other improvements and landscaping as appropriate for the site.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 100 feet on a public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. Not applicable.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows, unless
an alternate standard is specified in an approved School Master Plan:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yard and rear yard. A minimum side yard and a
minimum rear yard shall be provided along all side lot lines and rear lot
lines as follows:



 


Accessory buildings or structures

 

20 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where specifically permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and front bufferyards. May
include: driveways; greenways; trails, or walkways and shall otherwise be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures; and



         (b)   Minimum side yards, minimum rear yards, minimum
side bufferyards and minimum rear bufferyards. May include: interior access
driveways; or greenways, trails, or walkways connecting to adjoining projects
or subdivisions, provided the remainder of said yards or bufferyards shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees, or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, unless a greater height
is specified in an approved School Master Plan.



         (b)   Accessory building or structures. 22 feet, unless
a greater height is specified in an approved School Master Plan.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. Not applicable.



      (9)   Off-street parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street
Parking Regulations.



      (10)   Signs. The regulations contained in Article 7.6D, for
“Business and Other Uses Permitted in Residential Districts by Special
Exception” shall apply to the S: School District, provided, however,
notwithstanding anything in Article VII to the contrary:



         (a)   Scoreboards at approved athletic facilities which:



            1.   May include sponsor information on the face
of the scoreboard oriented toward the playing field, not to exceed 25% of the
area of the overall scoreboard surface;



            2.   Are not illuminated, either internally or
externally, except during an event, and



            3.   Do not provide for commercial or business
advertising on any other face of the scoreboard, shall be permitted subject
to Director’s review and approval of an improvement location permit.



         (b)   Seasonal sponsor banner signs located on the
interior of a perimeter fence and oriented toward the interior of an enclosed
athletic facility (i.e., a ball field or similar athletic facility), and only
incidentally visible from the exterior of the recreational facility; or



         (c)   Other permanent signs or temporary signs included
in an overall sign program (which includes the general number, size, type and
location of signs) and which is approved by the Plan Commission as part of an
approved School Master Plan.



      (11)   Landscape requirements. Landscaping shall comply with
the provisions of Article IV regarding landscaping for Office District
developments, unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved School
Master Plan.



      (12)   Lighting requirements. See Article IV and Article
5.5C(6), provided however, athletic field and stadium lighting (i.e.,
lighting for baseball, softball, football, rugby, soccer and the like) shall
comply with the following requirements, unless an alternate standard is
specified in an approved School Master Plan:



         (a)   Shall not exceed 110 feet in height above grade,
provided, however, that for any outdoor light fixture located at a height of
80 feet above grade or higher, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
additional height is necessary to reduce spill and glare;



         (b)   Shall be of a type and manufacturer that offers a
spill and glare control package and shall be fitted with the manufacturer’s
spill and glare control package;



         (c)   Shall not exceed 0.3 horizontal maintained
footcandles at the lot line;



         (d)   Shall be extinguished no later that one hour after
the end of the event; and



         (e)   May exceed the maximum lighting level set forth in
this Article, subject to such light levels being specified in an approved
School Master Plan.



      (13)   Building materials. The following provisions of Article
5.5 shall be applicable to all school buildings and other permanent
buildings, unless an alternative standard is specified in an approved School
Master Plan.



         (a)   New construction. See Article 5.5C(3)(a)2.,
Commercial Districts.



         (b)   Additions to existing buildings. See Article
5.5C(3)(b).



         (c)   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(c).



         (d)   Exterior building facade renovations with major
building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(d).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.3C  SCHOOL MASTER PLAN APPROVALS.



   School Master Plans shall be approved in the following manner:



      (1)   Approval of School Master Plans. The following shall be
deemed to be approved School Master Plans.



         (a)   A School Master Plan submitted for Plan Commission
approval as part of a requested petition for zone map change or, if the
property is already zoned to the S: School District, submitted for Plan
Commission approval as part of a development plan.



         (b)   The latest plan for development at a school
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special
exception grant prior to the adoption of this S: School District.



         (c)   In the event of a legally established
nonconforming school for which there has been no Plan Commission approval of
a School Master Plan or grant of a special exception by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the School Master Plan shall be interpreted as being the educational
uses and physical development of the school campus in existence on the date
of adoption of this ordinance.



      (2)   Phases. A School Master Plan may be submitted as follows.



         (a)   School Master Plan approvals may be obtained for a
total school project or school campus at one time or in phases. Phases may
include physical areas of development (i.e., portions of an overall site) or
elements of a development (i.e., building elevations, a sign program,
landscaping, parking, athletic fields or stadiums and the like).



         (b)   If phases are of physical areas of development,
the initial phase shall be depicted on an overall plan for the entire site.
As the approval of each subsequent phase is requested, an updated overall
plan which incorporates the prior approved phases and the proposed phase,
shall be required.



         (c)   Any initial School Master Plan or subsequent
phases of approval may include a request for waivers as authorized by Article
3.3C(8) below.



      (3)   Applicability.



         (a)   New schools. A School Master Plan shall be
approved by the Plan Commission prior to the development of a new school.



         (b)   Major school expansions. A School Master Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to any major expansion (i.e.,
greater than 10,000 square feet or in excess of 20% of gross floor area of
existing buildings) or the development of additional real estate at an
existing school site.



         (c)   Minor school expansions. Minor expansions of
existing school facilities (i.e., less than 10,000 square feet and less than
excess of 20% of gross floor area of existing buildings) and the addition of
accessory uses or temporary uses shall be subject only to the Director’s
review of an improvement location permit application for compliance with the
provisions of Article 3.3A and Article 3.3B above.



         (d)   Amendments. Amendments to School Master Plans
shall be determined in compliance with the process outlined in Article
5.8E(3), applicable to commercial/industrial development within 600 feet of a
residential district.



      (4)   After approval. After a School Master Plan has been
approved for a particular school by the Plan Commission pursuant to this
Article 3.3C, all development within that school site shall be subject only
to the Director’s review of improvement location permit applications for
individual improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of Article 3.3A
above;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of
Article 3.3B above;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved School
Master Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article 3.3C(6) below (or by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special exception grant prior to
the adoption of this S: School District).



      (5)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, unless filed as part of a
petition for zone map change, a School Master Plan shall be filed as a
development plan under same procedures as set forth in Article 5.8 of this
ordinance for architectural and site design review.



      (6)   Development requirements for the S: School District.



         (a)   Development requirements for the S: School
District shall include the development standards of Article 3.3B above, and
the additional development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a S: School
District include the following:



            1.   A School Master Plan, which shall include, at
a minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a school campus,
including, but not limited to: a listing the types of educational uses
proposed; the overall layout and design of the school site (i.e., location,
size and scope of educational buildings or structures, athletic fields and
stadiums, off-street parking areas and signs); conceptual building elevations
for major buildings or structures; proposed site lighting; and conceptual
landscape plans;



            2.   Each School Master Plan shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable development standards of the S: School
District for which a waiver is not provided for in this Article; and



            3.   Each School Master Plan shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control
Ordinance for which a waiver has not been granted.



      (7)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a School Master
Plan upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of S: School District for which a waiver has not been
granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (8)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of educational facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article 3.3B
for: minimum front yards; maximum building height; signs; landscaping;
lighting; and building materials, upon finding that the proposed school
development:



         (a)   Represents an innovative and appropriate
development of educational uses, including site design features, building
materials, lighting and landscaping which will enhance the use or value of
area properties and the safety and functionality of the educational uses;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 3.4. REL: RELIGIOUS USE DISTRICT



§ 3.4  INTENT.



   The REL: Religious Use Districts are established to promote and
maintain the development facilities for divine worship within the town. The
development of religious facilities or the major expansion of existing
religious within the REL: Religious Use Districts shall be subject to the
approval of a Religious Use Master Plan, as provided for in Article 3.4C
below, to assure that the development of a particular worship hall and
related facilities, is compatible with nearby residential neighborhoods.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007)



§ 3.4A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses. Religious use.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center;



            2.   Pre-school;



            3.   Public library;



            4.   School - commercial, trade or business; and



            5.   Vocational.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Artificial lake.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses
shall be applicable to development within the REL: Religious Use District to
the extent that the items regulated in Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses are
proposed for development at a religious use site.



         (b)   In addition, accessory uses in the REL: Religious
Use District may include:



            1.   Those buildings, structures or facilities
which are typically related to a religious use;



            2.   Such other primary or accessory religious
uses included in a Religious Use Master Plan filed with and approved by the
Plan Commission; or



            3.   If no Religious Use Master Plan exists, any
religious use or use incidental to a religious use, which is reasonably
related to existing religious use facilities.



         (c)   By way of example only, accessory uses may also
include: rectory; convent; child care ministry; and school classroom
buildings and school related facilities (i.e., administrative offices,
gymnasiums, athletic fields and stadiums, ball courts, game courts; fencing;
storage sheds; and the like).



      (4)   Temporary uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses,
Structures and Buildings shall be applicable to all temporary development
within the REL: Religious Use District to the extent that the items regulated
in Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings are proposed for
development at a religious use site.



         (b)   All temporary uses, structures and buildings, in
the REL: Religious Use District shall obtain an improvement location permit,
if required by Article 4.2A.



         (c)   In addition, temporary uses in the REL: Religious
Use District may include:



            1.   Any concert, festival, tournament or other
social activity related to a town-recognized special event identified in
Article 7.2 of this ordinance; or



            2.   Other temporary uses as approved by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning as being compatible with
the approved Religious Use Master Plan or existing facilities.



         (d)   Unless specified in an approved Religious Use
Master Plan, or specifically approved by the Director, no religious use may
conduct more than four temporary uses in any calendar year, and no individual
temporary use shall exceed ten days in duration.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007)



§ 3.4B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area
requirement provided sufficient land area is available for all buildings,
parking areas, other improvements and landscaping as appropriate for the site.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 100 feet on a public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. Not applicable.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows, unless
an alternate standard is specified in an approved Religious Use Master Plan:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yard and rear yard. A minimum side yard and a
minimum rear yard shall be provided along all side lot lines and rear lot
lines as follows:



 


Accessory buildings or structures

 

20 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where specifically permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and front bufferyards. May
include: driveways; greenways; trails or walkways and shall otherwise be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures; and



         (b)   Minimum side yards, minimum rear yards, minimum
side bufferyards and minimum rear bufferyards. May include: interior access
driveways; or greenways, trails or walkways connecting to adjoining projects
or subdivisions, provided the remainder of said yards or bufferyards shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, unless a greater height
is specified in an approved Religious Use Master Plan.



         (b)   Primary building exception. A steeple, copula,
turret or other architectural embellishment may be added to the main roof
line to a maximum height to the top of such steeple, copula, turret or other
architectural embellishment not to exceed 50 feet above grade, unless a
greater height is specified in an approved Religious Use Master Plan.



         (c)   Accessory building or structures. 22 feet, unless
a greater height is specified in an approved Religious Use Master Plan.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. Not applicable.



      (9)   Off-street parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street
Parking Regulations.



      (10)   Signs. The regulations contained in Article 7.6, D.,
for “Business and Other Uses permitted in the Residential Districts”
shall apply to the REL: Religious Use District, provided, however,
notwithstanding anything in Article VII to the contrary:



         (a)   Scoreboards at approved athletic facilities which:



            1.   May include sponsor information on the face
of the scoreboard oriented toward the playing field, not to exceed 25% of the
area of the overall scoreboard surface;



            2.   Are not illuminated, either internally or
externally, except during an event; and



            3.   Do not provide for commercial or business
advertising on any other face of the scoreboard, shall be permitted subject
to the Director’s review and approval of an improvement location permit.



         (b)   Seasonal sponsor banner signs located on the
interior of a perimeter fence and oriented toward the interior of an enclosed
athletic facility (i.e., a ball field or similar athletic facility), and only
incidentally visible from the exterior of the recreational facility; or



         (c)   Other permanent signs or temporary signs included
in an overall sign program (which includes the general number, size, type and
location of signs) and which is approved by the Plan Commission as part of an
approved Religious Use Master Plan.



         (d)   Signs on light poles: signs shall be permitted on
light poles which serve to illuminate an off-street parking area in the REL
District as specified below:



            1.   Type. Signs on light poles shall be limited
to banner signs:



               a.   Which are mounted on light poles
located on the lot; and



               b.   Which are mounted to the light poles
with upper and lower horizontal supports.



            2.   Maximum individual sign surface area.
Individual light pole banner signs shall not exceed the maximum dimensions of
three and one-half feet in width by eight feet in height;



            3.   Configuration and placement on light poles.
All individual light pole banner signs placed on a lot:



               a.   Shall be of the same dimensions; and



               b.   Shall be placed at the same relative
height and location on all light poles.



            4.   Number. Each light pole may contain two
banner signs, provided, however, if the light poles are located at the
perimeter edge of an off-street parking area, only one banner sign, which
shall be oriented toward the interior of the off-street parking area, shall
be permitted;



            5.   Total sign surface area. The total sign
surface area of all light pole banner signs on a lot shall not exceed a ratio
of one square foot for each off-street parking space within the off-street
parking area which is generally illuminated by the lights on the light poles
which support the light pole banner signs; and



            6.   Placement on lot. Light pole banner signs
shall be evenly distributed within or along the edge of the off-street
parking area used to determine the total sign surface area permitted as set
forth in Article 3.4B(10)(d)5. above.



      (11)   Landscape requirements. Landscaping shall comply with
the provisions of Article IV regarding landscaping for Office District
developments, unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved
Religious Use Master Plan.



      (12)   Lighting requirements. See Article IV and Article
5.5C(6), unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved Religious
Use Master Plan for any outdoor lighting fixture, including lighting fixtures
for parking areas, athletic fields or stadium lighting (i.e., lighting for
baseball, softball, football, rugby, soccer and the like).



      (13)   Building materials. The following provisions of Article
5.5 shall be applicable to all buildings, unless an alternative standard is
specified in an approved Religious Use Master Plan.



         (a)   New construction. See Article 5.5C(3)(a)2.
Commercial Districts.



         (b)   Additions to existing buildings. See Article
5.5C(3)(b).



         (c)   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(c).



         (d)   Exterior building facade renovations with major
building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(d).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007)



§ 3.4C  RELIGIOUS USE MASTER PLAN APPROVALS.



   Religious Use Master Plans shall be approved in the following manner.



      (1)   Approval of Religious Use Master Plans. The following
shall be deemed to be approved Religious Use Master Plans:



         (a)   A Religious Use Master Plan submitted for Plan
Commission approval as part of a requested petition for zone map change or,
if the property is already zoned to the REL: Religious Use District,
submitted for Plan Commission approval as part of a development plan;



         (b)   The latest plan for development at a religious use
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special
exception grant prior to the adoption of this REL: Religious Use District; and



         (c)   In the event of a legally established
nonconforming religious use for which there has been no Plan Commission
approval of a Religious Use Master Plan or grant of a special exception by
the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Religious Use Master Plan shall be
interpreted as being the worship facilities, accessory uses and physical
development of the site in existence on the date of adoption of this
ordinance.



      (2)   Phases. A Religious Use Master Plan may be submitted as
follows.



         (a)   Religious Use Master Plan approvals may be
obtained for a total project at one time or in phases. Phases may include
physical areas of development (i.e., portions of an overall site) or elements
of a development (i.e., building elevations, a sign program, landscaping,
parking, athletic fields or stadiums and the like).



         (b)   If phases are of physical areas of development,
the initial phase shall be depicted on an overall plan for the entire site.
As the approval of each subsequent phase is requested, an updated overall
plan which incorporates the prior approved phases and the proposed phase,
shall be required.



         (c)   Any initial Religious Use Master Plan or
subsequent phases of approval may include a request for waivers as authorized
by Article 3.4C(8) below.



      (3)   Applicability.



         (a)   New religious uses. A Religious Use Master Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to the development of a new
religious use.



         (b)   Major expansions. A Religious Use Master Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to any major expansion (i.e.,
greater than 10,000 square feet or in excess of 20% of gross floor area of
existing buildings) or the development of additional real estate at an
existing religious use site.



         (c)   Minor expansions. Minor expansions of existing
facilities (i.e., less than 10,000 square feet and less than excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing buildings) and the addition of accessory uses or
temporary uses shall be subject only to Director’s review of an improvement
location permit application for compliance with the provisions of Article
3.4A and Article 3.4B above.



         (d)   Amendments. Amendments to Religious Use Master
Plans shall be determined in compliance with the process outlined in Article
5.8E(3), applicable to commercial/industrial development within 600 feet of a
residential district.



      (4)   After approval. After a Religious Use Master Plan has
been approved for a particular religious use by the Plan Commission pursuant
to this Article 3.4C, all development within that religious use site shall be
subject only to Director’s review of improvement location permit
applications for individual improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of Article 3.4A
above;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of
Article 3.4B above;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved Religious
Use Master Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article 3.4C(6) below (or by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special exception grant prior to
the adoption of this REL: Religious Use District).



      (5)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, unless filed as part of a
petition for zone map change, a Religious Use Master Plan shall be filed as a
development plan under same procedures as set forth in Article 5.8 of this
ordinance for architectural and site design review.



      (6)   Development requirements for the REL: Religious Use
District.



         (a)   Development requirements for the REL: Religious
Use District shall include the development standards of Article 3.4B above,
and the additional development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a REL:
Religious Use District include the following:



            1.   A Religious Use Master Plan, which shall
include, at a minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a religious
use site, including, but not limited to: a listing the size of the worship
facility proposed; the overall layout and design of the site (i.e., location,
size and scope of buildings or structures, school and athletic facilities,
off-street parking areas and signs); conceptual building elevations for major
buildings or structures; proposed site lighting; and conceptual landscape
plans;



            2.   Each Religious Use Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable development standards of the REL:
Religious Use District for which a waiver is not provided for in this
Article; and



            3.   Each Religious Use Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not been granted.



      (7)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a Religious Use
Master Plan upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of REL: Religious Use District for which a waiver has
not been granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (8)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of educational facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article 3.4B
for: minimum front yards; maximum building height; signs; landscaping;
lighting; and building materials, upon finding that the proposed religious
use development:



         (a)   Represents an innovative and appropriate
development of a religious use, including site design features, building
materials, lighting and landscaping which will enhance the use or value of
area properties and the safety and functionality of the religious use;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007)



ARTICLE 3.5. C-I: COMMERCIAL-INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



§ 3.5  INTENT.



   The C-I: Commercial-Industrial Districts are established to promote and
maintain: gateway developments into the major industrial parks within the
town; and the development of support facilities necessary for the effective
operation of the industrial parks within the town. The C-I: Commercial-
Industrial District provides for a full range of support commercial and
industrial operations including service, retail, assembly and manufacturing
uses. In order to fulfill the intent of providing a gateway quality
development, all sites are required to comply with all architectural and site
design regulations of Article 5.5 and all processing, servicing and storage
functions shall be located within completely enclosed buildings.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.5A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Automobile service.



            1.   Painting and customizing; and



            2.   Tire and auto service center.



         (b)   Clothing service.



            1.   Dressmaking;



            2.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishment;



            3.   Millinery shop (fabric shop);



            4.   Self-service laundry;



            5.   Shoe repair shop; and



            6.   Tailor and pressing shop.



         (c)   Communication/utilities. Telephone exchange.



         (d)   Educational use.



            1.   Child care center (as a freestanding building
only);



            2.   Library; and



            3.   School - commercial, trade or business.



         (e)   Food sales and service.



            1.   Bakery - retail;



            2.   Caterer;



            3.   Convenience store;



            4.   Delicatessen; and



            5.   Restaurant without alcoholic beverages.



         (f)   Governmental use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Governmental offices;



            3.   Police station; and



            4.   Post office (without storage of delivery
vehicles).



         (g)   Industrial uses.



            1.   Assembly of previously manufactured parts,
sub-assemblies or components;



            2.   Dental laboratories;



            3.   Engineering laboratories;



            4.   Flex-space;



            5.   Light assembly or repair of previously
manufactured parts;



            6.   Medical laboratories;



            7.   Race car assembly and testing;



            8.   Research laboratories; and



            9.   Warehouse.



         (h)   Manufacture, assembly or repair.*



            1.   Appliances:



               a.   Light;



               b.   Major electric or gas;



               c.   Portable; and



               d.   Household.



            2.   Bottling of beverages;



            3.   Bottling of food;



            4.   Bottling of milk products;



            5.   Cabinets;



            6.   Cans;



            7.   Clocks and watches;



            8.   Cloth products from finished cloth;



            9.   Coating (excluding tar products);



            10.   Communication equipment and assembly;



            11.   Construction equipment and machinery;



            12.   Containers;



            13.   Cosmetics;



            14.   Dairy or milk products;



            15.   Detergents and soaps;



            16.   Electric hand tools;



            17.   Electric neon signs;



            18.   Electric materials;



            19.   Electric motors;



            20.   Electrical components and sub-assemblies;



            21.   Elevators;



            22.   Furniture;



            23.   Jewelry (including engraving);



            24.   Leather products from finished leather;



            25.   Light component parts of products;



            26.   Machinery and machinery components;



            27.   Marine equipment;



            28.   Mattresses;



            29.   Medicine;



            30.   Musical instruments;



            31.   Non-alcoholic beverages;



            32.   Office equipment including assembly;



            33.   Office machinery, electrical and mechanical;



            34.   Optical goods;



            35.   Paper box and paper products from finished
paper;



            36.   Pharmaceutical products;



            37.   Phonograph records and compact discs;



            38.   Prefabricated wood building and structural
members;



            39.   Recording instruments;



            40.   Sports equipment;



            41.   Starch;



            42.   Textiles;



            43.   Tools and implements (electrical or
non-electrical); and



            44.   Toys.



         (i)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Clinic, medical, dental or optometrists;



            2.   Electrical repair;



            3.   Machine shop;*



            4.   Mail order distribution;



            5.   Print shop;



            6.   Sign painting;



            7.   Welding shop;* and



            8.   Wholesale business.



         (j)   Office/professional services.



            1.   Architect;



            2.   Artist;



            3.   Bank machines;



            4.   Bank/savings and loan/credit union;



            5.   Dentist;



            6.   Design services;



            7.   Engineer;



            8.   Insurance agent;



            9.   Lawyer;



            10.   Musician;



            11.   Offices related to or in conjunction with
another permitted use;



            12.   Office of construction companies,
contractors, home remodeling companies;



            13.   Physician;



            14.   Pharmacist;



            15.   Photographic studio;



            16.   Professional offices;



            17.   Real estate office;



            18.   Service organization office; and



            19.   Travel agency.



         (k)   Personal service.



            1.   Barber shop;



            2.   Beauty shop; and



            3.   Health spa or fitness center



         (l)   Recreation.



            1.   Arcade;



            2.   Billiard hall; and



            3.   Dancing, aerobics, gymnastics studio.



         (m)   Retail.



            1.   Apparel shop;



            2.   Convenience store;



            3.   Drug store;



            4.   Floor coverings;



            5.   Flower shop;



            6.   Gift shop;



            7.   Newsdealer;



            8.   Paint store;



            9.   Retail showroom;



            10.   Stationery and book store; and



            11.   Wall coverings



* See Article 3.5B(9) for maximum gross floor area limitations.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Food sales and service. Restaurant with alcoholic
beverages.



         (c)   Manufacture, assembly or repair.*



            1.   Alcoholic beverages;



            2.   Brewing distillation of liquor and spirits;
and



            3.   Malt products.



         (d)   Miscellaneous. Artificial lake.



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Neighborhood recycling collection point;



            2.   Parking garage; and



            3.   Religious use.



         (f)   Recreation.



            1.   Archery range; and



            2.   Shooting range.



* See Article 3.5B(9) for maximum gross floor area limitations.



      (3)   Accessory uses. See Article IV.



      (4)   Temporary uses. See Article IV.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.5B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot width and frontage. Each lot or integrated
center shall have a minimum of 75 feet on a public street.



      (2)   Minimum yards and minimum building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and minimum building
setback measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Minimum side yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum side bufferyard

 

25 ft.



Minimum side yard
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Minimum rear yard and setback. Shall be provided
from the lot line as follows:



 


Minimum rear yard

 

10 ft.



Minimum rear bufferyard
 

25 ft.




 



      (3)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where expressly permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards. May include driveways and
parking areas (provided that no portion of the parking area may be located
closer to the right-of-way than the ten feet; except for minimum front yards
abutting the Ronald Reagan Parkway or a frontage street parallel to the
Ronald Reagan Parkway, where parking areas shall be prohibited) and shall be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in compliance with
the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (b)   Minimum front bufferyards. May include driveways
and shall be maintained as open space free from buildings or structures in
compliance with the requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth
in Article IV;



         (c)   Minimum side and rear yards. Minimum side and rear
yards may include interior access driveways connecting to adjoining lots
provided that the remainder of said yards shall be maintained as open space
free from buildings or structures in compliance with the requirements for
perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV;



         (d)   Minimum side and rear bufferyards. Shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained in compliance with the
requirements for perimeter landscape yards as set forth in Article IV.



         (e)   Minimum yards for out lots.



            1.   Out lots within an integrated center shall
provide a minimum yard of five feet along all lot lines in common with other
out lots or with the main portion of the integrated center. If any portion of
an out lot abuts the perimeter of the integrated center, that portion of the
out lot shall be required to comply with the applicable minimum front, side
or rear yard requirements set forth above. The main portion of the integrated
center shall not be required to provide a minimum yard along the lot line in
common with an out lot.



            2.   Provided, however, the minimum yards for out
lots along all lot lines in common with other out lots may be used for
parking areas, loading areas, interior drives or interior access drives
provided that:



               a.   The area of each such minimum yard that
would have been devoted to landscaping and the amount of landscape material
that would have been required to be installed in each such minimum yard, if
not complying with the special provisions of this division, are provided
elsewhere on each of the affected out lots as either additional foundation
landscaping area or additional interior parking area landscaping; and



               b.   Documentary assurances are provided on
the secondary plat or by other legally binding instrument which binds the
adjoining lots to be developed in compliance with the special provisions of
this division allowing such minimum yards to be used for parking areas,
loading areas, interior drives or interior access drives subject to the
provision of such additional foundation landscaping area or additional
interior parking area landscaping.



      (4)   Maximum building height. 50 feet.



      (5)   Parking and loading. See Article IV.



      (6)   Signs. All signs shall comply with the provision of
Article VII regarding signs for commercial or industrial districts.



      (7)   Outside storage and operations. All storage, servicing
and operations, except for parking and loading, shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings.



      (8)   Landscape requirements. Landscape requirements within
the C-I District shall comply with the provisions of Article 4.7 - Landscape
Provisions as applicable to the I-1 District, provided that the basic
requirement for landscaping of required front yards shall be a Level 2 and
the basic requirement for landscaping of required front bufferyards shall be
a Level 4.



      (9)   Maximum gross floor area.



         (a)   General. No single use, whether freestanding, a
part of a multi-tenant building, shall exceed 50,000 square feet of gross
floor area.



         (b)   General. No multi-tenant building shall exceed
150,000 square feet of gross floor area.



         (c)   Asterisks. All “Manufacture, Assembly or
Repair” and Certain “Miscellaneous” Uses as identified with an “ *”
in the permitted use listing contained in Article 3.5A shall be subject to
the following additional limitations:



            1.   No “Manufacture, Assembly or Repair” use
or specified “Miscellaneous” use shall exceed 25,000 square feet in gross
floor area; and



            2.   All “Manufacture, Assembly or Repair” use
or specified “Miscellaneous” use shall include a minimum of 10% of the
gross floor area of such use as office, retail, showroom or other finished
space.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.5C  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.



   Notwithstanding anything in Article V to the contrary, all development
located in the C-I District, regardless of location or proximity to
residential districts, shall be subject to the requirements for the filing of
a development plan for architectural and site design review as set forth in
Article V for development within commercial districts.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.5D  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.



   Development incentives shall not be available in the C-I District.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



§ 3.5E  MASTER PLANS.



   Master Plans shall be approved in the following manner.



      (1)   Approval of Master Plans. The following shall be deemed
to be approved Master Plans:



         (a)   A Master Plan submitted for Plan Commission
approval as part of a requested petition for zone map change or, if the
property is already zoned to the C-I District, submitted for Plan Commission
approval as part of a Development Plan;



         (b)   The latest plan for development as approved by the
Plan Commission in connection with a PUD District established prior to the
adoption of this C-I District; and



         (c)   In the event of a legally established
nonconforming development for which there has been no Plan Commission
approval of a Master Plan or PUD District established prior to the adoption
of this C-I District, the Master Plan shall be interpreted as being the
buildings, structures, accessory uses and physical development of the site in
existence on the date of adoption of this ordinance.



      (2)   Phases. A Master Plan may be submitted as follows:



         (a)   Master Plan approvals may be obtained for a total
project at one time or in phases. Phases may include physical areas of
development (i.e., portions of an overall site) or elements of a development
(i.e., building elevations, a sign program, landscaping, parking, athletic
fields or stadiums and the like).



         (b)   If phases are of physical areas of development,
the initial phase shall be depicted on an overall plan for the entire site.
As the approval of each subsequent phase is requested, an updated overall
plan which incorporates the prior approved phases and the proposed phase,
shall be required.



         (c)   Any initial Master Plan or subsequent phases of
approval may include a request for waivers as authorized by Article 3.5E(8)
below.



      (3)   Applicability.



         (a)   New development. A Master Plan shall be approved
by the Plan Commission prior to any new development in a C-I District.



         (b)   Major expansions. A Master Plan shall be approved
by the Plan Commission prior to any major expansion (i.e., greater than
10,000 square feet or in excess of 20% of gross floor area of existing
buildings) or the development of additional real estate at an existing site.



         (c)   Minor expansions. Minor expansions of existing
facilities (i.e., less than 10,000 square feet and less than excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing buildings) and the addition of accessory uses or
temporary uses shall be subject only to Director’s review of an improvement
location permit application for compliance with the provisions of Article
3.5A and Article 3.5B above.



         (d)   Amendments. Amendments to Master Plans shall be
determined in compliance with the process outlined in Article 5.8E(3),
applicable to commercial/industrial development within 600 feet of a
residential district.



      (4)   After approval. After a Master Plan has been approved
for a particular site by the Plan Commission pursuant to this Article 3.5E,
all development within that site shall be subject only to Director’s review
of improvement location permit applications for individual improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of Article 3.5A
above;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of
Article 3.5B above;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved Master
Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article 3.5E(6) below (or
standards established by the Plan Commission as part of a PUD District
established prior to the adoption of this C-I District).



      (5)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, unless filed as part of a
petition for zone map change, a Master Plan shall be filed as a development
plan under same procedures as set forth in Article 5.8 of this ordinance for
architectural and site design review.



      (6)   Development requirements for the C-I District.



         (a)   Development requirements for the C-I District
shall include the development standards of Article 3.5B above, and the
additional development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a C-I
District include the following:



            1.   A Master Plan, which shall include, at a
minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a site, including, but not
limited to: a listing the size of the types of uses proposed; the overall
layout and design of the site (i.e., location, size and scope of buildings or
structures, school and athletic facilities, off-street parking areas and
signs); conceptual building elevations for major buildings or structures;
proposed site lighting; and conceptual landscape plans;



            2.   Each Master Plan shall demonstrate compliance
with all applicable development standards of the C-I District for which a
waiver is not provided for in this Article; and



            3.   Each Master Plan shall demonstrate compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which
a waiver has not been granted.



      (7)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a Master Plan
upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of C-I District for which a waiver has not been granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (8)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of educational facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article 3.5B
for: minimum front yards; maximum building height; signs; landscaping;
lighting; and building materials, upon finding that the proposed development:



         (a)   Represents an innovative and appropriate
development, including site design features, building materials, lighting and
landscaping which will enhance the use or value of area properties;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE 3.6. G: GOLF



§ 3.6  INTENT.



   The G: Golf District is established to specify a land use district
applicable and consistent with a public or private golf course and related
activities within the town.



(Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007)



§ 3.6A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   (a)   Primary uses.



            1.   Golf course, public or private;



            2.   Private club;



            3.   Clubhouses;



            4.   Driving range



            5.   Tennis court(s);



            6.   Basketball court(s);



            7.   Outdoor recreational activities;



            8.   Indoor and outdoor fitness and exercise
facilities;



            9.   Gaming events (limited to private clubs or
private lodges);



            10.   Lodge;



            11.   Golf outings (private or public);



            12.   Parties (private or public);



            13.   Retail sales of golf and club related
merchandise;



            14.   Outdoor events;



            15.   Outdoor storage, including storage of
chemicals, fuels, herbicides and other materials related to maintenance and
improvement of a golf course and/or swimming pools;



            16.   Swimming pool(s) - outdoor or indoor;



            17.   Bathhouse;



            18.   Temporary parking of recreational vehicles
(limited to 120 consecutive hours during a seven-day period);



            19.   Food preparation and service, including
seasonal outdoor dining;



            20.   Sale and service of alcoholic beverages, as
permitted by the Indiana Alcoholic Beverage Commission and the town;



            21.   Fireworks, as permitted by Indiana Fire
Prevention and Building Safety Commission and the town;



            22.   Customary activities related to the
operation of a golf course;



            23.   Customary activities related to that of a
private club or lodge; and



            24.   Established nonconforming uses.



         (b)   Limit on primary uses. There shall be no limit to
the number of primary uses on a lot within the Golf District, subject to the
standards of this Article 3.6. The rights and benefits of a private club may
be enjoyed by full-time members, temporary members and for guests of members.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Public utility substation;



            2.   Public wells;



            3.   Sewage treatment plant; and



            4.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use.



            1.   School - public or private;



            2.   Kindergarten;



            3.   Child care center; and



            4.   Public library.



         (c)   Government use.



            1.   Fire station;



            2.   Municipal/state maintenance facility; and



            3.   Police station;



         (d)   Public facilities. Religious use.



         (e)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake; and



            2.   Tourist home/bed and breakfast.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses
shall be applicable to the development within the G: Golf District to the
extent that the items regulated in Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses are proposed
for development on a golf course.



         (b)   In addition, accessory uses in the G: Golf
District may include:



            1.   Any recreational use, or use incidental to a
golf course, which is reasonably related to the golf course use specified in
an approved Golf Course Master Plan; or



            2.   If no Golf Course Master Plan exists, any
recreational use, or use incidental to a recreational use, which is
reasonable related to existing recreational facilities.



         (c)   By way of example only, accessory uses may
include: picnic shelters, concessions stands, restrooms, swimming pool, bath
house, maintenance buildings, mechanical buildings, driving range, golf
practice area and putting greens.



      (4)   Temporary uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses,
Structures and Buildings shall be applicable to all temporary development
within the G: Golf District to the extent that the items regulated in Article
4.2 - Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings are proposed for the
development at a golf course site.



         (b)   All temporary uses, structures and buildings, in
the G: Golf District shall obtain an improvement location permit, if required
by Article 4.2A.



(Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007)



§ 3.6B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. 43,560 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 50 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 30 feet on a public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. Not applicable.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

80 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

60 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

40 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yard and rear yard. A minimum side yard and a
minimum rear yard shall be provided along all side lot lines and rear lot
lines as follows:



 


Accessory buildings or structures

 

20 ft.



Designated or improved grade level activity areas (i.e., dirt, grass or bark
trails; grass play areas; and the like) excluding any hard surfaced
recreation area
 

5 ft.



Parking lot, outdoor swimming pool, tennis courts, driving range, practice
green, practice area, ball courts or any other hard surfaced recreation area
 

20 ft.



Primary building
 

20 ft.



Recreational equipment/playground apparatus
 

20 ft.




 



      (6)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where specifically permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and front bufferyards. May
include: driveways; greenways; golf cart paths; fences; tee boxes; ball
washers; greens and fairways; trails, maintenance pathways; or any outdoor
recreational improvement which is comprised primarily of live vegetation
(i.e., botanical gardens, arboreta and the like), and shall otherwise be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures; and



         (b)   Minimum side yards, minimum rear yards, minimum
side bufferyards and minimum rear bufferyards. May include: interior access
drive; or greenways, golf cart paths, fences; tee boxes, ball washers, greens
and fairways, trails, maintenance pathways, or walkways connecting to
adjoining projects or subdivisions, provided the remainder of said yards or
bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees, or hedge, or
in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as
open space free from buildings or structures.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, unless a greater height
is specified in an approved Golf Course Master Plan.



         (b)   Accessory building or structures. 25 feet, unless
a greater height is specified in an approved Golf Course Master Plan.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. Not applicable.



      (9)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be
sufficient to accommodate the uses of the property in the Golf District, as
set forth in an approved Golf Course Master Plan. Parking surface may be
paved or gravel.



      (10)   Signs.



         (a)   The regulations contained in Article 7.6D, for
“Business and Other Uses Permitted in Residential Districts by Special
Exception” shall apply to the G: Golf District, provided, however,
notwithstanding anything in the Article VII to the contrary; and



         (b)   Other permanent signs or temporary signs included
in an overall sign program (which includes the general number, size, type and
location of signs) and which is approved by the Plan Commission as part of an
approved Golf Course Master Plan.



      (11)   Landscape requirements. Landscaping shall comply with
the provisions of Article IV regarding landscaping for Office District
development, unless an alternative standard is specified in an approved Golf
Course Master Plan.



      (12)   Lighting requirements. See Article IV and Article
5.5C(6), unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved Golf Course
Master Plan for any outdoor lighting fixture, including lighting fixtures for
parking areas, driving range, practice areas, tennis courts or swimming pools
and the like.



      (13)   Building materials for primary building(s). The
following provisions of Article 5.5 shall be applicable to all primary
building(s), unless an alternative standard is specified in an approved Golf
Course Master Plan.



         (a)   New construction. See Article 5.5C(3)(a)2.
Commercial Districts.



         (b)   Additions to existing buildings. See Article
5.5C(3)(b).



         (c)   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(c).



         (d)   Exterior building facade renovations with major
building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(d).



      (14)   Building materials for accessory buildings and
structures. Building material for accessory buildings or structures may be as
specified in an approved Golf Course Master Plan.



      (15)   On-site sewage treatment system. The Golf Course and
its improvements, including, but not limited to, clubhouses, lodge houses and
private club facilities, may utilize an on-site sewage waste treatment system
that complies with state regulations governing such.



      (16)   On-site water/well system. The golf course and its
improvements may utilize an on-site water/well system of non-potable water
for irrigation purposes that complies with state regulations governing such.



(Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007)



§ 3.6C  GOLF COURSE MASTER PLAN APPROVALS.



      (1)   Applicability.



         (a)   New golf courses. A development plan, which
includes a Golf Course Master Plan, shall be approved by the Plan Commission
prior to the development of a new golf course.



         (b)   Major golf course expansions. A development plan,
which includes a Golf Course Master Plan, shall be approved by the Plan
Commission prior to any major expansion of golf course facilities or the
development of additional real estate at an existing park.



         (c)   Minor golf course expansions. Minor expansions of
existing golf course facilities and the addition of accessory uses or
temporary uses shall be subject only to Director’s review of an improvement
location permit application for compliance with the provisions of this
Article.



      (2)   After approval. After a Golf Course Master Plan has been
approved for a particular golf course by the Plan Commission pursuant to this
Article, all development within that golf course shall be subject only to
Director’s review of improvement location permit application for individual
improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of this Article;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of this
Article;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved Golf
Course Master Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to this Article.



      (3)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, a Golf Course Master Plan shall
be filed as a development plan under same procedures as set forth in Article
5.8 of this ordinance for architectural and site design review.



      (4)   Development requirements for G: Golf District
(applicable to new golf courses constructed after the adoption of this
ordinance).



         (a)   Development requirements for the G: Golf District
shall include development standards of this Article, and the additional
development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a G: Golf
District include the following:



            1.   A Golf Course Master Plan, which shall
include, at a minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a golf
course, including, but not limited to: a listing of the types of recreational
uses proposed; the overall layout and design of the golf course (i.e.,
location of activity areas or structures, including off-street parking areas
and signs); locations of buildings or structures; proposed site lighting;
conceptual landscape plans; and the approximate size or scope of proposed
recreational facilities;



            2.   Each Golf Course Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable development standards of the G:
Golf District for which a waiver is not provided in this Article; and



            3.   Each Golf Course Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not been granted.



      (5)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a Golf Course
Master Plan upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of G: Golf District for which a waiver has not been
granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (6)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of recreational facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article
3.6.B., for minimum lot area; minimum lot width; minimum lot frontage;
minimum yards and building setbacks; use of minimum yards and bufferyards;
and off-street parking; upon finding that the proposed park development:



         (a)   Represents and innovative development of
recreational uses, including site design features, lighting and landscaping
which will enhance the use or value of area properties;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007)



ARTICLE 3.7. A: AIRSPACE OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 3.7  INTENT.



   An Airspace Overlay District, a secondary zoning district is
established to enhance and promote the safe operations of the Indianapolis
International Airport. The Airspace Overlay District consists of airport
instrument approach surface areas, airport transitional surface areas,
airport horizontal surface areas and airport conical surface areas as defined
below in this Article 3.7 and indicated on the Airspace Overlay District Map.



(Ord. 29-2007, passed 1-14-2008)



§ 3.7A  AIRSPACE OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all land within the Airspace
Overlay District. These regulations shall be in addition to all other primary
or secondary zoning district regulations applicable to such land. In case of
conflict between these regulations and the regulations of any other primary
or secondary zoning district, the provisions which impose the greater or
higher or more restrictive standard of performance shall control.



      (1)   Prohibited uses. Within that part of the airport
instrument approach surface areas and airport transitional surface areas,
which extend 10,200 feet from each end of a runway measured horizontally
along the extended centerline of such runway, no building, structure or
premises shall be erected, relocated or converted for use as a:



         (a)   Amusement park;



         (b)   Assembly hall;



         (c)   Carnival;



         (d)   Child caring institution;



         (e)   Correctional institution;



         (f)   Hospital;



         (g)   Public auditorium;



         (h)   Public swimming pool;



         (i)   School;



         (j)   Religious use;



         (k)   Residential primary plat;



         (l)   Sports arena;



         (m)   Stadium; or



         (n)   Theater.



      (2)   Height limits. Except as otherwise provided herein, no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained
within the Airspace Overlay District to a height in excess of the following
height limits herein established for the airport instrument approach surface
area, airport transitional surface area, airport horizontal surface area and
airport conical surface area, as defined below and designated on the official
zoning map. (Such height limits shall be computed from the applicable runway
elevation or airport elevation as designated on the Airspace Overlay District
Map).



         (a)   Height limits for the airport instrument approach
surface area shall be: one foot in height for each 100 feet in horizontal
distance beginning at a point 200 feet from the end of the instrument runway
and extending to a distance of 10,200 feet from the end of the runway; thence
one foot in height for each 50 feet in horizontal distance to a point 50,200
feet from the end of the runway.



         (b)   Height limits for the airport transitional surface
area shall be: one foot vertical height for each seven feet of horizontal
distance measured from the outer lines of all airport instrument approach
surface areas for the entire length of such airport instrument approach
surface areas, extending to their intersection with the outer line of the
airport conical surface area; and beyond such points of intersection,
beginning at the outer lines of all airport instrument approach surface areas
and extending a horizontal distance to 5,000 feet therefrom, measured at
right angles to the continuation of the runway centerline, one foot vertical
height for each seven feet of horizontal distance.



         (c)   Height limit for the airport horizontal surface
area shall be: 150 feet above the established airport elevation as indicated
on the Airspace Overlay District Map.



         (d)   Height limit for the airport conical surface area
shall be: one foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal distance
beginning at the periphery of the airport horizontal surface area and
measured perpendicularly to the periphery of the airport horizontal surface
area to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. Provided, however,
if any area is subject to more than one of the above height limitations, the
more restrictive limitation shall control. Provided, further, however,
nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the erection,
construction, growth or maintenance of any structure or tree to a height of
50 feet or less above the surface of the land.



      (3)   Performance standards within the airport conical surface
area. The following performance standards shall apply to all land within the
perimeter of the airport conical surface area as defined below and indicated
on the Airspace Overlay District Map.



         (a)   Interference with communications. No use shall
create interference with any form of communication, the primary purpose of
which is for air navigation.



         (b)   Glare; marking and lighting of airspace hazards.



            1.   All lights shall be located or shielded in
such a manner that they do not interfere with runway, taxi, tower or any
other airport lights or result in glare which may interfere with the use of
the airport in landing, taking-off or maneuvering of aircraft.



            2.   Such markers and lights as may be required by
the Indianapolis Airport Authority to indicate to air crews the presence of
structures or trees constituting airspace hazards shall be permitted.



         (c)   Smoke, dust, particulate matter.



            1.   Open burning shall be prohibited.



            2.   No use shall cause smoke, dust, particulate
matter or airborne material of any kind to escape beyond the lot lines in a
manner detrimental to or endangering the visibility of air crews using the
airport in landing, taking-off or maneuvering of aircraft.



(Ord. 29-2007, passed 1-14-2008)



§ 3.7B  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE AND DEFINITIONS.



      (1)   Construction of language. The language of this Article
3.7 shall be interpreted in accordance with the following regulations:



         (a)   The particular shall control the general.



         (b)   In the case of any difference of meaning or
implication between the text of this Article and any illustration or diagram,
the text shall control.



         (c)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.



         (d)   Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and
the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



         (e)   A “building” or “structure” includes any
part thereof.



         (f)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged
for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for”, or
“occupied for”.



         (g)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or
events connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, or “either . .
or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:



            1.   “And” indicates that all the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.



            2.   “Or” indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination.



            3.   “Either . . . or” indicates that all the
connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not
in combination.



      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         AIRPORT CONICAL SURFACE AREA. The land area beginning at
the periphery of the airport horizontal surface area and thence extending
outwardly a distance of 4,000 feet. Such AIRPORT CONICAL SURFACE AREA does
not include, however, the airport instrument approach surface areas and
airport transitional surface area.



         AIRPORT HORIZONTAL SURFACE AREA. The land area, the
perimeter of which is determined by projecting arcs from the center of the
inner line of each airport instrument approach surface area with the
dimension of such arcs for instrument approach surface areas being 10,000
feet. Such AIRPORT HORIZONTAL SURFACE AREA does not include, however, the
airport instrument approach surface area and airport transitional surface
area.



         AIRPORT INSTRUMENT APPROACH SURFACE AREA. The land area
located at each end of each instrument runway for landings and take-offs.
Such AIRPORT INSTRUMENT APPROACH SURFACE AREA having a width of 1,000 feet at
a horizontal distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway and widening
thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of
50,200 feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the
continuation of the runway centerline.



         AIRPORT LANDING AREA. The area of the airport used for the
landing, taking-off or taxiing of aircraft.



         AIRPORT TRANSITIONAL SURFACE AREA. The land area located
adjacent to each instrument runway. Such AIRPORT TRANSITIONAL SURFACE AREA
extending outward as indicated on the official zoning map from a line 500
feet of either side of the centerline of an instrument runway plus 200 feet
at each end thereof, to the inner line of the airport horizontal surface
area; further symmetrically located adjacent to each instrument runway
airport instrument approach surface area, on each side thereof, having
variable widths, as indicated on the official zoning map, and extending the
entire length of such airport instrument approach surface area to their
intersection with the outline of the airport conical surface area; and
further located beyond such points of intersection, beginning at the out
lines of the airport instrument approach surface area and extending a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet therefrom, measured at right angles to the
continuation of the runway centerline, as indicated on the Airspace Overlay
District map.



         AIRSPACE HAZARD. Any structure, tree, object or use of land
which obstructs the airspace or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of
aircraft in landing or taking-off at a public airport or heliport, as
determined to constitute an “airspace” or “airport” hazard either by
the Federal Aviation Administration, the Aeronautics Commission of Indiana or
the Indianapolis Airport Authority.



         INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway equipped or to be equipped with
electronic or visual air navigation aids adequate to permit the landing of
aircraft under restricted visibility conditions.



         OPEN BURNING. Any burning of combustible matter where the
products of combustion are emitted directly into the outside air without
passing through a stack or chimney.



         PUBLIC AIRPORT. An airport publicly owned or operated,
designated as a PUBLIC AIRPORT on the official zoning map, for which an
Airspace District is established by this Article.



         RUNWAY. The surface of the airport used for landing and
taking-off of aircraft.



         STRUCTURE. An object constructed or installed by humans,
including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and
overhead transmission lines.



(Ord. 29-2007, passed 1-14-2008)



ARTICLE 3.8. MUN: MUNICIPAL USE DISTRICT



§ 3.8  INTENT.



   The MUN: Municipal Use Districts are established to promote and
maintain the development facilities for municipal use within the town. The
development of municipal facilities or the major expansion of existing
municipal facilities within the MUN: Municipal Use Districts shall be subject
to the approval of a Municipal Use Master Plan, as provided for in Article
3.8C below, to assure that the development of a particular municipal use and
related facilities, is compatible with nearby residential neighborhoods.



(Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.8A  PERMITTED USES.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Electric relay station;



            2.   Public utility substation;



            3.   Public wells;



            4.   Pumping station;



            5.   Telephone exchange;



            6.   Water towers; and



            7.   Water treatment plant.



         (b)   Educational use. Public library.



         (c)   Governmental use.



            1.   Governmental offices;



            2.   Fire station;



            3.   Municipal/state maintenance facility;



            4.   Police station; and



            5.   Post office.



         (d)   Miscellaneous.



            1.   Artificial lake;



            2.   Hospital; and



            3.   Mass transit facility (bus/light-rail).



         (e)   Public facilities.



            1.   Cemetery - without crematory, funeral home or
mortuary;



            2.   Community center;



            3.   Museum;



            4.   Neighborhood recycling collection point;



            5.   Parking garage; and



            6.   Parking lot.



      (2)   Special exception uses.



         (a)   Communication/utilities.



            1.   Communication relay tower;



            2.   Sewage treatment plan; and



            3.   Storage tanks - non-hazardous.



         (b)   Governmental use. Jail/penal or correctional
institution.



         (c)   Miscellaneous. Cemetery - with crematory, funeral
home or mortuary.



         (d)   Public facilities.



            1.   Airport;



            2.   Animal shelter;



            3.   Heliport;



            4.   Recycling facility;



            5.   Religious use;



            6.   Resource recovery facility;



            7.   Sanitarium; and



            8.   Transfer station.



      (3)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses
shall be applicable to development within the MUN: Municipal Use District to
the extent that the items regulated in Article 4.1 - Accessory Uses are
proposed for development at a municipal use site.



         (b)   In addition, accessory uses in the MUN: Municipal
Use District may include:



            1.   Those buildings, structures or facilities
which are typically related to a municipal use;



            2.   Such other primary or accessory municipal
uses included in a Municipal Use Master Plan filed with and approved by the
Plan Commission; or



            3.   If no Municipal Use Master Plan exists, any
municipal use or use incidental to a municipal use, which is reasonably
related to existing municipal use facilities.



      (4)   Temporary uses.



         (a)   The provisions of Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses,
Structures and Buildings shall be applicable to all temporary development
within the MUN: Municipal Use District to the extent that the items regulated
in Article 4.2 - Temporary Uses, Structures and Buildings are proposed for
development at a municipal use site.



         (b)   All temporary uses, structures and buildings, in
the MUN: Municipal Use District shall obtain an improvement location permit,
if required by Article 4.2A.



         (c)   In addition, temporary uses in the MUN: Municipal
Use District may include:



            1.   Any concert, festival, tournament or other
social activity related to a town-recognized special event identified in
Article 7.2 of this ordinance; or



            2.   Other temporary uses as approved by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning as being compatible with
the approved Municipal Use Master Plan or existing facilities.



         (d)   Unless specified in an approved Municipal Use
Master Plan, or specifically approved by the Director, no municipal use may
conduct more than four temporary uses in any calendar year, and no individual
temporary use shall exceed ten days in duration.



(Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.8B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area
requirement provided sufficient land area is available for all buildings,
parking areas, other improvements and landscaping as appropriate for the site.



      (2)   Minimum lot width. 100 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage. 100 feet on a public street.



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage. Not applicable.



      (5)   Minimum yards and building setbacks.



         (a)   Front. A minimum front yard and building setback
measured from the proposed right-of-way shall be provided as follows, unless
an alternate standard is specified in an approved Municipal Use Master Plan:



 


Collector street

 

30 ft.



Interstate street
 

60 ft.



Local street/cul-de-sac street
 

30 ft.



Primary arterial street
 

30 ft.



Secondary arterial street
 

30 ft.




 



         (b)   Side yard and rear yard. A minimum side yard and a
minimum rear yard shall be provided along all side lot lines and rear lot
lines as follows:



 


Accessory buildings or structures

 

10 ft.



Primary building
 

10 ft.




 



         (c)   Side and rear bufferyard. A minimum 25-foot side
and rear bufferyard shall be provided along all side and rear lot lines for
the following uses:



            1.   Electric relay station;



            2.   Public utility substations;



            3.   Pumping station;



            4.   Water towers;



            5.   Water treatment plant;



            6.   Municipal/state maintenance facility;



            7.   Storage tanks (non hazardous);



            8.   Penal or correctional institution;



            9.   Neighborhood recycling point;



            10.   Recycling facility; and



            11.   Resource recovery facility.



      (6)   Use of minimum yards and bufferyards. All minimum yards
and bufferyards shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubbery, or hedge,
or in combination with other suitable ground cover materials and shall remain
free from structures except where specifically permitted below:



         (a)   Minimum front yards and front bufferyards. May
include: driveways, greenways, trails or walkways and shall otherwise be
maintained as open space free from buildings or structures; and



         (b)   Minimum side yards, minimum rear yards, minimum
side bufferyards and minimum rear bufferyards. May include: interior access
driveways, or greenways, trails or walkways connecting to adjoining projects
or subdivisions, provided the remainder of said yards or bufferyards shall be
landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination with
other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as open space free from
buildings or structures.



      (7)   Maximum building height.



         (a)   Primary building. 35 feet, unless a greater height
is specified in an approved Municipal Use Master Plan.



         (b)   Accessory building or structures. 25 feet, unless
a greater height is specified in an approved Municipal Use Master Plan.



      (8)   Minimum main floor area. Not applicable.



      (9)   Off-street parking. See Article 4.10 - Off-Street
Parking Regulations.



      (10)   Signs. The regulations contained in Article 7.6D, for
“Business and Other Uses Permitted in Residential Districts by Special
Exception” shall apply to the MUN: Municipal Use District, unless, however,
other permanent signs or temporary signs included in an overall sign program
(which includes the general number, size, type and location of signs) which
is approved by the Plan Commission as part of an approved Municipal Use
Master Plan.



      (11)   Landscape requirements. Landscaping shall comply with
the provisions of Article IV regarding landscaping for OD - Office District
or I-2 - Office Warehouse Industrial District developments where bufferyards
are required, unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved
Municipal Use Master Plan.



      (12)   Lighting requirements. See Article IV and Article
5.5C(6), unless an alternate standard is specified in an approved Municipal
Use Master Plan for any outdoor lighting fixture, including lighting fixtures
for parking areas.



      (13)   Building materials. The following provisions of Article
5.5 shall be applicable to all buildings, unless an alternative standard is
specified in an approved Municipal Use Master Plan.



         (a)   New construction. See Article 5.5C(3)(a)2 -
Commercial Districts.



         (b)   Additions to existing buildings. See Article
5.5C(3)(b).



         (c)   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(c).



         (d)   Exterior building facade renovations with major
building additions. See Article 5.5C(3)(d).



(Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



§ 3.8C  MUNICIPAL USE MASTER PLAN APPROVALS.



   Municipal Use Master Plans shall be approved in the following manner.



      (1)   Approval of Municipal Use Master Plans. The following
shall be deemed to be approved Municipal Use Master Plans:



         (a)   A Municipal Use Master Plan submitted for Plan
Commission approval as part of a requested petition for zone map change or,
if the property is already zoned to the MUN: Municipal Use District,
submitted for Plan Commission approval as part of a development plan;



         (b)   The latest plan for development at a municipal use
site approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special
exception grant prior to the adoption of this MUN: Municipal Use District; and



         (c)   In the event of a legally established
nonconforming municipal use for which there has been no Plan Commission
approval of a Municipal Use Master Plan or grant of a special exception by
the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Municipal Use Master Plan shall be
interpreted as being the primary facilities, accessory uses and physical
development of the site in existence on the date of adoption of this
ordinance.



      (2)   Phases. A Municipal Use Master Plan may be submitted as
follows:



         (a)   Municipal Use Master Plan approvals may be
obtained for a total project at one time or in phases. Phases may include
physical areas of development (i.e., portions of an overall site) or elements
of a development (i.e., building elevations, a sign program, landscaping,
parking and the like);



         (b)   If phases are of physical areas of development,
the initial phase shall be depicted on an overall plan for the entire site.
As the approval of each subsequent phase is requested, an updated overall
plan which incorporates the prior approved phases and the proposed phase
shall be required; and



         (c)   Any initial Municipal Use Master Plan or
subsequent phases of approval may include a request for waivers as authorized
by Article 3.8C(8) below.



      (3)   Applicability.



         (a)   New municipal uses. A Municipal Use Master Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to the development of a new
municipal use.



         (b)   Major expansions. A Municipal Use Master Plan
shall be approved by the Plan Commission prior to any major expansion (i.e.,
greater than 10,000 square feet or in excess of 20% of gross floor area of
existing buildings) or the development of additional real estate at an
existing municipal use site.



         (c)   Minor expansions. Minor expansions of existing
facilities (i.e., less than 10,000 square feet and less than excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing buildings) and the addition of accessory uses or
temporary uses shall be subject only to the Director’s review of an
improvement location permit application for compliance with the provisions of
Article 3.8A and Article 3.8B above.



         (d)   Amendments. Amendments to Municipal Use Master
Plans shall be determined in compliance with the process outlined in Article
5.8E(3) applicable to commercial/industrial development within 600 feet of a
residential district.



      (4)   After approval. After a Municipal Use Master Plan has
been approved for a particular municipal use by the Plan Commission pursuant
to this Article 3.8C, all development within that municipal use site shall be
subject only to Director’s review of improvement location permit
applications for individual improvements for:



         (a)   Compliance with the permitted uses of Article 3.8A
above;



         (b)   Compliance with the development standards of
Article 3.8B above;



         (c)   Substantial compliance with an approved Municipal
Use Master Plan; and



         (d)   Compliance with any waivers which may have been
granted by the Plan Commission pursuant to Article 3.8C(8) below (or by the
Board of Zoning Appeals in connection with a special exception grant prior to
the adoption of this MUN: Municipal Use District).



      (5)   Procedures and filing requirements. Notwithstanding
anything in this ordinance to the contrary, unless filed as part of a
petition for zone map change, a Municipal Use Master Plan shall be filed as a
development plan under same procedures as set forth in Article 5.8 of this
ordinance for architectural and site design review.



      (6)   Development requirements for the MUN: Municipal Use
District.



         (a)   Development requirements for the MUN: Municipal
Use District shall include the development standards of Article 3.8B above,
and the additional development requirements specified below.



         (b)   The additional development requirements which
shall be satisfied prior to the approval of a development plan for
architectural and site design review for any development within a MUN:
Municipal Use District include the following:



            1.   A Municipal Use Master Plan, which shall
include, at a minimum, general guidelines for the improvement of a municipal
use site, including, but not limited to: a listing the size of the municipal
facility proposed; the overall layout and design of the site (i.e., location,
size and scope of buildings or structures, off-street parking areas and
signs); conceptual building elevations for major buildings or structures;
proposed site lighting; and conceptual landscape plans;



            2.   Each Municipal Use Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable development standards of the MUN:
Municipal Use District for which a waiver is not provided for in this
Article; and



            3.   Each Municipal Use Master Plan shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not been granted.



      (7)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve a development
plan for architectural and site design review as proposed by a Municipal Use
Master Plan upon finding that:



         (a)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of MUN: Municipal Use District for which a waiver has
not been granted;



         (b)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan;



         (d)   The proposed development is appropriate to the
site and its surroundings; and



         (e)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (8)   Waivers. In order to encourage creativity in the design
of municipal facilities within the town, the Plan Commission may grant a
waiver of any of the development requirements specified in this Article 3.8B
for: minimum front yards; maximum building height; signs; landscaping;
lighting; and building materials, upon finding that the proposed municipal
use development:



         (a)   Represents an innovative and appropriate
development of a municipal use, including site design features, building
materials, lighting and landscaping which will enhance the use or value of
area properties and the safety and functionality of the municipal use;



         (b)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the immediately surrounding area; and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 10-2010, passed 7-26-2010; Ord. 04-2013,
passed 2-25-2013)



ARTICLE 4.1. ACCESSORY USES



§ 4.1A  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.



      (1)   Accessory uses shall be permitted in all zoning
districts, provided, however, that the primary use which is supported by the
accessory use is a permitted use within the district to which a lot is zoned.



      (2)   Accessory uses shall not be permitted on a lot prior to
the erection of the primary building.



      (3)   By way of example only, some typical accessory uses are:
garages; carports; porches; decks; awnings; canopies; mini-barns; storage
sheds; patios; outdoor fireplaces; bathhouses; cabanas; children’s
playhouses; swings; game courts, including tennis or basketball courts;
parking areas; signs; swimming pools; hot tubs; radio sending and receiving
antennas; satellite dish antennas; and storage buildings.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11- 2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24- 2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.1B  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES.



      (1)   Accessory uses shall comply with all development
standards of the applicable zoning district unless an exception is
specifically provided for in this Article 4.1.



      (2)   Accessory uses shall not encroach upon any platted
easements unless specifically authorized by the terms of the easement or by
written consent of the agency in whose favor the easement is granted.



      (3)   Accessory use buildings or structures shall not have a
lesser minimum front setback than the primary use building or structure
unless it is a permitted accessory use such as a freestanding sign or parking
area or a guard or pump house as needed in industrial districts.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.1C  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES, BUILDINGS OR
STRUCTURES IN ANY “R” DISTRICT.



   Accessory uses, buildings or structures permitted in any RR, R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6 and R-U District shall also comply with the following
additional development standards.



      (1)   Accessory uses, buildings or structures for
single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Accessory uses, buildings
or structures for single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall
comply with the following:



         (a)   Area. The total square foot area of all detached
accessory buildings on a lot and all attached accessory use portions of a
primary building containing a dwelling unit, shall not exceed the total
finished floor area of the primary building; and



         (b)   Number of detached accessory buildings. The total
number of detached accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed two
accessory buildings except on any lot one and one-half acres or larger where
the limit would be three structures over 200 square feet.



      (2)   Accessory uses, buildings or structures for multi-family
dwellings. Accessory uses, buildings or structures for multi-family dwellings
shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Area. The total combined square foot area of all
detached accessory buildings on a lot and all attached accessory use portions
of a primary building containing a dwelling unit, shall not exceed 50% of the
total finished floor area of all primary buildings; and



         (b)   Number of detached accessory buildings. The total
number of detached accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed two
accessory buildings except on any lot one and one-half acres or larger where
the limit would be three structures over 200 square feet.



      (3)   Swimming pools or hot tubs.



         (a)   A swimming pool or hot tub shall not be located
between any front lot line and the established front building line;



         (b)   A swimming pool or hot tub shall not be located in
any required side or rear yard required for an accessory use or a side or
rear bufferyard;



         (c)   1.   The swimming pool or hot tub shall be
enclosed by either: a fence, which shall be adequate to prevent persons,
children or animals from harm, and shall be equipped with a self-closing,
self-latching gate; or a safety pool cover complying with the provisions of
I.A.C. 20-4-27(c); and



            2.   If a fence is utilized, such fence shall:



               a.   If erected at grade, be not less than
four feet in height; or



               b.   If erected on the deck of an above
ground pool or hot tub, not be less than 36 inches in height measured from
the surface of the deck.



         (d)   No pool or hot tub shall be erected or constructed
unless adequate distance from overhead electrical wires is provided in
accordance with the National Safety Code and the National Electrical Code,
current editions;



         (e)   Abandoned or unused swimming pools or hot tubs,
situated on a premises which are not occupied for periods of 30 days or more,
shall be drained or equipped with a cover adequate to prevent persons,
children or animals from danger or harm; and



         (f)   All swimming pools or hot tubs, including
associated decking and aprons, shall be included in the calculation of
maximum lot coverage.



      (4)   Patios, porches, gazebos and decks. Patios, porches,
gazebos and decks shall comply with all maximum lot coverage, minimum yards
and building setback, and maximum building height regulations of the
applicable zoning district for primary buildings.



      (5)   (a)   Fences (including chain link, solid,
architectural screen, lattice-work or masonry) or hedges.



            1.   Shall not exceed 48 inches in height above
grade in a required front yard;



            2.   Shall not exceed six feet in height above
grade in a required side or rear yard;



            3.   Shall comply with all vision clearance area
requirements of this ordinance if located on a corner lot; and



            4.   Shall not exceed the maximum building height
allowed for an accessory building if located elsewhere on a lot.



         (b)   Fences; exception - residential subdivision
perimeter. A common fence, not exceeding six feet in height above grade, may
be located along a perimeter street of a recorded, platted residential
subdivision where individual lots or dwelling units do not have direct access
to said perimeter street.



      (6)   Satellite dish antennas in residential districts.



         (a)   The regulations of this Article shall apply to
satellite dish antennas in all residential districts which are greater than
one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter. These regulations are intended to allow
satellite dish antennas to be located in a manner that:



            1.   Does not unreasonably delay or prevent the
installation, maintenance or use of the antenna;



            2.   Does not unreasonably increase the cost of
installation, maintenance or use of the antenna; or



            3.   Preclude reception of an acceptable quality
signal.



         (b)   The regulations of this Article are intended to
accomplish the following specific and clearly defined health, safety and
aesthetic objectives:



            1.   To promote the public health and safety by
providing criteria for the placement of satellite dish antennas greater than
one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter which ensure that all such installations
are performed in a manner which limits endangerment of life and property on
the site and on surrounding properties if the antennas should collapse or are
felled by ice or high winds; and



            2.   To ensure the aesthetic harmony of
residential areas by providing for a harmonious streetscape, consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan, uncluttered by nonresidential structures, including
guy wires, poles, masts, cables or other appurtenances which can create a
visual blight offensive to those who reside, work or travel in the town.



         (c)   1.   The following regulations are intended to
meet the above objectives without unnecessarily burdening the federal
interests in ensuring the availability of satellite services and in promoting
fair and effective competition among competing communication service
providers.



            2.   In any residential district, satellite dish
antennas greater than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter shall be permitted
provided that:



               a.   If ground mounted, satellite dish
antennas shall:



                  i.   Not be located in any required
front, side or rear yard, or between the established front building line and
the front lot line; and



                  ii.   Not exceed the maximum building
height allowed for an accessory structure.



               b.   If roof-mounted, satellite dish
antennas shall:



                  i.   Not exceed the maximum building
height limit allowed for a primary building;



                  ii.   Not extend beyond the horizontal
limits of the roof area; and



                  iii.   Be installed in accordance with
plans certified by a registered engineer that the proposed installation
complies with the standards listed in §§ 623.0 and 624.0 of the BOCA Basic
Building Code. Furthermore, written documentation of such compliance,
including load distribution within the building’s support structure, shall
be furnished.



      (7)   Grade level improvements. Grade level improvements which
do not include a foundation shall be permitted as follows:



         (a)   In a required front yard. Stoops, sidewalks,
driveways and interior access drives; and



         (b)   In a required side or rear yard. Stoops, patios,
decks, sidewalks and interior access drives, provided, however that an
interior access drive located in a required side yard shall not be less than
eight feet in width nor greater than 12 feet in width. Patios and decks,
which include foundations or are located above grade level are regulated by
Article 4.1C(4) - Patios, Porches, Gazebos and Decks.



       (8)   Trash contain ers. Any trash contain er exceedi ng 36
cubic feet in capacity shall:







 



         ( a)    Be screened on at least three sides by a
building wall or a solid-walled enclosure, not less than six feet in height
nor more than ten feet in height above grade, equipped with an opaque screen
gate, and any solid-walled portion of the enclosure shall be provided with
Level 1 foundation landscaping;



         (b)   Not be located between the front facade of the
primary building and the front lot line except when the lot has multiple
front lot line(s) or there is another development constraint which prevents
trash containers and enclosures from being located to the side or rear of the
primary building; and



         (c)    Not be locat ed in any minimu m front yard,
minimu m side yard or minimu m rear yard.







 



(Ord. 21- 97, pass ed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001,
passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed
10-10-2005; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009;
Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012,
passed - -2012; Ord. 05-2014, passed 3-10-2014)



§ 4.1D  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES IN ALL
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   No accessory use or structure shall be permitted in any required front,
side or rear yard unless specifically authorized by the applicable zoning
district regulations. In addition, the following accessory uses shall also
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Trash containers. Trash containers exceeding 36 cubic
feet shall:



         (a)   Be screened on at least three sides by a building
wall or a solid-walled or fenced enclosure, not less than six feet in height
nor more than ten feet in height above grade;



         (b)    Not be located between the front line of the
primary building and the front lot line except when the lot has multiple
front lot line(s) or there is another development constraint which prevents
trash containers and enclosures from being located to the side or rear of the
primary building; and



         (c)    Not be located in any required yard or required
bufferyard.



      (2)   Parking areas. Shall comply with the off-street parking
regulations of Article IV of this ordinance.



      (3)   Loading areas. Shall comply with the off-street loading
regulations of Article IV of this ordinance.



      (4)   Signs. Shall comply with the sign regulations of Article
VII of this ordinance.



      (5)   Drive-through facilities.



         (a)   Shall be so designed that:



            1.   Drive-through lanes do not conflict with the
safe and efficient flow of traffic into and out of required parking spaces or
loading spaces;



            2.   Drive-through lanes have a “bail out”
capability for all vehicles which have entered the drive-through lane;



            3.   The minimum drive-through facility standards
include:



               a.   A drive-through lane with a minimum
width of ten feet measured from the furthest point of projection of a drive-
through facility from the building; and



               b.   A “bail out” lane with a minimum
width of 12 feet measured from and running parallel to the full length of the
drive-through lane.



            4.    If a “bail out” lane also serves as an
interior access drive providing access to parking spaces, the “bail out”
lane/interior access drive shall be limited to a one-way traffic pattern
following the direction of the drive-through lane;







   Combined Drive-Through Bail Out and Parking







 



   Drive-Through/Bail Out with Parking Area Beyond



            5.   If a parking area is developed beyond the
“bail out” lane, the parking area shall be separated from the “bail
out” lane by a curbed island having a minimum width of three feet;



            6.   Provide at least five waiting spaces prior to
the first occurrence of any ordering, pick-up or service facility; and



            7.   Provide sufficient room for at least one
waiting space after exiting the last pick-up or service facility.



         (b)   For the purposes of Article 4.10D(3) of this
ordinance, a drive-through lane shall not be considered an interior access
drive.



      (6)   Gasoline dispensers. Shall not be located within any
required front, side or rear yard and shall be provided with adequate on-site
maneuverability so as to avoid any interference with through traffic on any
public right-of-way.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012;
Ord. 05-2014, passed 3-10-2014)



§ 4.1E  UNDERGROUND FACILITIES.



   Underground facilities shall not be located in or under any required
front, side or rear yard.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.1F  GAME COURTS.



   Game courts shall not be located in any required front, side or rear
yard, or between the established front building line and the front lot line
provided, however, a basketball goal may be located in a driveway or interior
access drive on any lot containing a single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.1G  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RECYCLING CONTAINERS IN ALL RESIDENTIAL,
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   Any recycling container exceeding 36 cubic feet in capacity shall:



      (1)   Be oriented toward the back of the lot;



      (2)   Not be located between the front facade of the primary
building and the front lot line;



      (3)   Not be located in any minimum front, side or rear yard
or bufferyard;



      (4)   Shall not be located in a required parking space;



      (5)   Be located on an impervious surface such as asphalt or
concrete; and



      (6)   Have the rear and sides of the container provided with
Level 1.5 foundation landscaping.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



ARTICLE 4.2. TEMPORARY USES, STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS



§ 4.2A  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   A temporary use, structure or building which is in compliance with the
provisions of this Article, shall be allowed in any district. A temporary
use, structure or building which will be converted into a permanent primary
or accessory use after the cessation of the temporary use shall be required
to obtain an improvement location permit prior the establishment of the use
or the construction of any structure or building. A temporary use, structure
or building which will be removed from the site upon cessation of the
temporary use shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance to
obtain an improvement location permit.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2B  PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES, STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS.



   By way of example only, permitted temporary uses, structures and
buildings include: construction trailers, sales offices, garage sales and
seasonal retail sales.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2C  DURATION.



   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Article 4.2, a
temporary use, structure or building shall be permitted for a period not to
exceed one year. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Article
4.2, the temporary improvement location permit, if required, may be renewed
for an additional one-year period by the Director upon showing of good cause.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2D  COMPLIANCE WITH DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Any temporary use, structure or building shall comply with all
applicable development standards and setback requirements in the district in
which the temporary use, structure or building is located.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2E  CESSATION OF USE.



   All structures, buildings or debris associated with the temporary use
shall be removed from the site immediately upon completion or cessation of
the temporary use or expiration of the time period set forth above.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2F  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR GARAGE SALES/YARD SALES.



   Not withstanding any regulations above to the contrary, a garage sale
may be conducted only on premises located within an AG, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4, R-5, R-6, R-U, M-U or PUD District and shall be subject to the following
additional regulations.



      (1)   A garage sale may be conducted two times each calendar
year and shall not exceed three consecutive days in duration.



      (2)   A garage sale shall only be conducted during the hours
from sunrise to sunset.



      (3)   All personal property exhibited outdoors during a garage
sale shall be placed within a building or structure or otherwise removed from
the premises immediately following the end of the garage sale.



      (4)   No garage sale shall occur unless a permit therefore has
been obtained from the Clerk-Treasurer of the town. All garage sale permit
applications shall include the name of the owner(s) involved in the garage
sale, the address(s) of the garage sale and the date(s) of the garage sale.
If an application for a garage sale permit indicates compliance with the
provisions of this Article, a garage sale permit shall be issued.



      (5)   The garage sale permit shall be clearly displayed on the
premises of the garage sale for the complete duration of the garage sale.



      (6)   Garage sale signs shall comply with the applicable
provisions of Article VII.



      (7)   Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit
one or more owners from conducting a combined garage sale on one of the
premises owned by the participants, provided that all other provisions of
this Article are complied with.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2G  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY SEASONAL RETAIL SALES USES.



   Any temporary seasonal retail sales use, structure or building shall
also comply with the following regulations.



      (1)   The use or structure shall comply with all setback
requirements for a primary building on the site.



      (2)   A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on-site for the temporary seasonal retail sales use.



      (3)   The location of the temporary seasonal retail sales use
and its required amount of parking spaces shall not interfere with any
required parking spaces or safe and efficient flow of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic around the parking area for the permanent primary use of
the site.



      (4)   Signs for the temporary seasonal retail sales shall
comply with the provisions of the sign regulations for either:



         (a)   Freestanding identification signs for a single use
site; or



         (b)   Freestanding identification signs for out lots in
an integrated center, whichever is applicable, and for building
identification signs.



      (5)   One temporary seasonal retail sales use may be allowed
on a parcel or lot once a year.



      (6)   Temporary seasonal retails sales uses shall be inspected
every two weeks for compliance with standards of this Article. If the
Director finds that the temporary seasonal retail sales use is not in
compliance, the temporary seasonal retail sales use shall be terminated.



      (7)   Not withstanding the provisions above to the contrary,
temporary seasonal retail sales uses shall not exceed 60 continuous days in
duration per calendar year.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2H  MOBILE CLASSROOMS.



   Mobile classrooms shall only be permitted as a temporary use in
compliance with the following requirements.



      (1)   Mobile classrooms shall be for use by a religious use or
school.



      (2)   Mobile classrooms shall be permitted by the grant of a
special exception by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (3)   Applicants for a special exception shall submit a site
plan in compliance with the provisions of Article 5.7 of this ordinance at
the time of filing a petition for special exception.



      (4)   Special exceptions for mobile classrooms shall be
conditioned upon the applicant making progress towards accomplishing the
goals of development indicated the site plan within a reasonable period of
time as established by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (5)   Special exceptions for mobile classrooms shall be
reviewed annually by the Board of Zoning Appeals to determine if the
applicant is making progress towards accomplishing the goals of development
indicated on the site plan.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2I  TEMPORARY SALES TRAILERS AND MODEL HOMES FOR RESIDENTIAL
SUBDIVISIONS.



      (1)   Sales trailers for residential subdivisions are allowed
subject to the following standards.



         (a)   Prior to installation of the sales trailer, a
temporary improvement location permit and a construction trailer permit must
be issued.



         (b)   Must be located on a lot in the development in
which the homes are for sale.



         (c)   The street providing access to the sales trailer
shall be paved.



         (d)   The sales trailer must have Level 1 foundation
landscaping on all sides.



         (e)   At least four off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on a paved or gravel surface.



         (f)   All signs shall comply with the temporary sign
standards of Article VII.



         (g)   Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. daily.



         (h)   Shall be located near a fully functional and
operational fire hydrant that complies with the Fire Prevention Code.



         (i)   All exterior lighting shall be limited to typical
household exterior lighting. The use of ground mounted floodlights and search
lights are prohibited.



      (2)   Model homes with or without a sales office are allowed
subject to the following standards.



         (a)   Prior to construction, a building permit and
improvement location permit (ILP), if required, shall be issued.



         (b)   Must be located on a lot in the development in
which the homes are for sale.



         (c)   The street providing access to the model home
shall be paved.



         (d)   The model home must have Level 1 foundation
landscaping along the front and side elevations.



         (e)   At least two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on a paved or concrete surface.



         (f)   Shall be located within 250 feet of a fully
functional and operational fire hydrant.



         (g)   All signs shall comply with the temporary sign
standards of Article VII.



         (h)   Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. daily.



         (i)   All exterior lighting shall be limited to typical
household exterior lighting. The use of ground mounted floodlights and search
lights are prohibited.



         (j)   At least one model home shall be the highest
model/line offered for that section/phase of the development.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2K  TEMPORARY STORAGE UNITS IN ALL DISTRICTS.



      (1)   Shall be located on the site or lot of the primary use
for which the temporary storage is required;



      (2)   Shall not be located within any required front, side or
rear yard, setback or bufferyard;



      (3)   Shall not be located within any public right-of-way or
block a public sidewalk;



      (4)   Shall be located on an impervious surface such as a
driveway or an off-street parking area;



      (5)   Under no circumstances shall more than one temporary
storage unit be allowed on the site or lot at any time; and



      (6)   Shall not exceed 30 consecutive days in duration per
primary use per calendar year unless the duration is extended by the Director.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



§ 4.2L  TEMPORARY TENT SALES IN THE GC GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



      (1)   Temporary tent sales may be allowed twice a year with
each sale not exceeding 14 consecutive days in duration.



      (2)   Tents used for temporary tent sales may not exceed 1,200
square feet.



      (3)   Tents shall not be located in any required front, side
or rear setback, yard or bufferyard.



      (4)   Tents shall be on an impervious surface such as asphalt
or concrete.



      (5)   The site must comply with all off-street parking
requirements for the primary use.



      (6)   The temporary tent sale must be ancillary to the primary
use.



      (7)   A temporary improvement location permit shall be issued
by the Director prior to commencement of the temporary tent sale.



      (8)   Additional signs such as banners, flags, pennants,
streamers, wind signs, balloons and search lights may be used. If any such
additional signs are used, a sign plan for the temporary tent sale must be
approved by the Director.



      (9)   Tents must be made of a non-flammable material.



      (10)   Tents, canopies and other membrane structures must
comply with the Town Fire Prevention Code.



      (11)   At least one fire extinguisher that complies with the
Town Fire Prevention Code must be located in the tent.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 28-2008,
passed 11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 4.3. HOME OCCUPATIONS



§ 4.3A  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this Article to provide for home occupations that
conform to the standards set forth below. The standards in this Article are
intended to insure compatibility of home occupations with other permitted
uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood plus clearly
establishing the secondary or incidental status of home occupations in
relation to the primary use for dwelling purposes.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 4.3B  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential districts
subject to the following conditions.



      (1)   Home occupations shall be limited to:



         (a)   Family members residing within the dwelling and
who make the dwelling their primary place of residence; and



         (b)   A maximum of one nonresident employee.



      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation
shall be incidental and subordinate to the use for residential purposes by
the occupants. No more than 20% of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupations.



      (3)   There shall be no structural alterations to the interior
of the dwelling to accommodate a home occupation which would render the
dwelling undesirable for residential use.



      (4)   There shall be no structural additions, enlargements or
exterior alterations changing the residential appearance of the dwelling or
the lot or other visible indications of the conduct of the home occupation.



      (5)   There shall be no additional or separate entrance to the
dwelling for the purpose of conducting the home occupation.



      (6)   There shall be no internal or external alterations,
construction features or use of electrical or mechanical equipment which
would change the fire rating of the structure.



      (7)   There shall be no outside storage of any kind related to
the home occupation.



      (8)   All aspects of the home occupation shall be conducted
within the dwelling structure in which the occupant makes his or her
residence. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building or
detached garages.



      (9)   There shall be no traffic generated by a home occupation
which is greater in volume than that which would be normally expected in the
residential area in which the home occupation is located.



      (10)   There shall be no equipment or process used in the home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, smoke, fumes, odors or
electrical interference detectable to the normal senses at any point beyond
the lot line.



      (11)   There shall be no electrical or mechanical equipment
utilized in the home occupation which will create any visual or audible
interference with radio or television reception or which will cause
fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.



      (12)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of
commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises other
than vehicles normally associated with residential home delivery (i.e.,
postal or united parcel vehicles).



      (13)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of
on-premises signs which call attention to the fact that the dwelling is being
used for business purposes.



      (14)   The dwelling shall not be altered in its appearance and
the home occupation shall not be conducted in such a manner as to
differentiate the dwelling from the residential character of the area by
either use of colors, materials, construction, separate entrances, lighting,
signs or other means.



      (15)   No stock in trade (except for articles produced on the
premises by residents of the dwelling) shall be displayed or sold upon the
premises.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 4.3C  PROHIBITED HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   The following uses, by the nature of the investment or operation, have
a pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits
specified above for home occupations and impair the use, value and quiet
enjoyment of adjacent residential properties. Therefore, the uses specified
below shall not be permitted as home occupations:



      (1)   Auto/vehicle repairs, major or minor;



      (2)   Barber/beauty shop;



      (3)   Dance studio;



      (4)   Dental office or clinic;



      (5)   Medical office or clinic;



      (6)   Painting of vehicles, trailers, boats and the like;



      (7)   Photography studio;



      (8)   Photo developing;



      (9)   Private schools with organized classes;



      (10)   Upholstering;



      (11)   Television or radio repair;



      (12)   Lawn mower or bicycle repair;



      (13)   Appliance repair, large or small;



      (14)   Freight, trucking or shipping;



      (15)   Tooling, welding or machine shop;



      (16)   Antique or gift shop;



      (17)   Tool or equipment rental;



      (18)   Veterinary clinic, kennel or stable;



      (19)   Restaurants, eating or drinking establishments; and



      (20)   Any use not in compliance with the intent and
conditions set forth in this Article.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 4.3D  PERMITTED HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   By way of example, the following uses, when conducted in compliance
with the conditions set forth above, qualify as permitted home occupations:



      (1)   Art studio;



      (2)   Dressmaking;



      (3)   Office for an architect, engineer, planner, lawyer or
accountant;



      (4)   Office for a sales representative;



      (5)   Teaching, including musical instruments or dance when
limited to one pupil at a time;



      (6)   Child care for five or less children at any time;



      (7)   Home school; and



      (8)   Other uses that comply with the intent and conditions
set forth above in this Article.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 4.3E  REGISTRATION OF HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   All persons conducting home occupations shall register the home
occupation with the town on forms provided by the Clerk-Treasurer’s office.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



ARTICLE 4.4. SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR THE MENTALLY
ILL



§ 4.4  SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR THE MENTALLY ILL.



   A residential facility for the mentally ill as defined in this
ordinance and by I.C. 12-7-2-167 may not be located within 3,000 feet of
another residential facility for the mentally ill, as measured between lot
lines.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 4.5. SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES



§ I  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   In adopting this ordinance, the town makes the following
statement regarding its intent and makes the following findings.



      (1)   Adult entertainment establishments require special
supervision in order to protect and preserve the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the town’s citizens, the patrons of such establishments and the
employees of such establishments.



      (2)   The town finds that adult entertainment establishments
are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including prostitution,
sexual liaisons of a casual nature and other illegal activities.



      (3)   The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a
legitimate health concern that demands reasonable regulation of adult
entertainment establishments by the town in the specified manner in order to
protect the health and well-being of its citizens and the general public.



      (4)   Minimal regulations enacted by the town are a legitimate
and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult
entertainment establishments comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure
that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as
places of illegal sexual activity, solicitation or other illegal activities.



      (5)   There is convincing documented evidence that adult
entertainment establishments, because of their very nature, have a
deleterious effect on both the existing businesses around them and the
surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, cause increased crime
(particularly in the overnight hours) and downgrade property values.



      (6)   The town desires to minimize and control these adverse
secondary effects by regulating adult entertainment establishments in the
specified manner. By minimizing and controlling these adverse secondary
effects, the town seeks to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizenry and the general public; protect the citizens and the general public
from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the property
values and character of surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the spread of
urban blight.



      (7)   The town has determined that current local zoning and
other locational criteria do not adequately protect the health, safety and
general welfare of its citizens and that expanded regulation of adult
entertainment establishments is necessary.



      (8)   It is not the town’s intent in adopting this ordinance
to suppress or authorize the suppression of any speech activities protected
by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution but to enact
content-neutral regulations that address the adverse secondary effects of
adult entertainment establishments.



      (9)   It is not the town’s intent to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material, and the town recognizes that state and
federal law prohibits the distribution of obscene materials and expects and
encourages state law enforcement officials to enforce state obscenity
statutes against any such illegal activities in this state.



   (B)   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult entertainment businesses on communities presented to various courts and
cited in the cases of Township of Littleton, Colorado v. Z.J. Gifts D-4,
L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); Township of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277
(2000); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Township of Renton
v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972);
Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall, Illinois, 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir.
2007); G.M. Enter., Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph, 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003);
DLS, Inc. v. Township of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); East
Brooks Books, Inc. v. Township of Memphis, 48 F.3d 220 (6th Cir. 1995); O
‘Connor v. Township and County of Denver (10th Cir. 1990); Sundance Assocs.
v. Reno, 139 F.3d 804 (10th Cir. 1998); American Library Association v. Reno,
33 F.3d 78 (D.C. Cir. 1994); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville,
176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1998); Andy’s Restaurant and Lounge, Inc. v. City
of Gary, Case No. 2:01-CV-327 (N.D. Ind. 2005); Harris v. Fitchville Township
Trustees, 99 F. Supp. 2d 837 (N.D. Ohio 2000); and other cases and on reports
of secondary effects occurring in and around adult entertainment
establishments in Phoenix, Arizona (1984); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980);
Houston, Texas (1983); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Amarillo, Texas (1977);
Garden Grove, California (1991); Los Angeles, California (1977); Whittier,
California (1978); Austin, Texas (1986); Seattle, Washington (1989); Oklahoma
Township, Oklahoma (1986); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Dallas, Texas (1997); St.
Croix County, Wisconsin (1993); Bellevue, Washington (1998); Newport News,
Virginia (1996); Tucson, Arizona (1990); St. Paul, Minnesota (1988); Oklahoma
Township, Oklahoma (1986 and 1992); Beaumont, Texas (1982); New York, New
York (1994); Ellicottville, New York (1998); Des Moines, Iowa (1984); Islip,
New York (1980); Adams County, Colorado (1987); Manatee County, Florida
(1987); New Hanover County, North Carolina (1989); Las Vegas, Nevada (1978);
Cattaraugas County, New York (1998); Cleburne, Texas (1997); Dallas, Texas
(1997); El Paso, Texas (1986); New York Times Square study (1994); Report to
ACLJ on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (1996); findings
from the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group On The Regulation
Of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); and on
testimony to Congress in 136 Cong. Rec. S. 8987; 135 Cong. Rec. S. 14519; 135
Cong. Rec. S. 5636, 134 Cong. Rec. E. 3750; and also on findings from the
paper entitled “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace
Sexual Violence”, by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice
Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota; and from
“Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider’s View”, by David Sherman,
presented to the Michigan House Committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law,
Jan. 12, 2000; and from various other police reports, testimony, newspaper
reports, and other documentary evidence, and the town finds:



      (1)   Adult entertainment businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments;



      (2)   Certain employees of adult entertainment businesses, as
defined in this ordinance, engage in a higher incidence of certain types of
illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments;



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal
sex occur at adult entertainment establishments, especially those that
provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos
or live sex shows. The “couch dances” or “lap dances” that frequently
occur in adult entertainment establishments featuring live nude or semi-nude
dancers constitute or may constitute the offense of “engaging in
prostitution” under state law;



      (4)   Offering and providing private or semi-private booths or
cubicles encourages such activities which creates unhealthy conditions;



      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades
and other adult entertainment businesses for the purpose of engaging in
sexual activity within the premises of those adult entertainment businesses;



      (6)   Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in adult entertainment businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis salmonella, campylobacter and shigella
infections, chlamydial, myoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis
and chancroid;



      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982, 2,200 in
1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992;



      (8)   Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody
test in the state;



      (9)   The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the Unites States reported annually has risen. 33,613 cases were
reported in 1982, and 45,200 cases were reported through November 1990;



      (10)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases
being reported in 1990;



      (11)   The Surgeon General of the United States in his report
of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse
and exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected
mother to her newborn;



      (12)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts;



      (13)   Sanitary conditions in some adult entertainment
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;



      (14)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) to (B)(13) above
raise substantial governmental concerns;



      (15)   Adult entertainment businesses have operational
characteristics that require or subject them to reasonable government
regulation in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns;



      (16)   The adoption of this ordinance will promote the general
welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the town;



      (17)   Upon adoption, this ordinance replaces, supersedes, and
supplants Ord. 20-97 and Article 4.5 of Ord. 21-97.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02- 2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ II  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited in
which coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.



      (1)   A commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales
or display space for the sale or rental of any of the following:



         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact
discs, DVDs, slides or other visual representations, that are characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or



         (b)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.



      (2)   A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or
viewing of materials exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE,
ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. The existence of other principal
business purposes does not exempt an establishment from being categorized as
an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one
of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some
form of consideration, such materials that exhibit or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features any of the following:



      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (2)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVDs, slides or
other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. The sale, rental or exhibition, for any form of
consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, DVDs, magazines, periodicals
or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult hotel,
escort service, massage parlor, nude or semi-nude model studio, lingerie
modeling studio, sexual encounter center, adult motion picture theater or
adult theater as defined by in this § II Definitions of this ordinance. An
establishment in which a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or
similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to, massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to state law and this ordinance is not an
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS or an adult entertainment establishment.



   ADULT MOTEL or ADULT HOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar establishment
offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides
patrons, upon request, with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motions pictures, video cassettes, DVD’s, slides or other photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activity.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, DVD’s, slides or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.



   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. An entity that is open to the public and to
which either of the following applies:



      (1)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock
in trade of the sale, rental or viewing of visual materials or performances
(i.e., videos, CD-ROM discs, streaming video or other motion pictures)
depicting sexual conduct; or



      (2)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental
or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.



   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. The dominant or
principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films THAT ARE DISTINGUISHED OR
CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON THE EXHIBITION OR DESCRIPTION OF
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES OR SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS, the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   EMPLOYEE. A person who performs any service or work on the premises of
an adult entertainment business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or
performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent, lessee or otherwise, and whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. EMPLOYEE does
not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of
the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to
the premises, nor does employee include a person exclusively on the premises
as a patron or customer.



   ESCORT. Any person who, for a fee, commission, salary, hire, profit,
payment or other consideration accompanies or offers to accompany another
person to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or
consorts or otherwise associates or keeps company with another person about
any place or public resort or within any private quarters.



   ESCORT SERVICE. A service provided by any person who, for a fee,
commission, salary, hire, profit, payment or other consideration furnishes or
offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges
for persons, who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs,
entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with, associate, or
keep company with others about any place of public resort or within any
private quarters.



   LICENSE. A license to act or operate an adult entertainment business
issued pursuant to this ordinance.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate has been issued,
as well as the individual(s) designated on the license application as
principally responsible for the operation of the adult entertainment
business. With respect to an employee license issued under this ordinance,
LICENSEE means an employee as defined by in this § II Definitions above in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment at an adult
entertainment business.



   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body
occurs as part of or in connection with specified sexual activity or where
any person providing such treatment, manipulation or services related thereto
exposes specified anatomical areas. However, a MASSAGE PARLOR does not
constitute an adult entertainment business if the owner, operator and/or
employees of the massage parlor have been certified or licensed as a massage
therapist(s), under state law, by the Indiana State Board of Massage Therapy.



   NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO or LINGERIE MODELING STUDIO. Any place
where a person, who regularly appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, is
provided for money or any other form of consideration to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons. However, a modeling class or studio is not a NUDE OR SEMINUDE
MODEL STUDIO and is not subject to this chapter if it is operated in any of
the following ways:



      (1)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly
by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university that maintains and
operates educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



      (3)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other advertising indicating that a person
appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity is available for viewing, if in
order to participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or
seminude model is on the premises at any one time.



   NUDITY, NUDE, STATE OF NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or the showing of the female
breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and
areola. NUDITY, as used in this section, does not include a woman’s
breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or areola is exposed during
or incidental to the feeding.



   OPERATE. To control or hold primary responsibility for the operation of
an adult entertainment business, either as a business entity, as an
individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared responsibility.
OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED shall mean to cause to function or to put or
keep in operation. OPERATOR means any persons on the premises of an adult
entertainment business who is authorized to exercise overall operational
control or hold primary responsibility for the operation of an adult
entertainment business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business. A person may be found to be OPERATING or CAUSING TO
BE OPERATED an adult entertainment business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner or licensee of the business.



   PATRON. A customer of the adult entertainment business or a person from
the general public, not an employee of the business, who is on the premises
to obtain, receive or view the products, services or performances offered by
the business.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm, association,
joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever
form or character.



   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.



   SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. A state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   A business or commercial establishment that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place
where either of the following occur:



         (a)   Two or more persons may congregate, associate or
consort for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities; or



         (b)   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for
the purpose of displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of
consideration or compensation in any type or form.



      (2)   However, an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but
not limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to state law is not a
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The cleft of the buttocks, pubic region,
anus, male or female genitals, or the female breast.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:



      (1)   Prostitution or promoting prostitution; soliciting;
loitering to engage in solicitation; sexual performance by a child; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; sexual assault;
molestation of a child; or any similar offenses to those described above
under the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state or country;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense; or



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not
prevent such conviction from constituting a specified criminal activity as
defined in this section.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following:



      (1)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, sodomy;



      (2)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts;



      (3)   Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship;



      (4)   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating,
or the infliction of pain;



      (5)   Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an
animal by a human being; or



      (6)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with
any of the activities described in divisions (1) through (5) above of this
definition.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Of an adult entertainment business,
shall mean any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ III  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Operate an adult entertainment business as defined by §
II Definitions without a valid adult entertainment business license issued by
the town pursuant to this ordinance; and



      (2)   In connection with operating an adult entertainment
business, retain the services of a person as an employee, as defined in this
ordinance, who is not licensed as an adult entertainment business employee by
the town pursuant to this ordinance.



   (B)   Any person who violates subsection (A)(1) above shall be
guilty of an infraction.



   (C)   A violation(s) of subsection (A)(2) above constitutes grounds
for the suspension of an adult entertainment business license as provided for
in Section IX of this ordinance.



   (D)   No person shall act as an employee, as defined in this
ordinance, on the premises of an adult entertainment business without having
secured an adult entertainment business employee license (“employee
license”) pursuant to this ordinance.



   (E)   A violation of this section shall be a ground for the
suspension of an adult entertainment business employee license as provided
for in Section IX of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ IV  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   An original or renewal application for an adult entertainment
business license shall be submitted to the Town Manager or his or her
designee on a form provided by the Town Manager. The town’s application may
require and the applicant shall provide such information as reasonably
necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the town to determine whether
the applicant meets the qualifications established in this ordinance.



   (B)   A nonrefundable filing fee of $250 shall be paid at the time
of filing the application for the first application for a new license and
$125 for each consecutive year of renewal.



   (C)   The license fee for an adult entertainment business shall be
$700 for the first year or any part thereof, and $350 for each consecutive
year of renewal.



   (D)   By filing the application for approval with the Town Manager,
the applicant is agreeing to and is submitting himself, herself or itself to
the personal jurisdiction of the Town Council, Town Court and County Courts.



   (E)   An application for an adult entertainment business license
shall identify and shall be signed by the following persons:



      (1)   If the business entity is owned by an individual, that
individual;



      (2)   If the business entity is owned by a corporation, each
officer or director of the corporation, any individual owning or controlling
more than 50% of the voting shares of the corporation, and any person with an
ownership interest in the corporation who will be principally responsible for
the operation of the proposed adult entertainment business; or



      (3)   If the business entity is owned by a partnership
(general or limited), a joint venture, or any other type of organization
where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the
organization, each partner (other than limited partners); and any other
person entitled to share in the profits of the organization, whether or not
such person is also obligated to share in the liabilities of the
organization, who will be principally responsible for the operation of the
proposed adult entertainment business.



   (F)   An application for an adult entertainment business license
must designate one or more individuals who are to be principally responsible
for the operation of the proposed adult entertainment business, if a license
is granted. At least one person so designated must be involved in the
day-to-day operation of the proposed adult entertainment business. Each
person so designated, as well as the business entity itself, shall be
considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this
ordinance, and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



   (G)   An application for an adult entertainment business license
shall be completed according to the instructions on the application form,
which shall require the following:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, state the legal name and any
aliases of such individual;



         (b)   A partnership, state the complete name of the
partnership and all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or
limited, and provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;



         (c)   A joint venture, or any other type of organization
where two or more persons share in the profits and liabilities of the
organization, state the complete name of the organization and provide a copy
of the legal document establishing the organization, if any; or



         (d)   A corporation, state the complete name of the
corporation and the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation,
and state the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of
the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for
service of process.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult
entertainment business under a name other than that of the applicant, state
the fictitious name to be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing
the registration of the business name under applicable laws;



      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this ordinance, and if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of
each such conviction;



      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license
under this ordinance or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult
entertainment business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked,
as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state
whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, or
50% or greater owner of a corporation licensed under this ordinance whose
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name
and location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;



      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses
under this ordinance or other similar regulation from this or another
jurisdiction and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses;



      (6)   State the location of the proposed adult entertainment
business, including a legal description of the property (i.e., permanent
parcel number), street address and telephone number(s), if any;



      (7)   State the physical mailing address and residential
address of each applicant and each person signing the application. A post
office box does not satisfy this requirement. This address must be updated
within 30 days of any address change by the applicant/licensee. By submitting
an application, the applicant/licensee represents and agrees that the address
provided (as updated) is sufficient to allow for service of process at that
address. By submitting an application, the applicant/licensee also agrees
that any service attempted, pursuant to state law, at the address provided
constitutes sufficient service of process under state law, and he, she,
and/or it agrees to waive any challenge to any suit instituted by the town
against the applicant/licensee based upon personal jurisdiction and/or
insufficient/inadequate service of process made at the address provided.
Failure to provide an adequate address or to update timely that address
constitutes grounds for denying an application for an adult entertainment
license or revoking an adult entertainment license;



      (8)   Submit a recent photograph of each applicant who is a
natural person, taken by the town that clearly shows the applicant’s face;



      (9)   Submit the fingerprints of each applicant, who is a
natural person, recorded by the Town Police Department;



      (10)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and
identify the location of any tattoos on such person’s face, arms or hands,
or any other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person
is on the premises of the proposed adult entertainment business;



      (11)   State the driver’s license number and Social Security
number of each applicant who is a natural person and each person signing the
application, or, for an applicant that is not a natural person, the
applicant’s federally issued tax identification number;



      (12)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural
person is at least 18 years old;



      (13)   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises of the adult entertainment business. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the adult entertainment business license will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or diagram need not be
professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches; and



      (14)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police
investigation into the applicant’s criminal background regarding crimes of
a sexual nature so that the town can determine whether the ordinance’s
civil disabilities provisions apply. Such provisions exist to combat the sex
crimes connected with adult entertainment establishments by temporarily
prohibiting those recently convicted of such crimes from employment with
those establishments. In addition, the required disclosures ensure continuing
compliance with the ordinance’s licensing and permitting requirements.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ V  ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an adult entertainment
business license, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall promptly
request that the Town Director of Planning and Zoning review the information
provided in the application concerning the criminal background of the
applicant(s) and that the Director of Planning and Zoning transmit the
results of the investigation in writing to the Town Manager or his or her
designee within five business days of the completion of the investigation.



   (B)   Within five business days of receipt of an application for an
adult entertainment business, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall
notify the Town Fire Chief of such application. In making such notification,
the Town Manager or his or her designee shall request that the Fire Chief
promptly inspect the premises for which the adult entertainment business
license is sought to assess compliance with all applicable regulations under
this jurisdiction.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Town Manager or his or her
designee a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance
with the town’s fire regulations within ten business days of receipt of
notice of the application.



   (D)   The Town Director of Planning and Zoning shall commence the
inspection of the premises for which an adult entertainment business license
is sought promptly upon receipt of the application, and shall complete,
within ten business days after receipt of the application, a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the town’s
Zoning Ordinance.



   (E)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed adult
entertainment business license application, the Town Manager or his or her
designee shall approve or deny the issuance of a license. The Town Manager or
his or her designee shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant
unless he or she determines that one or more of the following findings are
true:



      (1)   An applicant who is a natural person is under 18 years
of age;



      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or has provided information or documents as requested on
the application that are insufficient on their face; provided, however, that
no license shall be denied solely on the ground that an applicant has refused
to disclose its Social Security number;



      (3)   An applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been
denied an adult entertainment business license by any jurisdiction or has had
a license to operate an adult entertainment business revoked by any
jurisdiction;



      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this ordinance;



      (5)   The proposed adult entertainment business would violate
or fail to be in compliance with any provisions of this ordinance, the
town’s Zoning Ordinance, any state statute or regulation, or any federal
statute or regulation;



      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this
ordinance has not been paid; and/or



      (7)   An applicant is in violation of or not in compliance
with any provision of this ordinance, except as provided in § V(F) of this
section.



   (F)   An adult entertainment business license shall state on its
face the name of the applicant, the expiration date and the address of the
licensed adult entertainment business. All adult entertainment business
licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to
the business so that they may be easily read at any time.



   (G)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall advise the
applicant in writing within three business days of the decision of the
reasons for any license denial. If the Town Manager finds, subsequent to
denial, that the basis for the denial of the license has been corrected or
abated, the applicant may reapply.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ VI  EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for an employee license shall be submitted to
the Town Manager or his or her designee on a form provided by it. The
application may request, and the applicant shall provide, such information as
reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the Town Manager to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
ordinance.



   (B)   An application for an employee license shall be completed
according to the instructions of the application form which shall require the
following:



      (1)   State the applicant’s name and any other names
(including “stage” names) or aliases used by the applicant;



      (2)   State the applicant’s date and place of birth;



      (3)   State the applicant’s height, weight, and hair and eye
color;



      (4)   Submit a recent photograph of the applicant taken by the
Town Police Department which clearly shows the applicant’s face;



      (5)   Submit the applicant’s fingerprints recorded by the
Town Police Department;



      (6)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant’s face, arms or hands, or any other anatomical area that normally
would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed adult
entertainment business;



      (7)   State the applicant’s present residence address and
telephone number;



      (8)   State the applicant’s present or intended business
address and telephone number;



      (9)   State the applicant’s driver’s license number and
Social Security number;



      (10)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
old;



      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the adult entertainment
business-related license history of the applicant for the five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate an adult
entertainment business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the
applicant has ever had an adult entertainment business-related license,
permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended. In the
event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name of the
issuing or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the
denial, revocation or suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial,
revocation or suspension;



      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity as defined in this ordinance and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of
each such conviction; and



      (13)   The above-required disclosures facilitate the police
investigation into the applicant’s criminal background regarding crimes of
a sexual nature so that the Town Manager can determine whether the
ordinance’s civil disabilities provisions apply. Such provisions exist to
combat the sex crimes connected with adult entertainment businesses and
sexually oriented establishments by temporarily prohibiting those recently
convicted of such crimes from employment with those establishments. In
addition, the required disclosures ensure continuing compliance with the
ordinance’s licensing and permitting requirements.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ VII  ISSUANCE OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed application for an employee
license, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall issue a license to
said applicant immediately.



   (B)   Within five business days of receipt of a completed
application for an employee license, the Town Manager or his or her designee
shall request that the Town Director of Planning and Zoning initiate an
investigation of the information provided in the application concerning the
criminal background of the applicant. The Director of Planning and Zoning
shall document the results of its investigation in writing within five
business days of the completion of its investigation and transmit this
writing to the Town Manager or his or her designee.



   (C)   Within ten business days after completion of the criminal
background investigation of the applicant, the Town Manager or his or her
designee shall either affirm the prior issuance of the license or revoke the
license. The Town Manager or his or her designee shall affirm the prior
issuance of a license to an applicant unless he or she determines that one or
more of the following findings are true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or has provided information or documents as requested on
the application that are insufficient on their face; provided, however, that
no license shall be denied solely on the ground that an applicant has refused
to disclose its Social Security number;



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this ordinance;



      (4)   The employee license is to be used for employment in a
business prohibited by local, state or federal law, statute, rule or
regulation; and/or



      (5)   The applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been
denied an employee license by any jurisdiction or has had an employee license
revoked by any jurisdiction.



   (D)   If the employee license is revoked, the Town Manager or his or
her designee shall advise the applicant in writing within three business days
of the reason(s) for any such revocation.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ VIII  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire
one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application
as provided in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more
than 90 days and no less than 30 days before the expiration date. If
application is made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the license
will not be extended pending a decision on the application but will expire on
its normal expiration date.



   (B)   An application for renewal of an adult entertainment business
license shall be submitted to the Town Manager or his or her designee on a
form provided by it. The completed renewal application shall describe any
changes or additions to, or deletions from, the information provided in the
applicant’s initial license application pursuant to this ordinance. Copies
of any document or material submitted in connection with the initial license
application shall accompany the completed renewal application that has been
revised or such application shall be revised to reflect any change in
circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an adult
entertainment business license application may be resubmitted with subsequent
renewal applications, provided that the applicant certifies in writing that
the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.



   (C)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall make
determinations concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same
criteria and time mandates used to evaluate applications for new licenses
under this ordinance.



   (D)   The Town Manager or its designee shall advise the applicant in
writing within three business days of the reason(s) for any denial of a
license renewal.



   (E)   An application for renewal of an employee license shall be
submitted to the Town Manager or his or her designee on a form provided by
it. The completed renewal application shall describe any changes or additions
to, or deletions from, the information provided in the applicant’s initial
license application pursuant to this ordinance. Copies of any document or
material submitted in connection with the initial license application shall
accompany the completed renewal application that has been revised or requires
revision to reflect any change in circumstances or conditions.



   (F)   When the Town Manager denies an application for renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from
the date of denial. However, if the Town Manager finds, subsequent to denial,
that the basis for the denial of the renewal license has been corrected or
abated, the applicant may reapply prior to the expiration of the one-year
period.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ IX  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall suspend an adult entertainment business
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee:



      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this ordinance; or



      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to
comply with any section of this ordinance.



   (B)   The Town Manager shall suspend an adult entertainment business
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a
licensee or its employee or agent has refused to allow, or has prohibited or
has interfered with, an inspection of the adult entertainment business
premises as authorized by this ordinance.



   (C)   The Town Manager shall suspend an employee license for a
period not to exceed 30 days if he or she determines that a licensee has
violated or does not comply with any section of this ordinance.



   (D)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall advise the
licensee in writing within three business days of the reason(s) for any
suspension.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ X  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall revoke an adult
entertainment business license or employee license if a cause of suspension
under this ordinance occurs and the license has been suspended two times
within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall revoke an adult
entertainment business license if it determines that:



      (1)   A licensee failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or provided information or documents as requested on the
application that are false;



      (2)   The licensee(s) failed to comply with any requirement
stated in the license, pursuant to this ordinance, to correct specified
deficiencies within 120 days;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of controlled substances on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution,
solicitation or the commission of a felony on the premises;



      (5)   A licensee knowingly operated the adult entertainment
business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;



      (6)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur
in or on the licensed premises;



      (7)   A licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this ordinance, during the term of the license; or



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the township,
county, state or United States government for any taxes or fees that were
assessed or imposed in relation to any business.



   (C)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall revoke an
employee license if it determines that:



      (1)   The licensee failed to provide all information and
documents required for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or provided information or documents as requested on the
application that are false;



      (2)   The licensee has knowingly acted as an employee on the
premises of an adult entertainment business during a period of time when the
licensee’s license was suspended; or



      (3)   The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity, as defined in this ordinance during the term of the license.



   (D)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall advise the
licensee in writing within three business days of the reason(s) for any
revocation.



   (E)   When the Town Manager or his or her designee revokes a license
pursuant to divisions (A), (B)(3) through (B)(7), (C)(2) or (C)(3) above, the
licensee shall not be issued another license for one year from the date the
revocation became effective.



   (F)   When the Town Manager or his or her designee revokes a license
pursuant to divisions (B)(1), (B)(8) or (C)(1) above, the applicant may be
granted a license if the basis for the revocation has been corrected or
abated and at least 30 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XI  APPEAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Any denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this
ordinance may be appealed to the Town Council by written notice within ten
days of such denial, suspension or revocation. Unless the applicant requests
a longer period, the Town Council must hold a hearing on the appeal within 21
days and must issue a decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension
or revocation within five days after the hearing. During the time between the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation of a license and the date of the
Town Council’s decision affirming or reversing the denial, suspension or
revocation, the status quo of the license holder or applicant shall be
maintained.



   (B)   In the event that the Town Council affirms the denial,
suspension or revocation of a new or renewal license under this ordinance,
the applicant may pursue an appeal to the Town Court. The failure of the Town
Council to render a decision on the application within the time prescribed
above shall be considered an affirmance of the denial, suspension or
revocation of the license, and the applicant may pursue an appeal to the Town
Court. This appeal provision is intended to comply with the requirement for
prompt judicial review stated by the United States Supreme Court in Township
of Littleton, Colorado v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, 124 S. Ct. 2219 (2004)



   (C)   Any licensee lawfully operating an adult entertainment
business prior to the denial of a license renewal application, or the
suspension or revocation of a license, shall retain said license and all
privileges attendant thereto, subject to all other terms of this ordinance,
so that the status quo of the licensee is maintained during the pendency of
an appeal to the Town Council of a decision rendered under this ordinance and
during the entire time required for the court to rule on the appeal pursuant
to division (B) above.



   (D)   Any licensee lawfully acting as an employee in an adult
entertainment business prior to the denial of a license renewal application,
or the suspension or revocation of a license, shall retain said license and
all privileges attendant thereto, subject to all other terms of this
ordinance, so that the status quo of the licensee is maintained during the
pendency of an appeal to the Town Council of a decision rendered under this
ordinance and during the entire time required for the court to rule on the
appeal pursuant to division (B) above.



   (E)   In the event that any judicial review of the denial of a new
or renewal license application or the revocation or suspension of a license
is still pending 30 days before the expiration date of any license, the
licensee may file a renewal license application with the Town Council or its
designee pursuant to this ordinance. In the event that an application for
renewal of a license is denied and the applicant seeks judicial review of
that denial, the town has the right to consolidate such review with any
pending judicial actions in regards to the previous denial, suspension or
revocation of a license.



   (F)   If, during the pendency of any appeal pursued under division
(B) above, there are additional denials of a renewal license application or
suspensions or revocations of that license, the town has the right to
consolidate the appeals for the additional denials, suspensions or
revocations with any pending appeal for that same licensee.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XII  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   An adult entertainment business license is not transferable
from one licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported
transfer of an adult entertainment business license shall automatically and
immediately revoke that license.



   (B)   An employee license is not transferable from one licensee to
another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom it was issued
may be transferred from one licensed adult entertainment business to another
such licensed establishment during the term of the license, provided that the
licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the Clerk-Treasurer of the
town or his or her designee within 15 days of such transfer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XIII  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF AN ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.



   (A)   Additional regulation. Nothing contained in this ordinance is
intended or shall be construed to permit or authorize activities which are
unlawful under state law or city ordinance. It is unlawful and a violation of
this chapter for an operator to knowingly or intentionally violate the
provisions of this ordinance or to allow, either knowingly or intentionally,
an employee or a patron to violate the provisions of this ordinance. It shall
be a defense to prosecution that the person was powerless to prevent the
violation.



   (B)   Minors prohibited. No person under the age of 18 years shall
be permitted on the premises of an adult entertainment business.



   (C)   Hours of operation. An adult entertainment business shall
close no later than 12:00 a.m. (midnight) or not later than the closing time
required under its permit to sell alcoholic beverages, whichever is later and
shall not reopen earlier than 11:00 a.m.



   (D)   Design standards. No adult entertainment business shall be
conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material
depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or
specified sexual activities by display, decorations, sign, show window or
other opening from any public way.



   (E)   Distance requirements. The establishment, relocation,
enlargement, reconstruction, resumption or structural alteration of any adult
entertainment business are prohibited if such adult entertainment business is
within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment business or within 600 feet
of any existing religious institution, library, school, day care facility,
child care facility, park, agricultural district or residential zoning
district within the town’s corporate limits.



   (F)   Measurement of distances. The distance between one adult
entertainment business and another adult entertainment business shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The
distance between an adult entertainment business and any religious
institution, school, park, library, day care facility, child care facility,
agricultural district or residential district shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest
exterior structural wall of the adult entertainment business to the nearest
lot line of the religious institution, day care facility, child care
facility, park, agricultural district or residential zoning district.



   (G)   Zoning district. No adult entertainment business shall be
established, relocated, enlarged, reconstructed, resumed or structurally
altered unless the site or proposed site is located in an I-2
Office/Warehouse Distributional Industrial District; an I-3 Light
Manufacturing Industrial District; or I-4 Heavy Manufacturing Industrial
District, and is approved as a special exception in such zoning district.



   (H)   Building limitation. Only one type of adult entertainment
business may be operated in a single building or structure.



   (I)   License requirements. No adult entertainment business may be
established, relocated, enlarged, reconstructed, resumed or structurally
altered unless and until the owner or operator of the adult entertainment
business obtains an adult entertainment business license, as set forth in
this ordinance, from the town.



   (J)   Signs. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance
to the contrary, all exterior displays and/or signs for an adult
entertainment business shall comply with the following regulations.



      (1)   No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in
any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas by
display, decorations, sign, show window or other opening from any public
right-of- way.



      (2)   Not more than one business wall sign shall be permitted
for an adult entertainment business and the business wall sign shall be
permitted only on the front facade of the building or structure. In addition
to the one permitted business wall sign, an adult entertainment business may
be permitted not more than one pole or ground sign structure if it is
permitted by Article 7.4 of this ordinance and any amendments thereto and
which meets all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the adult
entertainment business is located. All other signs and sign structures are
prohibited.



      (3)   The sign surface area of a business wall sign for an
adult entertainment business shall not exceed an amount equal to 5% of the
front building facade of the first floor elevation (first ten feet) of the
premises occupied by the adult entertainment business or 100 square feet,
whichever is less. The maximum sign surface area of a ground or pole sign
structure, where permitted, shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal
foot of frontage of the lot or 36 square feet, whichever is less.



      (4)   Signs and sign structures may be illuminated provided,
however, that such illumination shall not be by way of exposed neon, exterior
lighting (e.g., spot or flood lights) or any flashing or animated lights,
either interior to the sign, on the exterior of the sign, or as a border to
the sign.



   (K)   Operation. An adult entertainment establishment shall be kept
in a sanitary condition at all times. As a condition of licensure under this
ordinance, the town reserves the right to enter any licensed premises at any
time without notice to ensure compliance with this ordinance. The town shall
have the power to determine if such adult entertainment business is being
maintained in a sanitary condition. If it determines, after investigation,
that an unsanitary condition exists within an adult entertainment business,
the town shall suspend the adult entertainment business’s license for such
premises until such unsanitary condition(s) is rectified.



   (L)   Loitering. No owner, operator or licensee under this ordinance
or his, her or its employee shall permit persons to congregate within the
adult licensed establishment or on parking areas normally used for purposes
of parking for the adult entertainment business in a manner that constitutes
a breach of the peace as that term is used under state law. A violation of
this provision shall constitute sufficient grounds for the town to revoke the
adult entertainment business owner’s and/or operator’s adult
entertainment business license.



   (M)   Sexual activity, live entertainment and performances.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in an adult
entertainment business, appear before a patron or patrons in a state of
nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature.



      (2)   Any employee appearing on the premises of an adult
entertainment business semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity, as defined by
this ordinance, must be on a stage that is at least 24 inches from the floor,
and at a distance at least 36 inches from all parts of a clearly designated
area in which patrons will be present.



      (3)   All live entertainment and performances in an adult
entertainment business must take place on a stage that is at least 24 inches
from the floor and a distance of at least 36 inches from all parts of a
clearly designated area in which patrons will be present.



      (4)   The stage shall be separated from the area in which
patrons may be present.



      (5)   No employee, as defined in this ordinance, appearing on
the premises of an adult entertainment business nude, in a state of nudity,
semi-nude or semi-nudity, may intentionally or knowingly touch a customer or
a customer’s clothing or knowingly permit himself or herself to be touched
by a customer or a customer’s clothing.



      (6)   The provisions of subsections (M)(1) through (M)(3)
above shall not apply to an employee’s use of any restroom or any
single-sex dressing room that is accessible only to entertainers.



      (7)   It shall be unlawful to own, operate or cause to be
operated an adult arcade which has individual booths unless the booth meets
the following requirements.



         (a)   Each booth shall have a rectangular shaped
entranceway of not less than two feet wide and six feet high.



         (b)   There shall be no door, curtain or other
obstruction blocking or closing-off such entranceway so as to obstruct the
visibility of a patron 24 inches from the floor of the booth.



         (c)   It shall be unlawful for a patron to be present in
a booth in an adult arcade unless this patron is visible from 24 inches from
the floor of the booth.



         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to use or allow
to be used a booth in an adult arcade which does not meet the requirements
set forth in this section.



         (e)   In addition to such other penalties set forth in
this ordinance, a violation of this section shall constitute sufficient
grounds for the town to revoke an adult entertainment business license of the
offending owner or operator.



   (N)   Other requirements.



      (1)   A minimum of one public restroom shall be provided for
any type of adult entertainment business or the total number as required by
the State Building Code.



      (2)   Each adult entertainment business shall have a
janitor’s closet, which shall be provided for the storage of cleaning
supplies. Such closet shall have a mechanical ventilation with two cubic feet
per minute per square foot of floor area and a minimum of ten footcandles of
illumination. Such closet shall include a mop sink.



      (3)   At least one dressing room shall be provided exclusive
of a public restroom that can be locked from the inside and has a minimum of
15 footcandles of illumination.



      (4)   Off-street parking requirements: all adult entertainment
businesses as defined in this Article shall provide off-street parking at the
rate of one parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XIV  PENALTIES.



   Any person, business, owner, operator, patron and/or employee found
liable for violating or refusing to comply with any provision(s) of this
ordinance shall be fined in an amount of no less than $250 or no more than
$2,500. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist or occur, and each
separate occurrence, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, any
premises, building, dwelling or other structure in which an adult
entertainment business is repeatedly operated or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a public nuisance, and the
owner and/or operator shall be subject to a loss of his, her, or its adult
entertainment business license and shall be subject to civil abatement
proceedings initiated in the Town Court. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist or occur shall constitute a separate operation or
maintenance of the violation. Violations of this Article shall constitute a
nuisance per se, whether or not such violations are repeated or intentional.
Where a violation of this ordinance is proven in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the costs, including all court costs and attorneys’ fees
relating to such proof, shall be recoverable from the violator in addition to
any other fine, abatement or equitable relief imposed by the court, and a
lien against the violator’s property may be imposed for failure to pay the
fines, costs and/or attorneys’ fees.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XV  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.



   If any section, subsection, paragraph or clause of this ordinance shall
be deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the
remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, and clauses shall not be
affected.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ XVI  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This ordinance becomes effective upon its adoption by the Town Council
and supersedes any ordinance or prior ordinance in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 51-2005,
passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



ARTICLE 4.6. SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 4.6A  APPLICATION.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance and in addition
to other applicable provisions, wireless telecommunications facilities, when
such are permitted by federal law and the laws of the state, shall be
regulated and governed by the use regulations and requirements of this
Article. However, this Article shall not apply nor be construed to apply to
amateur radio operators who are licensed to operate a radio or transmitter by
the Federal Communications Commission under Part 97 of the Federal
Communications Commission’s Rules.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.6B  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this Article only, the following terms shall be defined as
set forth below. All other terms shall have the meaning set forth in Article
XIII, Definitions.



   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used to collect or radiate
electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas, such as panels,
and dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas, but no
including satellite earth stations.



   ANTENNA ARRAY. A structure attached to a telecommunications tower that
supports a telecommunications antenna.



   EIA-222. Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, “Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures”.



   NON-WHIP ANTENNA. An antenna which is not a whip antenna, such as dish
antennas, panel antennas and the like.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission between or among points specified
by the user of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. An antenna used to provide a
telecommunications service.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a
fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure more than ten feet tall, built
primarily to support one or more telecommunications antennas.



   WHIP ANTENNA. An omni-directional dipole antenna of cylindrical shape
which is no more than six inches in diameter.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.6C  PROCEDURES.



      (1)   Wireless telecommunication facilities are hereby
declared special exception uses in all districts contained in this ordinance.



      (2)   The applicant for a wireless telecommunication facility
special exception shall demonstrate that he, she or it has exhausted all
efforts to locate the proposed telecommunications antennas upon existing
buildings or structures in the geographical area of the proposed
telecommunications antennas. The applicant shall submit a Master Plan for its
wireless telecommunication facilities throughout the town. The Master Plan
shall demonstrate efforts to minimize the size and number of
telecommunications antenna locations throughout the geographical area, taking
into consideration existing technology.



      (3)   The placement of telecommunications antennas upon
existing telecommunications towers may be administratively approved by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.6D  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



      (1)   In addition to complying with the requirements for a
special exception use for the zoning district of the property, all wireless
telecommunications facilities shall comply with the following additional
requirements.



         (a)   The maximum height of a telecommunications tower,
including antenna array, shall not exceed 120 feet above grade.



         (b)   No new telecommunications towers shall be located
within 5,000 feet from another telecommunications tower.



         (c)   All guys and guy anchors shall be located within
the buildable area of the lot and shall not be located within any front, side
or rear yard setback or front, side or rear bufferyard setback and, in any
event, no closer than five feet to any lot line.



         (d)   The base of a telecommunications tower shall be
enclosed by security fencing.



         (e)   Equipment buildings must be similar in color and
character to the main or adjoining building or structure or blend with the
landscaping and other surroundings immediately adjacent to the equipment
building and shall be screened by a chain link or wrought iron fence with
landscaping installed in compliance with the provisions of Article IV for
Level 3 perimeter landscaping requirements.



         (f)   All applications shall be reviewed by the Design
Review Committee with the recommendations of the Design Review Committee
becoming part of the record of the proceedings before the Board of Zoning
Appeals and shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals as conditions
recommended to be imposed on the special exception use by the Board of Zoning
Appeals if the special exception is granted and which conditions, if imposed,
shall be satisfied before an improvement location permit is issued.



         (g)   A telecommunications tower shall be erected and
operated in compliance with the most current Federal Communication Commission
and Federal Aviation Administration rules and regulations and other
applicable federal and state standards.



         (h)   A telecommunications tower must be:



            1.   Used by three or more wireless communications
providers; or



            2.   Designed and built so as to be capable of use
by three or more wireless communications providers including providers such
as cellular or PCS providers using antenna arrays of nine to 12 antennas each
within 15 vertical feet of each other with no more than three degrees of
twist and sway at the top elevation and the owner of the telecommunications
tower and the property on which it is located must certify to the town that
the antenna is available for use by another wireless telecommunications
provider on a reasonable and non-discriminatory basis and at a cost not
exceeding the market value for the use of the facilities. If a portion of the
telecommunications tower is to be leased to other wireless communications
providers, the portions of the actual or proposed lease that demonstrate
compliance with the requirements of this division shall be submitted with the
application for special exception.



         (i)   All telecommunications towers shall be of a
tapering monopole construction, except that another type telecommunications
tower may be allowed upon showing that the alternate type of
telecommunications tower would cause less visual impact on surrounding
property than a similar monopole structure.



         (j)   No lettering, symbols, images, trademarks, signs
or advertising shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a
telecommunications tower, antenna array or antenna, other than as required by
FCC regulations regarding telecommunications tower registration or other
applicable law.



         (k)   The need for the requested site and the nature of
any existing sites shall be documented and the manner in which the placement
will promote the town telecommunications policies shall be demonstrated.



         (l)   Telecommunications towers shall be constructed to
minimize potential safety hazards. Telecommunications towers shall be
constructed so as to meet or exceed the most recent EIA-222 standards, and
prior to issuance of a building permit, the Building Inspector shall be
provided with an engineer’s certification that the telecommunications
tower’s design meets or exceeds those standards. Guyed telecommunications
towers shall be located in such a manner that if the telecommunications tower
should fall along its longest dimension, the telecommunications tower will
remain within the lot lines and avoid habitable structures, public streets,
utility lines and other telecommunications towers.



         (m)   Telecommunications towers and equipment buildings
shall be located: to minimize their number, height and obtrusiveness; to
minimize visual impacts on the surrounding area; and in accordance with the
following town telecommunications policies:



            1.   Ensure that the height of telecommunications
towers have the least visual impact and is no greater than required to
achieve service area requirements and potential collocation, when visually
appropriate;



            2.   Demonstrate that the selected site for a new
telecommunications tower provides the least visual impact on residential
areas or the public way and illustrate that the selected site provides the
best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the proposed facility;



            3.   Site telecommunications towers to minimize
being visually solitary or prominent when viewed from residential areas or
the public way. The telecommunications tower should be obscured by
vegetation, treecover, topographic features and buildings or other structures
to the maximum extent feasible;



            4.   Place telecommunications towers to ensure
that historically significant landscapes are protected. The views of and
vistas from architecturally or historically significant structures should not
be impaired or diminished by the placement of telecommunications towers; and



            5.   The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a
special exception which does not fully comply with the telecommunications
policies contained herein for telecommunications towers when the Board of
Zoning Appeals determines that such a grant better accomplishes the
telecommunications policies set out in this division than would a strict
application of these telecommunication policies. Such deviations from the
town telecommunications policy shall be no greater than necessary to
accomplish those policies.



         (n)   No signals or lights or illumination shall be
permitted on telecommunications towers unless required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration or the town.



         (o)   If any additions, changes or modifications are to
be made to a telecommunications tower, the Building Inspector shall have the
authority to require proof, through the submission of engineering and
structural data, that the addition, change or modification conforms to
structural wind load and all other requirements of the current Building Code
adopted by the town.



         (p)   Telecommunications towers which have not been used
for a period of one year shall be removed. The last telecommunication service
provider to use a telecommunications tower shall notify the Director or his
or her designee within 30 days that use of a telecommunications tower has
been discontinued.



         (q)   All telecommunications towers shall comply with
all ordinances of the town not in conflict with this section.



      (2)   Antennas mounted on existing buildings or structures.



         (a)   Roof-mounted telecommunications antennas are
allowed on nonresidential buildings in all zoning districts without further
zoning proceedings, provided a non-whip antenna does not exceed the height of
the building by more than ten feet and is screened from view from any
adjacent public right-of-way and provided a whip antenna does not exceed the
height of the building by more than 15 feet and is located no closer than 15
feet to the perimeter of the building. Prior to installation of a
roof-mounted telecommunications antenna, the Building Inspector shall be
provided with an engineer’s certification that the roof will support the
proposed telecommunications antenna and associated roof-mounted equipment.
Roof-mounted telecommunications antenna and associated equipment shall be
screened with enclosures or facades having an appearance that blends with the
building on which they are located or by locating them so that they are not
visible from an adjacent public right-of-way.



         (b)   Building-mounted telecommunications antennas of
the non-whip antenna type are allowed on nonresidential buildings in all
zoning districts without further zoning proceedings, provided the non-whip
antenna is mounted flush with the exterior of the building so that it
projects no more than 30 inches from the surface of the building to which it
is attached and the non-whip antenna’s appearance is such as to blend with
the surrounding surface of the building.



         (c)   Associated equipment shall be placed either within
the same building or in a separate building which matches the existing
building in character and building materials or blends with the landscaping
and other surroundings immediately adjacent to the separate building housing
the equipment. Associated equipment for roof-mounted telecommunications
antennas may be located on the roof of the building if it is screened from
view from any adjacent public right-of-way.



         (d)   Telecommunications antennas are allowed without
further zoning proceeding on existing utility, lighting, telecommunications
towers and sign structures exceeding 50 feet in height above grade, provided
that the telecommunications antenna does not exceed the height of the
structure by more than ten feet if a non-whip antenna or 15 feet if a whip
antenna. Existing structures may be rebuilt if necessary to support the load
of the new telecommunications antenna without further zoning proceedings if
the rebuilt structure is substantially similar in appearance to the existing
structure it replaces.



         (e)   Telecommunications antennas located on existing
buildings or structures are not subject to the 5,000 foot separation
requirement.



         (f)   When an application for an improvement location
permit to locate a telecommunications antenna on an existing building or
other structure is made, the Director shall be provided with color photo
simulations showing the site of the existing structure with a photo-realistic
representation of the proposed telecommunications antenna and the existing
structure or any proposed reconstruction of the structure as it would appear
viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent public
right-of-way. The applicant shall also submit photographs of the same views
showing the current appearance of the site without the proposed
telecommunications antenna.



      (3)   Telecommunications antennas shall not be constructed or
used within the town without all approvals and permits first having been
secured.



      (4)   Within 30 days of the enactment of this ordinance, and
during each January thereafter, providers of personal wireless services, as
that term is defined by federal law, operating in the town shall provide the
town with their respective Master Plan for wireless telecommunications
facilities, including detailed maps, showing the precise locations and
characteristics of all telecommunications antennas and telecommunications
towers serving any portion of the town and indicating coverage areas for
current and future telecommunications antennas and telecommunications towers
and shall provide the town with any updates to the above documents. Updated
documents shall be provided to the town within three months of their creation.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 4.7. LANDSCAPE PROVISIONS



§ 4.7A  INTENT.



   Landscaping of required yards and required bufferyards is an essential
element of the design of a site with respect to promoting the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the town. Landscaping is
intended to lessen the impact of development on the environment by reducing
glare and heat buildup, promoting the creation landscape islands for
pedestrian safety, to break up large expanses of pavement, and to reduce
storm water run-off. Landscaping provides a critical buffering effect between
higher intensity districts and lower intensity districts (e.g., typically
between commercial and industrial districts and residential districts).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39- 2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7B  LANDSCAPING OF REQUIRED FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARDS AND REQUIRED
FRONT, SIDE AND REAR BUFFERYARDS IN ALL DISTRICTS EXCEPT RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS.



   All required yards and all required bufferyards shall be landscaped in
compliance with the requirements in Table 4.7-A, Table 4.7-B and Table 4.7-C.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7C  PERIMETER LANDSCAPING REQUIRED FOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS IN ALL
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   All required perimeters and all required bufferyards for residential
subdivisions shall be landscaped in compliance with the requirements in Table
4.7-A, Table 4.7-B and Table 4.7-C. subject to the following:



      (1)   Front perimeter.



         (a)   As stipulated in Table 4.7-B., the front perimeter
of a residential subdivision along a major thoroughfare (primary arterial,
secondary arterial or collector street), shall have Level 5 perimeter
landscaping.



         (b)   The Level 5 perimeter landscaping shall be within
a minimum 20-foot wide landscape easement adjacent to the right-of-way of the
perimeter street with berms as stipulated in Article 4.7G(2).



         (c)   As stipulated in Table 4.7-C., the Level 5
perimeter landscaping shall consist of a plant unit value (PUV) of 40%
ornamental or shade trees, 40% evergreen trees and 20% hedge plants or shrubs
(half of which shall be an evergreen species). The plant material should be
clustered or planted in irregular patterns.



         (d)   If a fence or wall is incorporated, required PUV
will be given credit as stipulated in Article 4.7G All plant material shall
be located on the street side of the fence or wall.



      (2)   Side and rear perimeters.



         (a)   As stipulated in Table 4.7-B., the side and rear
perimeters of a residential subdivision, shall have Level 3 perimeter
landscaping.



         (b)   The Level 3 perimeter landscaping shall be within
a minimum 15 foot wide landscape easement along the side and rear perimeter
with berms as stipulated in Article 4.7G.



         (c)   As stipulated in Table 4.7-C., the Level 3
perimeter landscaping shall consist of a plant unit value (PUV) of 40%
ornamental or shade trees, 40% evergreen trees and 20% hedge plants or
shrubs. The plant material should be clustered or planted in irregular
patterns.



         (d)   If a fence or wall is incorporated, PUV will be
given credit as stipulated in Article 4.7G All plant material shall be
located on the outside of the fence or wall.



         (e)   Existing trees may be used and given credit per
Article 4.7J if it is determined the trees are an appropriate species and
healthy.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7D  FOUNDATION PLANTING IN THE R-6 DISTRICT, R-U DISTRICT, ALL
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS AND ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



      (1)   Foundation planting areas required. Foundation planting
areas shall be required for all new buildings and building additions in the
R-6 District, the R-U District for multi-family dwellings or any special
exception use, all commercial districts and all industrial districts as
follows:



         (a)   In the case of a single use site or a primary
building in an integrated center located in a commercial district, foundation
planting areas are required along the front and each side of the building.



         (b)   In the case of a building located in the R-6
District, R-U District, on an out lot in a commercial district or any
building located in an industrial district, the front, side and rear of the
building shall have foundation planting areas.



      (2)   Foundation planting areas. Foundation planting areas
shall be subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   Location. Foundation planting areas shall be
calculated individually for each applicable front, side or rear of a building
and shall be located along such front, side or rear of a building (except for
those portions of the front or side of a building devoted to pedestrian
ingress/egress, vehicular ingress/egress, loading or drop-off zones);



         (b)   Area. Foundation planting areas shall have a total
area in square feet of not less than two feet times the length of the wall
(two feet X length of wall = area for foundation planting) to which the
foundation planting is oriented;



         (c)   Relationship to buildings. Foundation planting
areas shall be located:



            1.   Adjacent to the building; or



            2.   So as to begin within 15 feet of the building
(in the case of a sidewalk which runs adjacent to the building).



         (d)   Minimum dimension. Foundation planting areas shall
maintain a minimum depth in the smallest dimension of six feet;



         (e)   Plant unit value. Foundation planting areas shall
be landscaped with grass and shrubbery, trees or hedge, or in combination
with other suitable ground cover materials and maintained as a foundation
planting strip in compliance with the requirements for a Level 1 plantings as
set forth in Table 4.7-B; and



         (f)   Overlap with perimeter yards. Foundation planting
areas may overlap required perimeter yards landscaping provided that the
plant unit value in such perimeter yard landscaping is equal to or greater
than the total plant unit value required for the perimeter yard plus the
overlapping foundation landscaping area.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7E  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING IN THE R-6 DISTRICT, R-U DISTRICT, ALL
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS AND ALL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Any new surface, off-street parking areas and expanded surface
off-street parking areas located in any: R-6 District or R-U District for
multi-family dwellings or any special exception use; commercial district; or
industrial district, shall be subject to the regulations of this Article 4.7E.



   (B)   Off-street parking areas shall include areas uses for the
parking or display of automobiles, boats, trucks or farm equipment associated
with a dealership or leasing business.



   (C)   Off-street parking areas shall not include areas uses for
semi-truck loading areas, semi-truck maneuvering areas and semi-truck parking
areas.



      (1)   Interior parking lot landscaping in the R-6 District,
the R-U District for multi- family dwellings or any special exception use,
all commercial districts and all industrial districts.



         (a)   All new surface parking lots and expanded surface
parking lots located in any R-6 District, any R-U District, any commercial
district or any industrial district shall include at least one interior
landscape island measuring eight feet by 18 feet minimum for every 15 parking
spaces. Each interior landscape island shall contain at least one deciduous
shade (overstory) tree, deciduous ornamental (understory) tree or evergreen
tree. All trees shall comply with the size at time of planting as indicated
in Table 4.7-C.



         (b)   Space devoted to interior landscape islands shall
be in addition to any required front, side or rear yards, required front,
side or rear bufferyards, or required foundation plantings.



         (c)   The area devoted to interior landscape islands may
be located individually in the interior of the parking lot or may be
aggregated into one or more landscape areas. When located individually,
interior landscape islands shall be located so as to define vehicular and
pedestrian traffic patterns. When aggregated into one or more landscape
areas, interior landscape islands shall function to: preserve existing trees,
create boulevard treatments, create landscape features, create common open
space areas for passive recreational activities or define vehicular and
pedestrian traffic patterns.



      (2)   Perimeter landscaping of parking lots in the R-6
District, the R-U District, all commercial districts and all industrial
districts. In addition to landscaping provided in required yards and required
bufferyards, if a parking area is located between a building and a required
front yard or between a building and a required front, side or rear
bufferyard, the side of the parking area facing the front yard or the front,
side or rear bufferyard shall be screened by:



         (a)   A compact hedge row located between the front yard
or a bufferyard and the edge of the parking area planted three feet on-center
(3 ft. o.c.) and between 24 and 30 inches in height at the time of planting;
or



         (b)    Hedge plants in combination with: an ornamental,
decorative fence or masonry wall or earthen berm provided that the plant unit
value of the hedge, wall and/or berm equals one and one-half.



   Sample Landscaping Maximizing Use of Shrubs







   Sample Landscaping Maximizing Use of Evergreens







Note: Each sample area represents a total length of 400 feet. Depth of the
sample areas varies for illustrative purposes only. Trees indicated are at
full growth, not at time of planting.



 


TABLE 4.7-A - PERIMETER LANDSCAPE YARDS








Adj. Prop.

 

Zoning Of Subject Property




A G

 

R R

 

R -1

 

R -2

 

R -3

 

R -4

 

R -5

 

R -6

 

R- U

 

M U

 

T C

 

O D

 

N R

 

G C

 

I- 1

 

I- 2

 

I- 3

 

I- 4

 

PU D






AG

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

2

 

3

 

1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

(2)




RR

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-1

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-2

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-3

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-4

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-5

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-6

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




R-U

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

5

 

(2)




MU

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

1

 

2

 

3

 

4

 

(2)




TC

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




OD

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




NR

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




GC

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




I-1

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




I-2

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




I-3

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




I-4

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

(2)




LA

 

N A

 

N A

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

5- 3

 

(1)

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

1

 

1

 

2

 

3

 

(2)




   LA = Limited access right-of-way   NA = Screening not
required       1 = Level 1   2 = Level 2




   3 = Level 3         4 = Level 4         5 = Level 5




5-3 = Level 5 for the front perimeter along a perimeter street (major
thoroughfare); Level 3 for the side and rear perimeter of the subdivision




(1) = Landscaping shall be provided as required by Article 2.8B(8)




(2) = Landscaping may be any Level as determined by the Plan Commission as
part of the review and determination of the Planned Unit Development





 



 


Table 4.7-B - Levels of Perimeter Plantings



Level 1   =   Any combination of plants selected from the plant
categories listed in Table 4.7-C which equals or exceeds a plant unit value
of 1.0 for each 100 lineal feet


Level 2   =   Any combination of plants selected from the plant
categories listed in Table 4.7-C which equals or exceeds a plant unit value
of 2.0 for each 100 lineal feet, provided that at least 25% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from deciduous shade (overstory) trees,
deciduous ornamental (understory) trees, evergreen trees or evergreen trees -
narrow spread


Level 3   =   Any combination of plants selected from the plant
categories listed in Table 4.7-C which equals or exceeds a plant unit value
of 3.0 for each 100 lineal feet, provided that at least 25% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from deciduous shade (overstory) trees or
deciduous ornamental (understory) trees and at least 25% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from evergreen trees or evergreen trees -
narrow spread


Level 4   =   Any combination of plants selected from the plant
categories listed in Table 4.7-C which equals or exceeds a plant unit value
of 4.0 for each 100 lineal feet, provided that at least 25% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from deciduous shade (overstory) trees or
deciduous ornamental (understory) trees and at least 50% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from evergreen trees or evergreen trees -
narrow spread


Level 5   =   Any combination of plants selected from the plant
categories listed in Table 4.7-C which equals or exceeds a plant unit value
of 5.0 for each 100 lineal feet, provided that at least 10% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from deciduous shade (overstory) trees or
deciduous ornamental (understory) trees and at least 75% of the required
plant unit value shall be derived from evergreen trees or evergreen trees -
narrow spread


> Level 5  =   Whenever a plant unit value in excess of 5.0 is required
in connection with the approval of a development plan - development
incentives, or the imposition of conditions or commitments authorized by this
ordinance, at least 10% of the required plant unit value shall be derived
from deciduous shade (overstory) trees or deciduous ornamental (understory)
trees and at least 75% of the required plant unit value shall be derived from
evergreen trees or evergreen trees - narrow spread



 



 


Table 4.7-C - Plant Unit Values




Plant Categories
(Minimum Size at Time of Planting)

 

Plant Unit Value





Deciduous shade (overstory) tree:
 





   2.5 in. caliper
 

.75



   4 in. caliper
 

1.00



Deciduous ornamental (understory) tree:
 





   1.5 in. caliper
 

.50



   3 in. caliper
 

.75



Multi-stemmed tree (8 ft. high)
 

.50



Multi-stemmed tree (12 ft. high)
 

.75



Evergreen tree (6 ft. high)
 

.50



Evergreen tree (12 ft. high)
 

.75



Evergreen tree - narrow spread (4 ft. high)
 

.25



Evergreen tree - narrow spread (6 ft. high)
 

.40



Hedge plant:
 





   18 in. (foundation plantings only)
 

.025



   24 in. high
 

.05



   36 in. high
 

.10



Preservation of existing vegetation
 

See Article 4.7I



Fence, wall or berm
 

See Article 4.7F





 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7F  GROUND COVER WITHIN REQUIRED LANDSCAPING.



   All landscaping required above shall, at a minimum, consist of living
vegetation (i.e., trees and shrubs) and grasses or ground cover materials, or
preserved existing natural vegetation (i.e., thickets). Loose stone, rock or
gravel may be used as a landscaping accent, but shall not exceed 20% of the
area of the required landscape area in which it is used.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7G  WALL, FENCE OR BERM.



   In addition to living vegetation required above, landscaping in a
required yard or a required bufferyard may include a fence, wall or berm as
regulated below.



      (1)   Fence or wall regulations.



         (a)   Fence or wall in a front yard. An ornamental,
decorative fence or masonry wall may be used in conjunction with required
front yard or required front bufferyard landscaping. Any fence or wall used
in a front yard shall not exceed three feet in height if solid or six feet in
height if the sight barrier is less than 50%. Any fence or wall which
maintains a height of between 30 inches and three feet if solid or between
five feet and six feet if the sight barrier is less than 50% shall count as
up to a .50 plant unit value for each 100-foot increment against the required
plant unit value specified by Table 4.7-B.



         (b)   Fence or wall in a side or rear yard or side or
rear bufferyard. An ornamental, decorative fence or masonry wall may be used
in conjunction with required side or rear yard or required side or rear
bufferyard landscaping. Any fence or wall used in a side or rear yard or side
or rear bufferyard shall not exceed six feet in height if solid or ten feet
in height if the sight barrier is less than 50%. Any fence or wall which
maintains a height of between four feet and six feet if solid or between six
feet and ten feet if the sight barrier is less than 50% shall count as up to
a .75 plant unit value for each 100-foot increment against the required plant
unit value specified by Table 4.7-B.



      (2)   Berm regulations.



         (a)   Berm in a front yard or front bufferyard. An
undulating earthen berm, may be used in conjunction with required front yard
or required front bufferyard landscaping. Any berm used in a front yard shall
have a maximum height not to exceed six feet when located in a residential
district or commercial district; or 15 feet when located in an industrial
district.



         (b)   Berm in a side or rear yard or side or rear
bufferyard. An undulating earthen berm, may be used in conjunction with
required side or rear yard or required side or rear bufferyard landscaping.
Any berm used in a side or rear yard or side or rear bufferyard shall have a
maximum height not to exceed six feet in a residential district, ten feet in
a commercial district, or 15 feet when located in an industrial district.



         (c)   Construction of berms. A berm used as a
landscaping element shall be constructed in accordance with the following
regulations:



            1.   Each berm shall have a minimum crown width of
two feet;



            2.   Each berm shall have a side slope of not
greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical;



            3.   Each berm shall undulate by not less than two
feet in elevation and shall maintain its maximum height for a minimum of 60
feet for each 100-foot increment;



            4.   Each berm shall be planted and covered with
live vegetation; and



            5.   A retaining wall may be used on the side of
the berm facing away from the public right-of-way.



         (d)   Plant unit value for berms. The plant unit value
of a berm shall be determined by the height of the berm. The plant unit value
equivalent of a berm constructed in compliance with these regulations shall
be as set forth in Table 4.7 - D: Plant Unit Value of a Berm.



 


Table 4.7 - D: Plant Unit Value of a Berm




Maximum Height of Berm

 

Plant Unit Value Equivalent




3 ft.

 

.50




6 ft.

 

.75




10 ft.

 

1.0




15 ft.

 

1.5




 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7H  INSTALLATION OF LANDSCAPING.



   All landscaping required by this Article shall be:



      (1)   Installed prior to commencement of the use on the real
estate; or



      (2)   If seasons and weather conditions are not appropriate
for the installation of landscaping immediately prior to commencement of the
use, all landscaping required by this Article shall be installed by the end
of the next planting season after the use is commenced. For the purpose of
this Article 4.7G, planting seasons end on May 15 and September 30 of each
year.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7I  MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING.



   The owner or property manager shall:



      (1)   Maintain all required landscaping by keeping lawns
mowed, all plants maintained as disease-free, and planting beds groomed
(except in areas of preserved existing natural vegetation (i.e., thickets);
and



      (2)   Replace any required planting, which is removed or dies
after the date of planting. Such replacement shall occur during the next
planting season. For the purpose of this Article 4.7H, planting seasons end
on May 15 and September 30 of each year.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7J  CREDIT FOR PRESERVATION OF EXISTING TREES.



   In order to encourage the preservation of existing stands of trees or
tree rows and to enhance the quality of the built environment, the Director
may approve an alternative landscape plan which utilizes the designation of a
tree save area in lieu of new plantings within a required yard, a required
bufferyard, foundation plantings or interior landscape islands in parking
lots provided that such alternative landscape plan:



      (1)   Provides for the saving of trees in the tree save area
at or in excess of the rate specified in Table 4.7-E - Tree Preservation
Credits for new plantings in the required yard, required bufferyard,
foundation plantings or interior landscape islands in parking lots;



      (2)   Provides that all trees which are to be preserved in a
tree save area shall be maintained without injury and with sufficient area
for the root system to sustain the tree;



      (3)   Provides that protective care and physical restraint
barriers at the drip line, such as temporary protective fencing, shall be
provided in the tree save area to prevent alteration, compaction or increased
depth of the soil in the root system area prior to and during groundwork and
construction; and



      (4)   Provides that, in the event trees designated for saving
in the tree save area are damaged during construction or die within three
years of completion of construction on the site, replacement trees shall be
planted in the designated tree save area at a rate of one deciduous shade
(overstory), deciduous ornamental (understory) or evergreen tree for every
tree which was damaged or which died, provided however, an evergreen
tree-narrow spread may be replaced by another evergreen tree-narrow spread.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



§ 4.7K  ALTERNATE LANDSCAPE PLAN APPROVAL.



      (1)   Intent of alternate landscape plan. The Director, upon
request by an applicant, shall have the authority to modify the landscape
requirements of this Article IV pertaining to required yards and approve an
alternative landscape plan so long as the alternative plan:



         (a)   Maintains the total plant unit value otherwise
required;



         (b)   Is appropriate to the site and its surroundings;
and



         (c)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
Article IV.



      (2)   Allowed alternative landscape plans. Such alternative
landscape plan approval shall be limited to:



         (a)   A redistribution of plant materials required for
required yards to other locations on the lot;



         (b)   A redistribution of foundation landscaping
materials to required front yards, front bufferyards, side yards, side
bufferyards or rear bufferyards;



         (c)   The use of undersized hedge plants for up to 25%
of the required foundation plantings (18 inches to 24 inches high at the time
of planting rather than 24 inches to 30 inches at the time of planting,
subject to a plant unit value for each undersized hedge plant of .025);



         (d)   Allowing an alternative to the screening of
parking areas provided that the total plant unit value installed for such
screening purposes shall equal or exceed the total plant unit value required
based upon the value of the required hedge row; or



         (e)   Allowing the use of stone, gravel or similar
non-vegetative ground cover in:



            1.   Foundation planting areas; or



            2.   The first 12 inches from back of curb in an
interior parking lot landscape island.



      (3)   Limitations. The Director shall not have the authority
to modify the landscape requirements of this Article IV so as to:



         (a)   Reduce landscaping levels in required bufferyards;
or



         (b)   Relocate foundation landscaping to a required rear
yard.



      (4)   DRC review. Director may, at its discretion, forward
such proposed alternative landscape plan to the Design Review Committee for
review and advice.



      (5)   Appeals. Any determination by the Director to approve or
disapprove of a proposed alternative landscape plan may be appealed by any
aggrieved party, within five business days after such determination, by
filing an administrative appeal with the Board of Zoning Appeals, stating the
reasons and justification for the appeal. Such petition shall be filed
consistent with the provisions of rules of procedure of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



 


Table 4.7-E - Tree Preservation Credits




Required Plant Categories and Minimum Sizes

 

Plant Categories of Trees to Be Saved

 

Size of Trees to Be Saved

 

Plant Unit Value of Saved Trees






 
If a deciduous shade (overstory) tree is to be saved
 

2 in.—4 in. caliper

 

.75




4 in.—6 in. caliper

 

1.00




> 6 in. caliper

 

1.25



Deciduous shade (overstory) tree (< 2 in. caliper )
 
If a deciduous ornamental (understory) tree is to be saved
 

1 in.—3 in. caliper

 

.50




3 in.—5 in. caliper

 

.75




>5 in. caliper

 

1.00




 
If an evergreen tree is to be saved
 

5 ft.—8 ft. high

 

.50



Deciduous ornamental (understory) tree (< 1 in. caliper)
 

8 ft.—12 ft. high

 

.75




>12 ft. high

 

1.00



If an evergreen tree - narrow spread is to be saved
 

3 ft.—5 ft. high

 

.25




5 ft.—10 ft. high

 

.50




>10 ft. high

 

.75



Evergreen tree (6 ft. high)
 
If a deciduous shade (overstory) tree is to be saved
 

2 in.—4 in. caliper

 

.25




4 in.—6 in. caliper

 

.50




> 6 in. caliper

 

.75



If a deciduous ornamental (understory) tree is to be saved
 

1 in.—3 in. caliper

 

.25




3 in.—5 in. caliper

 

.50




>5 in. caliper

 

.75



Evergreen tree - narrow spread (4 ft. high)
 
If an evergreen tree is to be saved
 

5 ft.—8 ft. high

 

.50




8 ft.—12 ft. high

 

.75




>12 ft. high

 

1.00



If an evergreen tree - narrow spread is to be saved
 

3 ft.—5 ft. high

 

.25




5 ft.—10 ft. high

 

.50




>10 ft. high

 

.75





 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007)



ARTICLE 4.8. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 4.8A  SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY.



   All new uses established after the effective date of this ordinance
shall comply with the following performance standards. Any use in existence
prior to the date of this ordinance shall not be altered or modified so as to
conflict with the following performance standards.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.8B  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



      (1)   Vibration. No use shall cause earth vibration or
concussions detectible beyond the lot lines without the aid of instruments.



      (2)   Smoke, dust and particulate matter. Smoke, dust and
particulate matter and any other airborne material shall not exceed the
limits established by the Indiana Department of Environmental Management
Rules regarding fugitive dust.



      (3)   Noxious matter. No use shall discharge across lot lines
any noxious, toxic or corrosive matter, fumes or gases in such concentration
as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or
cause injury to property.



      (4)   Odor. No use shall emit across lot lines odors in such
quantities as to be readily detectible at any point along the lot lines and
as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare or
cause injury to property.



      (5)   Noise. No use shall produce noise in such a manner as to
endanger the public health, safety or welfare or cause injury to property.
Operational or production noise shall be muffled so as not to become
detrimental due to intermittence, beat frequency, shrillness or vibration.



      (6)   Heat. No use shall produce heat creating a hazard
perceptible from any point beyond the lot lines.



      (7)   Glare. No use shall produce glare creating a hazard
perceptible from any point beyond the lot lines.



      (8)   Waste. No use shall accumulate within the lot or
discharge beyond the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in
violation of the applicable standards and regulations of the County Health
Department, the Indiana State Board of Health, the Stream Pollution Control
Board of the state, in such a manner as to endanger the public health, safety
or welfare or cause injury to property.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 4.9. LIGHTING STANDARDS



§ 4.9A  INTENT.



   It is the intent of lighting standards to provide for illumination
levels on individual lots which are adequate for the safe and efficient
movement of individuals or vehicles to and from a lot and within a lot. Light
intensity shall not be so great as to cause objectionable glare beyond any
lot line.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006)



§ 4.9B  LIGHTING REGULATIONS.



   All lighting shall comply with the following regulations.



      (1)   Light standards and fixtures on a lot, including
freestanding light fixtures and those attached to buildings, security lights
and architectural lights, shall be of consistent design and materials.



      (2)   Parking lot lights shall be of uniform size, design and
height.



      (3)   All freestanding lights shall be of either: a “down
lighting” style with the light element completely shielded on all sides and
the top; or be equipped with a refractor so as to direct light downward onto
the lot.



      (4)   Lighting shall not cause illumination:



         (a)   Beyond any lot line in a commercial district,
except for lot lines in common between out lots or lot lines in common
between out lots and the main portion of an integrated center;



         (b)   Beyond any lot line in an industrial district,
except for lot lines in common between two industrial lots which utilize the
development incentive for the use of required yards in integrated centers or
industrial parks;



         (c)   Beyond any lot line for a business located in a
residential district or an agricultural district; or



         (d)   Onto any right-of-way, based upon the zoning
district of the real estate on the opposite side of such lot line or
right-of-way, in excess of:



            1.   If adjoining commercial or industrial
districts. Two footcandles;



            2.   If adjoining residential districts. One-half
footcandles; and



            3.   If adjoining agricultural districts. One
footcandle.



      (5)   Architectural or sign lighting shall be so directed and
shielded that the light element is not visible from any point along an
adjacent public right-of-way.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 39-2006,
passed 10-9-2006)



ARTICLE 4.10. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 4.10A  PARKING FOR BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR USES.



   All new development, building additions or conversions of use for which
an improvement location permit is required by this ordinance shall provide
required off-street parking areas in accordance with the following
regulations.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10B  EXISTING PARKING AREAS.



   Off-street parking areas shall not be reduced below the minimum
requirement for such use as required by this ordinance. Any off-street
parking areas existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance which
were already below the standards established by this ordinance shall not be
further reduced.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10C  LOCATION OF PARKING AREAS.



   Off-street parking areas shall be located on the same lot, within the
same integrated center, or within 600 feet of the building, structure or use
served by the off-street parking area. Off-street parking for any use shall
be located within a zoning district which permits the use for which the
off-street parking is required.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10D  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING AREAS.



   The following standards shall apply to the design of off-street parking
areas required by this ordinance in all districts (except for single-family
dwellings located in the AG and RR Districts, and agricultural uses located
in the AG District).



      (1)   Standard parking schemes. The layout of all parking
areas shall be in compliance with the requirements set forth in Table 4.10-A
- Parking Lot Design.



      (2)   Surface of parking areas. All required off-street
parking areas and the ingress/egress to and from such off-street parking
areas shall be hardsurfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material to
provide a dust-free surface. A gravel surface may be used for a period not to
exceed six months after the commencement of the use for which the parking
area is provided, where ground or weather conditions are not immediately
suitable for permanent surfacing as specified herein.



      (3)   Distance from buildings in commercial and industrial
districts. All parking spaces, parking areas and interior access drives
located in any commercial and industrial district shall maintain a minimum
five-foot separation from the wall of a building.



      (4)   Definition of parking spaces. All parking spaces shall
be provided with wheel stops or other devices to ensure that motor vehicles
do not encroach beyond the parking area or into a required yard.



      (5)   Off-street parking area connectivity.



         (a)   Off-street parking areas for abutting commercial
uses or multi-family developments shall have connecting maneuvering aisles to
provide for internal cross-access movements.



         (b)   Where off-street parking areas connect, or are
planned for connection, a cross-access easement the width of the maneuvering
aisle shall be established and recorded.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10E  MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.



   Off-street parking for all uses shall be provided in accordance with
the minimum requirements set forth in Table 4.10-B. When the computation of
required parking spaces results in a fraction of one-half or greater, the
number of required parking spaces shall be rounded up to the next whole
number.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10F  REQUIRED PARKING FOR THE DISABLED.



   Every parking lot and parking garage available to the public shall have
parking spaces reserved for the use of physically handicapped persons
according to the following schedule (as required by ADA Accessibility
Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities, Chapter 4.1.2 (5)(a), published in
the Federal Register, Volume 56, No. 144, dated July 26, 1991):



 


Total Parking Spaces Required

 
Minimum Number of Reserved Spaces





1—25

 

1




26—50

 

2




51—75

 

3




76—100

 

4




101—150

 

5




151—200

 

6




201—300

 

7




301—400

 

8




401—500

 

9




501—1,000

 

2% of the total number of parking spaces




1,001 and over

 

20, plus 1 for each 100 spaces over 1,000





 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10G  REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING.



   Commercial retail centers greater than 10,000 square feet and
multi-family developments shall provide bicycle parking at the rate of one
bicycle parking space for every 30 off-street parking spaces. The maximum
number of required bicycle parking spaces shall be 15.



      (1)   A bicycle rack, bicycle loops or other device as
approved by the Director shall be installed to secure bicycles within the
bicycle parking area.



      (2)   The bicycle parking area shall be located near or inside
the main entrance of the primary structure.



      (3)   The location of the bicycle parking area when fully
occupied shall not obstruct any pedestrian way and a five-foot wide
pedestrian path shall be maintained at all times.



      (4)   A bicycle parking area may not be located in any minimum
front, side or rear yard or bufferyard.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



§ 4.10H  LAND BANKING FOR REDUCED PARKING IN GC, C-I, I-1, I-2, I-3 AND I-4
DISTRICTS.



   The number of off-street parking spaces for all uses allowed in the
above zoning districts as required per Table 4.10-B for either single use
sites or integrated centers that have shared off-street parking areas may be
reduced by 30% subject to compliance with the following regulations:



      (1)   Enough land to accommodate additional off-street parking
spaces shall be set aside as a land-banked area so that the total number of
off-street parking spaces required for the use or uses per Table 4.10-B can
be built on site in the future should the need arise.



      (2)   The owner shall provide a recorded site plan that
identifies the land-banked area as a “no-build area” prohibiting any
permanent or temporary structure from being built within the so denoted area.
Landscaping and limited use of utilities may be allowed within the
“no-build area”.



      (3)   A drainage plan in full compliance with town standards
for on-site storm water management for the total number of off-street parking
spaces as required per Table 4.10-B for the use or uses shall be approved
prior to issuance of an improvement location permit (ILP) for a site plan
with the reduced parking.



      (4)   If the Director finds that insufficient parking is
provided for the use or uses and vehicles are parking in the designated
“no-build” or land-banked areas on a periodic or continued basis, a
violation notice shall be served and the owner shall have six months from the
date of notice to install the total amount of off-street parking spaces
required for the use or uses per Table 4.10-B.



 


Table 4.10-A Parking Lot Design




Angle of Parking Space

 

Width of Parking Space

 

Depth of Parking Space

 

Width of Maneuvering Aisle




61 degrees—90 degrees

 

9 ft. 0 in.

 

18 ft. 0 in.

 

24 ft. 0 in.




46 degrees—60 degrees

 

9 ft. 0 in.

 

18 ft. 0 in.

 

18 ft. 0 in. (one-way)




45 degrees

 

8 ft. 6 in.

 

18 ft. 0 in.

 

15 ft. 0 in. (one-way)




Parallel

 

8 ft. 0 in.

 

22 ft. 0 in.

 

12 ft. 0 in. (one-way)




 







   Angle Parking







   Parallel Parking



 


Table 4.10-B Required Off-Street Parking




Use

 

Minimum Parking Requirement





1.   Any commercial recreational enterprise involving the assembling of
persons (unless otherwise specified in this table)
 



   a.   Indoor
 
1 parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area


   b.   Outdoor
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 parking
space for each 600 square feet of site area accessible to the public,
exclusive of the parking area


2.   Automobile, truck, bus, boat, recreational vehicle or motorcycle
sales or rental
 
1 parking space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space
for each 7,000 square feet of outdoor display area


3.   Banking: bank, savings and loan, credit union
 



   a.   Combined drive-through and walk-in facilities
 
1 parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area


   b.   Drive-through facility only
 
1 parking space for each drive-up bay


   c.   Walk-in facility only
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


4.   Bowling alleys
 
a.   4 parking spaces for each alley/lane


b.   If, in addition, there are other uses or accessory uses located
within or operated in conjunction with the bowling alley, such as
restaurants, night clubs and the like, additional parking spaces, calculated
based upon the parking requirements for that specific use, shall be provided
(calculation shall be based upon the total square feet of gross leasable
floor area for uses located within or operated in conjunction with the
bowling alley)


5.   a.   Religious uses, including church or synagogue
 
1 parking space for each 4 permanent seats in the sanctuary


   b.   Auditoriums, assembly halls, recital halls
 
1 parking space for each 4 seats at maximum capacity calculated pursuant to
Fire Code


6.   Community centers, museums, civic clubs and philanthropic institutions
 
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area


7.   Convenience store
 
3.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; parking
spaces at gasoline pumps may be included in the calculation of required
parking


8.   Day nurseries, child care centers, kindergartens, nursery schools
 
1 parking space for each 8 pupils based upon maximum capacity


9.   Fire station
 
3 parking spaces for truck bay, plus a minimum of 3 additional parking spaces.


10.   Furniture/floor or wall covering store
 
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area


11.   Gasoline service stations, tire and auto service center, automobile
repair, other auto service functions
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to
retail sales, plus 2 spaces per service bay, (a service bay shall not be
considered a parking space), plus 3 customer spaces


12.   Gasoline service station/convenience store
 
Same as 7. Convenience store above


13.   Grocery/supermarket
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


14.   Hardware/paint/home improvement store
 
1 parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 parking
space for each 1,000 square feet of the facility devoted to outside
operations or storage, exclusive of the parking area


15.   Health spa/fitness center
 
a.   1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


b.   If, in addition, there are other uses or accessory uses located
within or operated in conjunction with the health spa or sports club, such as
dining areas, restaurants, night clubs, retail stores and the like,
additional parking spaces, calculated based upon the parking requirements for
that specific use, shall be provided (calculation shall be based upon the
total square feet of gross leasable floor area for such uses located within
or operated in conjunction with the health spa or sports club)


16.   Hotels, motels
 
a.   1 parking space for each rental sleeping unit


b.   If, in addition to sleeping units, there are other uses or accessory
uses located within or operated in conjunction with the hotel or motel, such
as ballrooms, meeting rooms, dining areas, retail stores, auditoriums,
restaurants, night clubs, and the like, additional parking spaces, calculated
based upon the parking requirements for that specific use, shall be provided
(calculation shall be based upon the total square feet of gross leasable
floor area for such uses located within or operated in conjunction with the
hotel or motel)


17.   Library
 
1 parking space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area


18.   Medical, dental, optometrists clinics/offices
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


19.   Mini-warehouses
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to
office space, plus 1 parking space per resident/manager, plus 1 parking space
for each 30 storage units; required off-street parking spaces shall not be
utilized as rental or leased spaces


20.   Miniature golf
 
4 parking spaces for each golf hole, plus 1 space per each 100 square feet
devoted to accessory retail or amusement establishments


21.   Mortuary/funeral home/crematories
 
1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area in parlors and assembly
rooms


22.   Nursing care, convalescent home, hospital, sanitariums,
rehabilitation centers
 
1 parking space for each 2 patient beds


23.   Office commercial use, general: (to include, but not be limited to)
business, professional office, post office, office park, research center
 
3.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area


24.   Tennis/racquet club
 
4 parking spaces per game court, plus 1 parking space for each 200 square
feet of the remaining gross floor area in the building devoted to office or
retail activities


25.   Residential
 



   a.   Single-family dwelling (including individual mobile dwellings)
and two-family dwellings
 
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit


   b.   Multi-family dwellings
 
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit for the first 50 dwelling units, plus 1.75
parking spaces for each additional dwelling unit over 50


26.   Restaurant
 



   a.   Family (dine-in only)
 
1 parking space per each 3 customer seats (including outdoor seating areas)
(minimum of 5 parking spaces required)


   b.   Fast food, with or without drive-through
 
1 parking space per each 5 customer seats (minimum of 5 parking spaces
required)


   c.   Fast food, drive-through only (no seating)
 
1 parking space per 100 square feet of gross floor area (minimum of 4 parking
spaces required


27.   Taverns and night clubs
 
1 parking space per each 75 square feet of gross floor area


28.   Retail or service commercial uses - individual, freestanding uses:
including, but not limited to: bakeries; drug stores; beauty and barber
shops; liquor stores; laundromats; photo studios; jewelry, gift, appliance
and similar stores; personal service shops
 
3.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area
shall be required for any individual, freestanding retail or service
commercial use unless listed separately in this section, in which case the
parking requirement noted for that specific use shall be utilized



 
Provided, however, that in no case shall any individual use provide less than
5 parking spaces


29.   Retail or service commercial uses - integrated centers
 
a.   If the total gross leasable floor area of an integrated center is
less than 400,000 square feet, 4 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable floor area shall be required


b.   If the total gross leasable floor area of an integrated center is
greater than 400,000 square feet, but less than 600,000 square feet, 4.5
parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area shall
be required


c.   If the total gross leasable floor area of an integrated center is
greater than 600,000 square feet, 5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable floor area shall be required


   Provided, however:


   1.   In no case shall any individual use provide less than 5 parking
spaces; and



 
   2.   The following individual uses: grocery store/supermarket;
theaters - motion picture or legitimate; bowling alley; or night club, shall
provide parking spaces as required for the individual use by this section and
such calculation shall be separate from the calculation of the gross leasable
floor area calculation of the integrated center


30.   Skating rink (roller or ice)
 
1 parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area in the building


31.   Schools: commercial, trade or business
 
1 parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area in the building,
or one parking space per each 25 square feet of classrooms, whichever
provides the greater number of spaces


32.   Theater, indoor
 
1 parking space for each 3 seats


33.   Assembly, manufacturing or similar use
 
a.   1 parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to such use


b.   If, in addition, there is space devoted to office, retail or other
uses specified elsewhere in these regulations, parking required for such
additional use shall also be provided.


34.   Distribution, warehouse, or similar use
 
a.   1 parking space for each 3,000 square feet of gross floor area


b.   If, in addition, there is space devoted to office, retail or other
uses specified elsewhere in these regulations, parking required for such
additional use shall also be provided


35.   Uses not specified
 
For any use not specified above, specific requirements shall be determined by
the Director and shall be based upon requirements for similar uses, expected
demand and traffic generated by the proposed use, and other information from
appropriate traffic engineering and planning criteria




 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013)



ARTICLE 4.11. OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS



§ 4.11  INTENT.



   These off-street loading regulations are intended to provide for the
provision of off-street loading areas which are adequate to support the needs
of the proposed use and future uses of a site while at the same time assuring
that the design and construction of such off-street loading areas meet
minimum design standards necessary to provide efficient circulation and
prevent undue traffic congestion.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11A  LOADING FOR BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR USES.



   All commercial or industrial development or conversions of use for
which an improvement location permit is required by this ordinance shall
provide off-street loading areas in accordance with the following regulations.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11B  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF LOADING AREAS.



   The following standards shall apply to the design of off-street loading
areas.



      (1)   Loading space dimensions. A required or excess
off-street loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width by at least 55
feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have a
vertical clearance of at least 15 feet.



      (2)   Minimum aisle width. Each required off-street loading
space shall open directly upon an aisle or interior access drive with a width
of at least 35 feet and creating a total maneuvering area, inclusive of the
loading space, of at least 105 feet, unless subject to the provisions of
Article 4.11C below.



      (3)   Mane uvering. Each maneuvering area, aisle and interior
access drive shall be so designed and located as to provide safe and
efficient ingress/egress to each loading space and so that trucks do not back
from or into a public street, or onto an adjoining property (unless the
subject property and the adjoining property are located within the same
industrial park and such maneuvering area is subject to a recorded easement
allowing such maneuvering).







 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11C  DESIGN OF EXCESS LOADING AREAS.



   Any use which provides loading spaces at a rate of greater than four
loading spaces and more than two times the minimum required by this ordinance
shall provide a total maneuvering area of at least 105 feet which is separate
and distinct from the minimum aisle width requirement of 35 feet.



   Total Maneuvering Area



   (Excluding Loading Area)







 







   Alternate Design for Loading Areas



   Loading Space and Maneuvering Area as Approved by the Town Engineer



(Ord. 21-97, passed - - 1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11D  ALTERNATE DESIGN FOR LOADING AREAS.



   In those instances where insufficient area exists to provide for
perpendicular loading spaces as allowed by Article 4.11B above or Article
4.11C above, angled or parallel loading spaces may be proposed, provided:



      (1)   The design of such loading area shall include either a
one-way traffic pattern or orients the loading spaces so that traffic flow
from the loading spaces is in the direction of traffic movement on the side
of aisle on which the loading spaces are located;



      (2)   The loading spaces are accessed by an aisle or interior
access drive having a width of not less than 35 feet plus sufficient
maneuvering area outside of the aisle of the interior access drive, based
upon the angle of the loading spaces, to provide safe and efficient
maneuverability; and



      (3)   The design of such angled or parallel loading spaces
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11E  LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES.



      (1)   All loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the use served.



      (2)   All loading spaces shall be oriented toward a side or
rear lot line.



      (3)   No loading space shall be located between the front lot
line and the front line of any portion of the building served unless the
orientation of loading space development incentive is used per Article
5.4B(4)(a).



      (4)   No loading space shall be located in a required side or
rear yard or required side or rear bufferyard.



      (5)   Office, professional services, retail or other
non-industrial uses may provide one required loading space per building in a
“pull-off” loading area located adjacent to an interior access drive. A
“pull-off” loading area shall not be subject to the prohibition against
being located between the front lot line and front facade of any portion of
the building served set forth in Article 4.11E(3) above.







 



   Pull-Off Loading Area



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11F  USE OF REQUIRED LOADING AREAS.



   Space allocated for required or excess off-street loading spaces and
associated maneuverability shall not be used to satisfy off-street parking
space requirements.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11G  SURFACE OF LOADING AREAS.



   All off-street loading areas and the ingress/egress to and from such
off-street loading areas shall be hardsurfaced with asphalt, concrete or
other material to provide a dust-free surface. A gravel surface may be used
for a period not to exceed six months after the commencement of the use for
which the loading area is provided, where ground or weather conditions are
not immediately suitable for permanent surfacing as specified herein.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11H  MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES.



   Off-street loading spaces for all uses shall be provided in accordance
with the minimum requirements set forth in Table 4.11-A.



 


Table 4.11-A: Required Off-Street Loading




Use

 

Gross Floor Area of Building (Square Feet)*

 

Required Number of Loading Spaces





Industrial
 

< 10,000

 

0




10,000—40,000

 

1




40,000—100,000

 

2




100,000—200,000

 

3




Each additional 200,000 or portion thereof

 

1 additional



Office/professional service
 

< 20,000

 

0




20,000—100,000

 

1




100,000—200,000

 

2




Each additional 200,000 or portion thereof

 

1 additional



Other nonresidential
 

< 10,000

 

0




10,000—100,000

 

1




Each additional 100,000 or portion thereof

 

1 additional



Retail
 

< 10,000

 

0




10,000—25,000

 

1




25,000—60,000

 

2




60,000—120,000

 

3




Each additional 100,000 or portion thereof

 

1 additional





 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 4.11I  SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.



   The site design of any gasoline service station shall provide for the
safe and efficient ingress and egress to the site for fuel delivery vehicles
and an area for such fuel delivery vehicles to park while unloading which
does not interfere with or impede ingress or egress to or from any public
street.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



ARTICLE 4.12. ADDITIONAL FRONT, SIDE AND REAR SETBACK PROVISIONS



§ 4.12A  ADDITIONAL FRONT SETBACK PROVISIONS.



      (1)   Public streets.



         (a)   In the case where the Thoroughfare Plan does not
include a proposed right-of-way, or where the existing right-of-way is
greater than the proposed right-of-way, the existing right-of-way line shall
be used for setback measurement.



         (b)   1.   The setback provisions of this Article are
subject to the following modification.



            2.   In any block in any district contained in
this ordinance in which an existing front yard setback is established by
existing, legally established buildings or structures on more than 60% of the
total number of lots within the same block face fronting on the same public
street, the minimum required front yard setback for any new building,
structure or addition along such block face shall be the average of such
established front yards if such dimension is less than the minimum front yard
setback established by this ordinance.



         (c)   Any development permitted within a required front
yard or required front bufferyard shall be those specified in the “Use of
Minimum Yards and Bufferyards” sections of the applicable district.



      (2)   Private streets. The minimum front yard and minimum
building setback from the right-of-way line of a private street shall be the
same as for a local public street in the applicable district. Provided,
however:



         (a)   1.   The setback provisions of this Article are
subject to the following modification.



            2.   In any block in any district contained in
this ordinance in which an existing front yard setback is established by
existing, legally established buildings or structures on more than 60% of the
total number of lots within the same block face fronting on the same private
street, the minimum required front yard setback for any new building,
structure or addition along such block face shall be the average of such
established front yards if such dimension is less than the minimum front yard
setback established by this ordinance.



         (b)   Any development permitted within a required front
yard or required front bufferyard shall be those specified in the “Use of
Minimum Yards and Bufferyards” sections of the applicable District.



      (3)   Double frontage lots.



         (a)   Limited access street rights-of-way. That portion
of a double frontage lot located in a residential district which abuts any
limited access street right-of-way shall be subject to setback and other
requirements of this ordinance applicable to minimum rear yards.



         (b)   All other streets. That portion of a double
frontage lot which abuts any perimeter street in which a “non-access
easement” is provided for by a properly approved and recorded plat shall be
subject to setback and other requirements of this ordinance applicable to
minimum rear yards.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011)



§ 4.12B  SIDE AND REAR YARD EXCEPTIONS.



   The minimum side and rear yard setback requirements for a lot
containing a single-family or two- family dwelling in a residential district
shall be subject to the following exceptions.



      (1)   A legally established nonconforming, detached, accessory
garage may be reconstructed on an existing foundation even though such
reconstruction would not comply with required side or rear yards, provided
such reconstruction does not interfere with a vision clearance area or
encroach into any right-of-way.



      (2)   A legally established nonconforming single-family or
two-family dwelling may be enlarged or extended one time (except where the
provisions in Article 9.1M would apply) along a legally established
nonconforming side yard provided that the lineal footage of such enlargement
or extension does not exceed 50% of the lineal footage of the original
dimension of the single-family or two-family dwelling along that side
setback, also provided such enlargement or extension does not interfere with
a vision clearance area or encroach into any right-of-way.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011)



§ 4.12C  SETBACK EXCEPTION; LATERALLY-SUPPORTED EXTENSIONS.



   Laterally-supported extensions, such as canopies, eaves, cornices, bay
windows or roof overhangs, may extend a maximum of 24 inches into any
required front, side or rear yard or required front, side or rear bufferyard.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011)



§ 4.12D  EXCEPTIONS FOR SETBACKS ALONG ALLEYS.



   All setbacks from alleys shall be equivalent to the side setback for
the appropriate district.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 06-2011,
passed 6-13-2011)



ARTICLE 4.13. REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PRIVATE STREETS AND PRIVATE ALLEYS



§ 4.13  REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL PRIVATE STREETS AND PRIVATE ALLEYS.



   All private streets and private alleys, when specifically authorized
for use by grant of variance, grant of development incentive or subdivision
waiver, shall be developed to the following standards.



      (1)   Pavement width for private streets . Minimum pavement
width available for through traffic (i.e., exclusive of parking spaces):



         (a)   Residential districts.



 


1-way traffic, no parking

 

12 ft.



1-way traffic, parking on one or both sides
 

24 ft.



2-way traffic, no parking
 

20 ft.



2-way traffic, parking on one or both sides
 

24 ft.




 



         (b)   Commercial or industrial districts.



 


1-way traffic, no parking

 

18 ft.



1-way traffic, parking on one or both sides
 

30 ft.



2-way traffic, no parking
 

24 ft.



2-way traffic, parking on one or both sides
 

36 ft.




 



      (2)   Pavement width for private alleys. Minimum pavement
width for that portion of a private alley available for through traffic
(i.e., exclusive of parking spaces):



 


Commercial or industrial districts

 

18 ft.



Residential districts
 

15 ft.




 



      (3)   Depth and materials. Minimum pavement depth and
materials for through traffic widths as noted in Article 4.13(1) above,
exclusive of parking areas, shall be those required by the town standards for
public streets, provided, however, curbing shall not be required.



      (4)   Emergency vehicles. The geometric design of private
streets or private alleys shall provide for either the through movement or
turn-around movement of emergency vehicles. Turn-around design may include
cul-de-sac, hammerhead or other design approved by the Town Engineer and Fire
Marshal of the town.



      (5)   Maintenance/services. Prior to the issuance of an
improvement location permit or obtaining secondary plat approval, the
developer or subdivider shall file documentary assurances with the town that
all lots served by the private streets or private alleys shall be provided
with the following services: regular trash pick-up; leaf pick-up; snow
removal; daily mail delivery service; roadway maintenance and repair,
including, but not limited to, driving surface, roadway subgrade, subsurface
drainage, roadside drainage, curbs, sidewalks, street lights, street name
signs, traffic control signs, and traffic control signals; and powers to
enforce speed control and parking regulations. Such services shall be
provided in accordance with the specifications approved by the Plan
Commission, which shall include the establishment of a maintenance fund or
escrow account by the developer or subdivider, which may be supplemented by
regular or special assessments against each lot owner provided such
assessments are at reasonable and non-discriminatory rate of charge. Such
documentary assurances shall be incorporated into the applicable final plat
that is recorded in the office of the Recorder of the county, or otherwise
provided for through legally binding perpetual agreements as approved by the
Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 03-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 4.14. VISION CLEARANCE AREAS



§ 4.14  VISION CLEARANCE AREAS.



   (A)   No building, structure or improvement, including landscaping,
shall be erected, placed, planted or maintained so as to interfere with a
vision clearance area located between the heights of two and one-half feet
and nine feet above the crown of a street, driveway or alley.



   (B)   A vision clearance area shall be established for all streets,
whether public or private, in one of the following manners:



      (1)   At the intersection of streets, vision clearance areas
are formed at each corner by the street right-of-way lines and a line
connecting points on the right-of-way lines located 25 feet away from the
intersection of such street right-of-way lines. In the case of a round or
corner-cut right-of-way, the measurement shall be taken from the intersection
of the right-of-way lines extended; or



      (2)   At the intersection of a street with a driveway or
alley, vision clearance areas shall be formed by the intersection of the
street right-of-way line and the driveway surface edge or the right-of-way of
the alley and a line connecting points ten feet street right-of-way line and
the driveway surface from the intersection of such edge or alley right-of-way.







 







 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - - 1997)



ARTICLE 4.15. COMMITMENTS REQUIRED BY THE PLAN COMMISSION



§ 4.15A  COMMITMENTS.



   (A)   The Plan Commission may, when in the discretion of the Plan
Commission it is deemed necessary to:



      (1)   Assure the compatibility of a proposed development with
surrounding properties; or



      (2)   To minimize the potential for the occurrence of
detrimental affects from any attributes of a proposed development on
surrounding properties, require or permit the owner of a parcel of property
to make written commitments concerning the use or development of the subject
property in connection with a development plan approval as provided for in
this ordinance, or in connection with recommending approval of a zone map
change to any zoning district classification contained in this ordinance to
the Town Council as a condition of development.



   (B)   (1)   The commitments shall be reduced to writing in
recordable form and signed by the owner(s) of the real estate.



      (2)   The commitments shall be in effect for:



         (a)   As long as the real estate to which they apply
remains zoned to the classification to which the real estate was zoned when
the commitments were made; or



         (b)   Modified or terminated as provided below.



      (3)   The commitments shall authorize their recording by staff
in the office of the Recorder of the county upon the final approval of the
zone map change by the Town Council. Following the recording of the
commitments, staff shall return the original recorded commitments to
petitioner and shall retain a copy of the recorded commitments in its file.



   (C)   The Plan Commission, owners of all parcels of ground adjoining
the real estate and all owners of real estate within the area included in the
petition who were not petitioners for approval, and other specially affected
persons designated in such commitments shall be entitled to enforce such
commitments pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-1015 or as otherwise provided by
applicable law.



   (D)   The commitments required by the Plan Commission shall be in
substantially the form set forth in Exhibit A of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 4.15B  MODIFICATION OF COMMITMENTS BY THE PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   Commitments required or permitted by the Plan Commission may
be modified or terminated by a decision of the Plan Commission, made at a
public hearing after notice to adjoining owners has been given pursuant to
the rules of procedure of the Plan Commission.



   (B)   Any modification or termination of the commitments shall not
be effective until:



      (1)   Reduced to writing;



      (2)   Approved by the Plan Commission;



      (3)   Executed and notarized by the present owner(s) of the
real estate; and



      (4)   Recorded in the office of the Recorder of the county.



   (C)   The modification or termination of commitments shall be in
substantially the form set forth in Exhibit B of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 4.16. OUTDOOR DISPLAY STANDARDS



§ 4.16A  APPLICABILITY.



      (1)   For any retail establishment within 600 feet of a
Gateway Corridor or residential district, merchandise may be displayed and
stored outdoors in the open air for sale to customers in areas immediately
adjacent to the primary structure without a special exception subject to the
following standards:



         (a)   Must be located within 12 feet of the foundation
of the front, side or rear facade of the primary structure if not enclosed;



         (b)   If enclosed by a 24 to 36 inch wall, must be
within 20 feet of the foundation of the front facade of the primary structure;



         (c)   If adjacent to the side of the primary structure,
must be fully enclosed and screened by a wall eight feet tall. Any
merchandise that can be seen above the wall shall be screened by an opaque
surface;



         (d)   The above walls shall be constructed of the
primary building material of the primary structure;



         (e)   If located adjacent to a bufferyard and a
residential district, must be screened by a fence, wall or Level 5 perimeter
landscaping per Article 4.7;



         (f)   The maximum height of merchandise either stacked
on pallets or freestanding shall be five feet (trees are exempt);



         (g)   Items such as vending machines, ice machines and
propane displays must be flush with the facade of the primary or accessory
structure on an impervious surface such as asphalt or concrete. These items
shall not interfere or impede pedestrian pathways such as sidewalks or
entrances;



         (h)   Vending machines or merchandise that hangs from a
canopy, such as hanging plants, are exempt from the height restriction;



         (i)   Merchandise shall not block or impede a pedestrian
way such as a sidewalk or entrance. A five-foot wide pathway shall be
maintained at all times; and



         (j)   Cannot be located in any front, side or rear yard
or bufferyard.



      (2)   In order to display and store merchandise outdoors in
the open air for sale to customers within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor or
residential district in an area not adjacent to the primary structure, or a
distance of more than 30 feet from the foundation of the primary structure, a
special exception must be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals subject to
the following standards:



         (a)   The total area allocated for outdoor display for
either the permanent display of merchandise or for temporary seasonal sales
items cannot exceed more than 10% of the gross floor area (GFA) for the
primary structure;



         (b)   The total amount of merchandise displayed cannot
exceed more than 10% of the gross floor area for the primary structure in
cubic yards;



         (c)   The location of the outdoor display area cannot be
within any front, side or rear yard or bufferyard;



         (d)   If the outdoor display area is located within a
parking area, there shall be enough remaining parking spaces to satisfy the
off-street parking area requirement for the primary structure, or for the
integrated center, whichever is less;



         (e)   If merchandise is displayed in bulk form stacked
on a pallet, the maximum height shall be five feet (trees are exempt);



         (f)   Stacked items shall be kept in an orderly and neat
fashion at all times;



         (g)   If vehicular access is allowed within the outdoor
display area, the required maneuvering aisle width shall be maintained at all
times free from merchandise and debris;



         (h)   Required maneuvering aisles or interior access
drives shall not be obstructed;



         (i)   Outdoor display does not include vehicles
displayed for a new or used dealership; and



         (j)   If located adjacent to a bufferyard and a
residential district, must be screened by a fence, wall or Level 5 perimeter
landscaping per Article 4.7.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



ARTICLE 4.17. OUTDOOR SEATING/DINING STANDARDS



§ 4.17A  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these standards are to allow outdoor seating/dining for
restaurants, bars or taverns in the GC General Commercial, TC Town Center, OD
Office District and NR Neighborhood Retail or PUD Zoning Districts to ensure
the public safety, health and general welfare of the community.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 4.17B  PROCEDURES.



      (1)   No outdoor seating/dining shall be allowed without the
issuance of an improvement location permit (ILP). If for new construction,
the outdoor seating/dining area shall be delineated with the ILP for the new
structure. If for an existing structure, an ILP shall be filed as required by
Article II of this ordinance.



      (2)   No outdoor seating/dining shall be allowed without the
issuance of a license agreement as required by ordinance if to be located in
the TC Town Center District and to be located within the town’s
right-of-way for pedestrian access (sidewalk) or an alley.



      (3)   License agreements required for areas in the TC Town
Center District shall be renewed on an annual basis.



      (4)   License agreements are subject to review and approval by
the Town Council.



      (5)   All outdoor seating/dining areas are subject to review
and approval by the Design Review Committee and the Plan Commission.



      (6)   To allow the sale of alcoholic beverages within an
outdoor seating/dining area, the establishment must have an approved liquor
license from the state and the county and a special exception granted by the
Town Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 4.17C  STANDARDS.



      (1)   An outdoor seating/dining area shall be within an
enclosed area delineated by a barrier on an impervious surface.



      (2)   Outdoor seating/dining areas may not be located within
pedestrian clear zones at corners of street intersections. Clear zones are
areas measured 25 feet in each direction at the corner of the intersection
from the mid-radius of the curb.



      (3)   Outdoor seating/dining areas shall not impede pedestrian
traffic. A five foot wide, clear pedestrian path shall be maintained at all
times.



      (4)   Outdoor seating/dining areas shall not be located within
any required front, side or rear yard setback or bufferyard.



      (5)   Outdoor seating/dining shall not interfere with
entrances or means of ingress/egress to the primary building.



      (6)   At least one trash receptacle shall be located within
the outdoor seating/dining area. Trash receptacles shall be emptied as needed
and never allowed to overflow.



      (7)   More than one unobstructed means of egress shall be
maintained at all times.



      (8)   All tables, chairs and umbrellas used for outdoor
seating/dining must be located entirely within the demarcated outdoor
seating/dining area as delineated by barriers.



      (9)   No tables or chairs may be stored or stacked within
outdoor seating/dining areas.



      (10)   Access width: any access opening must measure no less
than 44 inches in width.



      (11)   If located adjacent to a bufferyard or a residential
district, shall be screened by a wall or fence six feet tall. The wall shall
be constructed of the primary building material of the primary building.



      (12)   If located adjacent to a bufferyard or a residential
district, there shall be no excessive noise at any time.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 4.17D  BARRIERS.



      (1)   Required. A detectable barrier is required for the
leading edge of all outdoor seating/dining areas. The leading edge is defined
as the section of a outdoor seating/dining area that is at or near a
perpendicular angle to the building wall and or curb line.



      (2)   Barrier types.



         (a)   Rope or chain barrier. The rope or chain must have
a minimum diameter of one inch. Height cannot exceed 27 inches when measured
12 inches or more from the supporting post.



         (b)   Vertical support posts. Must be made of wood or
metal and if a stanchion base is used, it must be flat and be no more than
one-half inch above grade.



         (c)   Fence or wall height. Shall be between 36 and 42
inches in height.



         (d)   Fence. The fence material shall be metal.



         (e)   Wall. Walls must brick or other masonry type
product matching the primary building in material and color.



         (f)   Planters. May not exceed 36 inches in height above
grade of the surface. Artificial plants are not allowed. Plants may not
exceed a height of eight feet.



         (g)   Fabric inserts and chain-link fences. Fabric
inserts and chain-link fences are not permitted barrier types. Materials not
specifically manufactured for fencing or pedestrian control are not allowed
(i.e., buckets, tree stumps, food containers and the like).



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 4.17E  FURNITURE.



      (1)   Furniture shall be of a high quality and kept clean and
in good condition at all times.



      (2)   Furniture must be freestanding and not secured to trees,
fixtures or infrastructure.



      (3)   Only tables, chairs and umbrellas are allowed within
outdoor seating/dining areas. No service stations, bars, counters, shelves,
racks, sofas and the like are allowed.



      (4)   The use of heating devices, the number and their
locations must be approved by the town’s Fire Marshal. No heating devices
are allowed in the Town Center District adjacent to Main Street.



      (5)   Umbrellas: no umbrellas are allowed adjacent to Main
Street in the Town Center District on sidewalks.



         (a)   Umbrellas must be entirely within defined outdoor
seating/dining areas and not allowed to overhang such area.



         (b)   Umbrellas must maintain a height of seven feet
when extended and cannot be higher than ten feet.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 4.17F  TOWN CENTER STANDARDS ALONG MAIN STREET ON SIDEWALKS.



      (1)   No outdoor seating/dining area may be located closer
than five feet from the curb.



      (2)   Outdoor seating/dining areas may not be located within
pedestrian clear zones at corners of street intersections. Clear zones are
areas measured 25 feet in each direction at the corner of the intersection
from the mid-radius of the curb.



      (3)   For areas along Main Street, the maximum number of
tables allowed is two per establishment.



      (4)   The maximum number of chairs allowed per table is four.



      (5)   The outdoor seating/dining area can be no more than 10%
of the total gross floor area of the business.



      (6)   The floor of the outdoor seating/dining area shall be
uncovered sidewalk.



(Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



ARTICLE 4.18  RESERVED



ARTICLE 4.19  OUTDOOR PRODUCT DISPLAY IN THE I-2 AND I-3 ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 4.19A  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      (1)   PRODUCT shall refer to items manufactured on, assembled
on, and/or shipped from the site. The Director of Planning and Zoning shall
determine whether a requested product is germane.



         The following are examples of items that are not considered
PRODUCT:



         (a)   Inoperable vehicles, inoperable equipment, or
other items typically stored in a junk yard or salvage area.



         (b)   Donation, recycling, drop boxes, or other similar
appurtenances.



         (c)   Automated teller or vending machines.



         (d)   Passenger, delivery, or other commercial vehicles



         (e)   Wearing apparel.



         (f)   Highly flammable or toxic materials.



         (g)   Merchandise with wind movable parts and appendages.



         (h)   Any item that is for retail sale on site.



      (2)   PRODUCT DISPLAY shall refer to the approved outdoor
display of product(s) through the Improvement location permit process by the
Director of Planning and Zoning.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19B  LOCATION.



      (1)   Outdoor product displays shall not be located so as to
interfere or conflict with walks, required parking areas, required loading
areas, driveways, interior access drives, interior access driveways,
perimeter landscape yards or foundation plantings.



      (2)   Outdoor product displays shall be in an area noted in an
approved improvement location permit as “Display Area”.



      (3)   Outdoor product displays shall not be located in a
required yard or required bufferyard.



      (4)   Outdoor product displays shall have a clearance of at
least five feet from any walk, parking space, or drive.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19C  PROCEDURE.



   An outdoor product display area shall not be constructed or utilized
without the approval of an improvement location permit by the Director of
Planning and Zoning. The Director shall have the discretion to impose
reasonable conditions in conjunction with said approval. The Director shall
have the authority to void any improvement location permit for noncompliance.
The Plainfield Design Review Committee (DRC) may be consulted for better
design.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19D  SETBACKS.



      (1)   Front yard. Must comply with the primary structure front
yard setback for the zoning district.



      (2)   Side and rear yard. Must comply with the primary
structure setback for the zoning district.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19E  SIZE.



      (1)   The cumulative area of all outdoor displays shall not
exceed 3,600 square feet.



      (2)   The appropriate height of the display area shall be
determined by considering the size of the item(s) to be displayed, the
proportion of the display area to the building, and the location of the
display area on the site.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19F  SURFACE.



   Outdoor product display areas shall be surfaced using concrete or
asphaltic concrete. No display of product vehicles shall occur on organic
material, gravel, or rock surfaces.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19G  LANDSCAPING.



   A minimum four foot wide landscape buffer shall be provided that
consists of 0.15 PUV for every ten feet of perimeter around three sides of
the outdoor product display area.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19H  ILLUMINATION.



   See Article 7.8.C.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 4.19I  PRODUCT DISPLAY STANDARDS.



      (1)   The product display area must be constructed to
withstand overturning by wind or contact. The display shall not be
permanently affixed to any utility poles, signs, light poles, and/or trees.



      (2)   All product display areas shall be continuously
maintained in a state of order, security, safety, and repair. The display
surface shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free of rust, corrosion,
protruding tacks, nails, and/or wires. Any cracked or broken surfaces, or
other unmaintained or damaged portions of a display shall be repaired or
replaced or removed immediately.



      (3)   The use of plazas for outdoor product display is
encouraged.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 5.1. DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES



§ 5.1A  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this Article to provide incentives to developers
which encourage: creativity and imagination in the process of development;
efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open space; variety in physical
development patterns; and special considerations for property with
outstanding features (i.e., historical significance, unusual topography,
landscape amenities, size and shape).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 5.1B  GENERAL PROCEDURES.



      (1)   Within each zoning district contained in this ordinance
which refers to development incentives, there shall be two opportunities
available for development:



         (a)   Any development which demonstrates full compliance
with the permitted use and development standards section of that district
shall be entitled to the issuance of an improvement location permit; or



         (b)   Any development which desires to take advantage of
the development incentives set forth in this Article, shall file for and
obtain development plan approval from the Plan Commission or Director, as
specified for each development incentive, prior to the issuance of an
improvement location permit.



      (2)   If, at any point in the approval process of a
development plan, the petitioner elects to forgo the pursuit of development
plan approval, the petitioner shall be allowed to withdraw the application
for development plan approval and apply for an improvement location permit in
full compliance with the permitted use and development standards section of
that district and the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 5.1C  WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   To accomplish the purpose of this Article, the Plan
Commission or Director, as appropriate, may approve a waiver of the
development requirements specified for that district to the extent provided
for in this Article.



      (2)   All development requirements and development standards
of this ordinance and the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver
provision is not provided for in this Article shall remain applicable unless
a variance of this ordinance is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals or
waiver of the Subdivision Control Ordinance is granted by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 5.2. DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES IN R-1, R-2 AND R-3 DISTRICTS



§ 5.2  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES IN R-1, R-2 AND R-3 DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following development incentives are available for the
development of single-family dwelling subdivisions in the R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts. The following development incentives are not available for the
development in the R-4 or R-5 Districts.



   (B)   All development plans which utilize the development incentives
specified below in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts shall be filed for review
and approval by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2A  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   Project area (minimum size of overall subdivision). The
minimum acreage for any overall subdivision to be developed utilizing the
provision of this Article shall be five acres.



      (2)   Project density. The overall maximum number of lots
within an overall subdivision to be developed pursuant to this Article shall
remain the same as that permitted by developing the same real estate into
developable lots in full compliance with all zoning, health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations applicable to such real
estate.



      (3)   Water and sewer availability. Attachment to public water
and sanitary sewer facilities shall be mandatory for any overall subdivision
to be developed pursuant to this Article.



      (4)   Public streets/individual lot access. Each lot within an
overall subdivision developed pursuant to this Article shall be served by:



         (a)   Public streets; or



         (b)   Private streets, where each such private street:



            1.   Is designed and built to town standards for
depth and materials;



            2.   Is designed so as to provide adequate
maneuverability and access for school buses, fire trucks and other emergency
vehicle access; and



            3.   Is approved by the Plan Commission as a
waiver of the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



      (5)   Project open space. The amount of permanent open space
created by the development of an overall single-family dwelling subdivision
pursuant to this Article shall be equivalent to, or more than, the total
reduction in area contained within developable lots based upon a comparison
of Sketch Plan One and Sketch Plan Two as required by Article 5.2E below.



      (6)   Compliance with Residential Design Guidelines. Each
subdivision shall demonstrate compliance with the following provisions of the
Town of Plainfield Residential Design Guidelines:



         (a)   Section 2 - Single-Family and Two-Family
Guidelines;



         (b)   Section 4 - Open Space;



         (c)   Section 5 - Vehicular Design and Pedestrian
Circulation; and



         (d)   Section 7 - Building Materials and Craftsmanship.



      (7)   Compliance with other applicable laws. Each subdivision
shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable development standards of the
zoning district and Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver is not
otherwise provided for in this Article.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2B  WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN R-1, R-2 AND R-3 DISTRICTS.



   Individual lots within an overall subdivision that receives development
plan approval from the Plan Commission to be developed pursuant to this
Article may be granted a waiver of the development requirements specified in
this ordinance to the extent permitted below:



      (1)   Minimum lot area, except as provided below.



         (a)   The minimum lot area requirements shall remain
applicable to all lots which abut the perimeter of a subdivision section.



         (b)   The minimum lot area for all lots which do not
abut the perimeter of a subdivision section may be reduced in area up to the
extent provided for below:



 


District

 
Minimum Lot Area


R-1
 
20,000 sq. ft.


R-2
 
10,000 sq. ft


R-3
 
7,000 sq. ft.



 



         (c)   When a minimum lot area requirement is reduced as
provided for in this Article for the first tier of lots in from the perimeter
of a subdivision, a provision shall be made for a landscape and buffering
area of not less than:



            1.   Fifty feet in dimension between said first
tier of lots and any perimeter street; or



            2.   Thirty feet in dimension between said first
tier of lots and the perimeter of that portion of the overall subdivision for
which this waiver is being requested, with landscaping and buffering details
equivalent to a Level 5 (see Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions) and as
approved by the Plan Commission in connection with the approval of a
development plan pursuant to this Article.



      (2)   Minimum lot width, except as provided below.



         (a)   The minimum lot width requirements shall remain
applicable to all lots which abut the perimeter of a subdivision section.



         (b)   The minimum lot width for all lots which do not
abut the perimeter of a subdivision section may be reduced in area up to the
extent provided for below:



 


District

 
Minimum Lot Width



R-1

 

80 ft.




R-2

 

70 ft.




R-3

 

60 ft.




 



         (c)   When a minimum lot width requirement is reduced as
provided for in this Article for the first tier of lots in from the perimeter
of a subdivision, a provision shall be made for a landscape and buffering
area of not less than:



            1.   Fifty feet in dimension between said first
tier of lots and any perimeter street; or



            2.   Thirty feet in dimension between said first
tier of lots and the perimeter of that portion of the overall subdivision for
which this waiver is being requested, with landscaping and buffering details
equivalent to a Level 5 (see Article 4.7 - Landscape Provisions) and as
approved by the Plan Commission in connection with the approval of a
development plan pursuant to this Article.



      (3)   Minimum front yard, except as provided below.



         (a)   The minimum front yard requirements may be reduced
as follows:



            1.   To 25 feet for any portion of a structure
with a front loading garage; or



            2.   To 15 feet for any portion of a structure
containing finished floor area or a side-loaded garage.



         (b)   In those subdivisions where, in the determination
of the Plan Commission, the product type may present a similar or repetitive
appearance from lot to lot, a provision shall be provided on the plat or
through other legally binding documents satisfactory to the Plan Commission,
to:



            1.   Create a variable build-to line; or



            2.   Assure significant variation will exist in
the design and appearance of adjacent single-family dwelling units;



      (4)   Maximum lot coverage, except as provided below. The
maximum lot coverage may not exceed:



 


District

 
Maximum % of Lot Coverage



R-1

 

30%




R-2

 

35%




R-3

 

40%




 



      (5)   Minimum side yard and aggregate side yard requirements.



         (a)   The minimum side yard and aggregate side yard
requirements may be reduced in compliance with the following:



 


District

 
Minimum Side Yard
 
Aggregate Side Yard



R-1

 

5 ft.

 

20 ft.




R-2

 

5 ft.

 

15 ft.




R-3

 

0 ft.

 

15 ft. (between buildings)




 



         (b)   Provided, however, where a minimum side yard of
less than five feet is approved, a procedure shall be provided, recorded and
maintained as part of the secondary plat for the continual maintenance of
that portion of any structure that is located within five feet of the side
yard.



      (6)   Minimum rear yard requirements. The minimum rear yard
requirements of the applicable zoning district shall remain applicable to all
lots.



      (7)   Lot frontage on a public street. The requirement for lot
frontage on a public street and for each lot to gain direct access from said
public street or an abutting alley may be waived to allow for direct access
from a lot to a private street or private alley.



      (8)   Compliance. The requirement for each single-family
dwelling to demonstrate compliance with the Town of Plainfield Residential
Design Guidelines may be waived to allow for the provision of: alternate
architectural embellishments or building design features; alternate open
space accommodations; alternate vehicular design and pedestrian circulation
accommodations; or alternate building materials which are determined by the
Plan Commission to be superior to the recommendations of the Town of
Plainfield Residential Design Guidelines.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2C  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROJECT OPEN SPACE.



      (1)   The open space created by any development which utilizes
the provisions of this Article shall be:



         (a)   Preserved in its naturally occurring state;



         (b)   Developed only to the extent required to provide
for:



            1.   The passive recreational activities of
walking, biking, hiking, picnicking;



            2.   Developed and maintained as landscape
features including, but not limited to, common areas, landscape easements and
boulevard entry ways; and



            3.   Other recreational or amenity features
approved by the Plan Commission.



         (c)   Developed into an active recreational area; and



         (d)   If the project is located adjacent to any portion
of the Greenway Plan as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, a direct linkage
to such greenway from the open space shall be provided.



      (2)   The development of such open space shall be subject to
the following additional requirements:



         (a)   Land area devoted to a perimeter landscape and
buffering area as required above by Article 5.2B(1) for a lot area waiver or
by Article 5.2B(2) for a lot width waiver, shall not qualify as open space
under this Article 5.2C - General Requirements for Project Open Space or
under Article 5.2D - Calculation of Open Space.



         (b)   At least 75% of the total open space created by
development pursuant to this Article shall consist of tracts of land at least
50 feet wide in its smallest dimension;



         (c)   The open space shall be accessible to all owners
or residents within the subdivision or project, and their guests, by way of
sidewalk, footpath or combined walkway/bikeway; and



         (d)   At least 50% of the open space created by the
development of an overall subdivision pursuant to this Article shall be
either:



            1.   Preserved in its natural state;



            2.   Utilized for passive recreational activities;
or



            3.   Maintained as landscape features.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2D  CALCULATION OF OPEN SPACE.



   Open space shall be calculated by taking the total land area within
lots contained in Sketch Plan One (as defined below) and subtracting the
total land area within lots contained in Sketch Plan Two (as defined below).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2E  PLAN DOCUMENTATION AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION.



   All requests for development plan approval within the R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts pursuant to this Article shall include the following:



      (1)   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict the
development of the overall subdivision in full compliance with all use and
development standards of the applicable zoning district and all other
applicable health, flood control and subdivision laws, ordinances and
regulations of the town.



      (2)   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict the
development of the overall subdivision pursuant to this Article.



      (3)   Development plans.



         (a)   Development plans shall contain a proposed
breakdown of sections to be contained in the overall subdivision.



         (b)   Section One of such overall subdivision shall
include an amount of open space equivalent to, or more than, the total
reduction in lot area contained within developable lots within that Section
One of the overall subdivision and shall be the first section of the
subdivision to be developed.



         (c)   Any subsequent section of the subdivision may
utilize the “excess” permanent open space created and existing in Section
One (and all prior sections) of such subdivision to provide for lot area
reductions within that subsequent section provided that the total amount of
open space remains equivalent to, or more than, the total reduction in lot
area contained within developable lots within all approved sections of the
subdivision (including the section in question).



      (4)   Open space. Documentary evidence of the provision of
open space in a manner and amount equal to or in excess of that required by
this Article shall be provide either in written format or in tabular format
incorporated into Sketch Plan Two above.



      (5)   Residential design guidelines. Documentary evidence,
through the provision of: typical building elevations; typical building
renderings; photographic and text explanations of architectural details;
overall site plan; material samples; manufacturer specifications; written
commitments; or proposed covenants, to demonstrate compliance with the Town
of Plainfield Residential Design Guidelines.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2F  MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE.



   Prior to obtaining secondary plat approval, the petitioner shall file
documentary assurances with the town that the permanent dedication and
continuous maintenance of open space shall be made in accordance with the
development plan approved by the Plan Commission, and that the common areas
and recreation areas shall be made available to the residents of the overall
subdivision at a reasonable and non-discriminatory rate of charge. Such
documentary assurances shall be incorporated into the secondary plat that is
recorded in the office of the County Recorder or otherwise provided for
through legally binding perpetual agreements as approved by the Plan
Commission. Such open space shall perpetually run with the subdivision
section and shall not be developed or separated from the subdivision section
at a later date (unless no development of any portion of the overall
subdivision which utilizes the open space contained within that subdivision
section for the purpose of lot area reductions has occurred and the entire
area subject to the subdivision section is presented for replat).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2G  SERVICES FOR PRIVATE DRIVES.



   Prior to obtaining secondary plat approval, the petitioner shall file
documentary assurances with the town that all residences served by private
drives shall be provided with the following services: regular trash pick-up;
leaf pick-up; snow removal; daily mail delivery service; roadway maintenance
and repair, including, but not limited to, driving surface, roadway subgrade,
subsurface drainage, roadside drainage, curbs, sidewalks, street lights,
street name signs, traffic control signs, and traffic control signals; and
powers to enforce speed control and parking regulations. Such services shall
be provided in accordance with the specifications approved by the Plan
Commission, which shall include the establishment of a maintenance fund or
escrow account by the petitioner, which may be supplemented by regular or
special assessments against each lot owner provided such assessments are at
reasonable and non-discriminatory rate of charge. Such documentary assurances
shall be incorporated into the secondary plat that is recorded in the office
of the County Recorder or otherwise provided for through legally binding
perpetual agreements as approved by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.2H  FINDINGS.



   The Plan Commission may approve a development plan (and thereby grant
the waivers requested by the petitioner) indicating compliance with this
Article only upon finding that:



      (1)   The use or value of area properties will not be
adversely affected;



      (2)   The proposed development will be in compliance with the
applicable development requirements and general requirements for project open
space;



      (3)   The proposed development has demonstrated the use of
building design features and site layout consistent with the intent and
recommendations of the Town of Plainfield Residential Design Guidelines;



      (4)   The proposed development is appropriate to the site and
its surroundings; and



      (5)   The proposed development is consistent with the intent
and purpose of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 5.3. DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN
REVIEW IN THE R-6 DISTRICT



§ 5.3  DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN REVIEW
IN THE R-6 DISTRICT.



   In order to promote innovation and creativity in the design of the
built environment and to mitigate the impacts of high density multi-family
dwelling projects, all development located within the R-6 District shall be
subject to the approval of a development plan by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.3A  PROJECTS WITH A GROSS DENSITY OF UP TO 8.0 DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE.



   Any proposed multi-family dwelling project located in the R-6 District
which contains up to 8.0 dwelling units per acre shall provide the
architectural and site design features specified in this Article 5.3A.



      (1)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval submitted under the Article 5.3A shall
include a site plan, building elevations, landscape plan, sign plan and
lighting plan as specified in Article 5.7 below, demonstrating compliance
with the provisions of this Article.



      (2)   Development requirements. All multi-family dwelling
projects in the R-6 District which are proposed comply with the development
standards set forth in Article 2.7B shall provide architectural and site
design features as specified below:



         (a)   Required multi-family dwelling architectural
features.



            1.   Required architectural features. All
buildings, including community building/club house, storage buildings,
maintenance buildings, garages, carports and buildings containing dwelling
units shall utilize a minimum of two of the following five architectural
features:



               a.   Building materials shall comply with
the following:



                  i.   All brick or stone veneer
supplemented with significant use of architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like);



                  ii.   Multiple building materials with
the primary building material being brick, fieldstone, limestone, marble,
granite and comprising a minimum of:



                     A.   Eighty-five percent of the
area of each elevation for a one-story elevation;



                     B.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation for a two-story elevation; or



                     C.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation and 60% of the total area of each
elevation for more than two-story elevations. (Note: elevation wall area is
exclusive of window or door areas.)



                  iii.   In the case of multiple
building materials, secondary building should comprise a minimum of 10% of
the elevation area. Recommended secondary materials include: textured block,
architectural pre-cast concrete, concrete composite siding, wood clapboard
siding, wood beaded siding, stucco, E.F.I.S. and the like.



               b.   Multiple surface textures (e.g., rough,
striated, imprinted and the like);



               c.   Facade or elevation modulations (e.g.,
building offsets of at least two feet in depth for every 40 feet of building
wall length);



               d.   Architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like); or



               e.   Multiple colors (i.e., the use of a
maximum of three discernable colors, with primary color constituting a
minimum of 60% of the applicable elevation and the secondary color
constituting a minimum of 10% of the applicable elevation) on each exterior
wall surface.



            2.   Additional architectural features for
multi-family townhouses. Townhouse developments shall utilize the following
architectural features:



               a.   i.   The roof of each dwelling unit
shall be distinct from the roof of adjacent dwelling units either through:
separation of roof pitches; varying the direction of roof pitches; inclusion
of dormers; or other variation in roof design; or



                  ii.   Each dwelling unit is designed
with a covered front porch occupying a minimum of 50% of the overall width of
the dwelling unit.



               b.    All garages, carports or other
off-street parking areas reserved for the owners or occupants of the
townhouse dwelling units, whether attached or detached, shall be provided
with rear access from an adjoining public or private alley.







 



Multi-Family Townhouse with Covered Front Porch







 



M ulti-Family T ownhouses with R oof Lines Changes







 



A lley Access to Townhouse Garages



            3.   Mechanical equipment. In order to minimize
the negative visual impact associated with the location of mechanical
equipment (e.g., HVAC systems and related components; pedestals for
electrical, telephone or cable service; above-ground water and gas utility
meters; and the like) in required yards, on buildings or adjacent to
buildings, mechanical equipment shall be screened as follows.



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon an elevation view of the
building on all sides.



               b.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides by: the building; screen
walls or fences of a material and color which is compatible with the primary
building; or evergreen or densely twigged hedge plants (with or without
mounding) of a height at time of planting which is not less than the height
of the mechanical equipment being screened.



         (b)   Site design features required. The site design
features listed below shall be utilized in all multi-family dwelling projects
in the R-6 District which are not requesting any development incentives
regarding gross density, use of interior yards or perimeter yards, maximum
building height or the number of stories containing dwelling units:



            1.   The project shall include a community
building/club house featuring two or more common recreational facilities
including, but not limited to, a swimming pool, hot tub, tennis court,
basketball court, lounge area, multi-purpose room, game room and the like
which are appropriate to the project;



            2.   a.   The project shall include a walkway
or pedestrian/bikeway system complying with the following requirements as
part of the site design:



                  i.   Shall functionally connect front
doors or primary building entries with planned or existing public sidewalks
on each public street frontage of the multi- family dwelling project;



                  ii.   Shall provide a direct linkage
to any planned or existing town greenway which abuts or is adjacent to the
multi-family dwelling project.



                  iii.   Shall provide a direct and
functional connection from the front doors or primary building entries to any
on-site, off-street parking area;



                  iv.   Shall provide for identifiable
pedestrian crossing treatments along functional pedestrian routes wherever a
private walkway or pedestrian/bikeway system crosses an interior access drive
or interior access driveway; and



                  v.   Shall functionally connect to the
various required open space elements within the multi-family dwelling project.



               b.   The owner of the real estate shall be
responsible for the perpetual maintenance of any private walkways or
pedestrian/bikeway systems.



            3.    The provision of parking spaces and dwelling
units accessible to individuals with disabilities, as defined in Title III of
the Americans with Disabilities Act, in excess of the minimum requirements
specified by applicable federal rule.







 



      (3)   Waiver of development requirements. In order to
encourage innovative building and site designs capable of enhancing the
quality of the built environment within the R-6 District, a waiver of any of
the architectural features and site design features specified in this Article
5.3A may be heard and determined in connection with the approval of a
development plan for architectural and site design review.



      (4)   Findings required for the approval of a waiver of
development requirements of this Article 5.3A. A waiver of the architectural
features and site design features specified in this Article 5.3A may only be
granted upon the finding that:



         (a)   1.   The proposed development represents an
innovative use of building materials, site design features or landscaping
which will enhance the use or value of area properties beyond the enhancement
that would otherwise occur under the strict application of the architectural
and site design requirements set forth in the R-6 District; or



            2.   The strict application of the terms of the
architectural features or site design features set forth in Article 5.3A
represents an inappropriate pattern of development given the specific
location and surroundings of the proposed development.



         (b)   The proposed development is consistent with and
compatible with other development located within the R-6 District and the
surrounding area; and



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 5.3B  PROJECTS WITH A GROSS DENSITY OF BETWEEN 8.0 DWELLING UNITS PER
ACRE AND 12.0 DWELLING UNITS PER ACRE.



      (1)   Development incentives. Multi-family dwelling projects
shall be eligible to receive development plan approval from the Plan
Commission to be developed pursuant to this Article 5.3B and may be granted a
waiver of the development requirements specified in this ordinance to the
extent permitted below:



         (a)   Maximum project gross density. Maximum project
gross density may be increased by the Plan Commission up to a maximum of 12
dwelling units per acre;



         (b)   Minimum interior yards. In projects containing two
or more buildings, interior yard requirements may be waived by the Plan
Commission to provide for interior yards as follows:



            1.   The requirements for yards around buildings
containing dwelling units and requirement that the a minimum distance between
buildings shall be the sum of each applicable minimum interior yard may be
modified to provide a minimum distance between buildings of 20 feet; or



            2.   Interior yards may be modified to provide for
the overlap of interior yards with required perimeter yards.



         (c)   Maximum building height. The maximum building
height may be waived by the Plan Commission to provide for a maximum building
height of 50 feet, but not to exceed three stories containing dwelling units.



      (2)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval submitted under the Article 5.3B shall
include the following:



         (a)   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict the
development in full compliance with all use and development standards of the
applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control and
subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



         (b)   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict the
development pursuant to this Article; and



         (c)   Other supporting information. A site plan,
building elevations, landscape plan, sign plan and lighting plan as specified
in Article 5.7 below, demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this
Article.



      (3)   Development requirements. All multi-family dwelling
projects in the R-6 District which are proposed to be in excess of eight
dwelling units per acre, proposed to contain buildings which are over 35 feet
in height or are proposed to contain buildings with more than two stories
containing dwelling units shall provide architectural features and site
design features as specified below:



         (a)   Required multi-family dwelling architectural
features.



            1.   Required architectural features. All
buildings, including community building/club house, storage buildings,
maintenance buildings, garages, carports and buildings containing dwelling
units shall utilize a minimum of four of the following five architectural
features:



               a.   Building materials shall comply with
the following:



                  i.   All brick or stone veneer
supplemented with significant use of architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like); or



                  ii.   Multiple building materials with
the primary building material being brick, fieldstone, limestone, marble,
granite and comprising a minimum of:



                     A.   Eighty-five percent of the
area of each elevation for a one-story elevation;



                     B.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation for a two-story elevation; or



                     C.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation and 60% of the total area of each
elevation for more than two-story elevations. (Note: Elevation wall area is
exclusive of window or door areas.)



                  iii.   In the case of multiple
building materials, secondary building should comprise a minimum of 10% of
the elevation area. Recommended secondary materials include: textured block,
architectural pre-cast concrete, concrete composite siding, wood clapboard
siding, wood beaded siding, stucco, E.F.I.S. and the like.



               b.   Multiple surface textures (e.g., rough,
striated, imprinted and the like);



               c.   Facade or elevation modulations (e.g.,
building offsets of at least two feet in depth for every 40 feet of building
wall length);



               d.   Architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like); or



               e.    Multiple colors (i.e., the use of a
maximum of three discernable colors, with primary color constituting a
minimum of 60% of the applicable elevation and the secondary color
constituting a minimum of 10% of the applicable elevation) on each exterior
wall surface.







 



   Example of Multiple Building Materials, Multiple Textures,



   Facade Modulation, Architectural Elements and Multiple Colors



            2.   Additional features. Each dwelling unit shall
provide a minimum of two of the following three items:



               a.   Amenities such as fireplaces, private
patios or private balconies;



               b.   Minimum floor area of 1,100 per
dwelling unit; or



               c.   Laundry facility hook-ups in each
dwelling unit.



            3.   Additional architectural features for
multi-family townhouses. Multi- family townhouse developments shall utilize
the following architectural features:



               a.   1.   The roof of each dwelling unit
shall be distinct from the roof of adjacent dwelling units either through:
separation of roof pitches; varying the direction of roof pitches; inclusion
of dormers; or other variation in roof design; or



                  2.   Each dwelling unit is designed
with a covered front porch occupying a minimum of 50% of the overall width of
the dwelling unit.



               b.   All garages, carports or other
off-street parking areas reserved for the owners or occupants of the
townhouse dwelling units, whether attached or detached, shall be provided
with rear access from an adjoining public or private alley.







 



Multi-Family Townhouse with Covered Front Porch







 



M ulti-Family T ownhouses with R oof Lines Changes







 



A lley Access to Townhouse Garages



            4.   Mechanical equipment. In order to minimize
the negative visual impact associated with the location of mechanical
equipment (e.g., HVAC systems and related components; pedestals for
electrical, telephone or cable service; above-ground water and gas utility
meters; and the like) in required yards, on buildings or adjacent to
buildings, mechanical equipment shall be screened as follows:



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon an elevation view of the
building on all sides; and



               b.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides by: the building; screen
walls or fences of a material and color which is compatible with the primary
building; or evergreen or densely twigged hedge plants (with or without
mounding) of a height at time of planting which is not less than the height
of the mechanical equipment being screened.



         (b)   Site design features required.



            1.   Each multi-family dwelling project which
proposes to be developed under the development incentives of this Article
5.3B shall provide site design features as specified below:



               a.   A minimum of two site design features
shall be utilized for each additional dwelling unit per acre, or fraction
thereof, above eight dwelling units per acre;



               b.   A minimum of two site design features
shall be utilized for any increase in maximum building height above 35 feet
or two stories containing dwelling units;



               c.   A minimum of two site design features
shall be utilized for an overlap of interior yards or an overlap of interior
yards with required perimeter yards; and



               d.   Each site design feature selected shall
be considered separate from and in addition to the other site design features
listed below and in no event shall one site design feature be credited toward
compliance with any other site design feature.



            2.   Site design features.



               a.   Recreational opportunities are provided
in manner and amount which:



                  i.   Exceed the minimum requirements
of the R-6 District by at least 50% in area;



                  ii.   Are superior in design and
layout from minimum requirements; and



                  iii.   Are appropriate to the
anticipated resident profile of the project.



               b.   The project includes a community
building/club house featuring four or more common recreational facilities
including, but not limited to, a swimming pool, hot tub, tennis court,
basketball court, lounge area, multi-purpose room, game room and the like
which are appropriate to the project;



               c.   Accommodations for trash collection
through the use of centralized trash collection areas which:



                  i .   Are screened on at least three
sides by a solid-walled enclosure which is faced with exterior materials of
brick, stone or other masonry material(s) compatible with the architecture of
the buildings containing dwelling units (wood may be used in limited
circumstances, subject to applicable fire codes, when necessary to be
consistent and compatible with the architecture of buildings containing
dwelling units);







 



Solid Walled Enclosure for Trash Compactor with Foundation Landscaping



                  ii.    Provide a gate across the
access to the trash collection area enclosure covered with wood or similar
appearing material and painted a color that is compatible with the colors of
the buildings containing dwelling units;







 



Gated Access to Trash Enclosure



                  iii.    Provide foundation landscaping
around the trash collection area enclosure; and



                  iv.    Have a vehicular pull-off area
for residents to park while depositing items into the trash collection area.







 



Vehicular Pull-Off at Trash Enclosure



               d.   Provision of a trash compactor within a
trash collection area;



               e.   The provision of perimeter yard
landscaping which is, at a minimum, two times greater than the minimum
required plant unit value for a perimeter yard;



               f.   The provision of foundation landscaping
for all buildings equivalent to a Level 2;



               g.   The provision of a fenced pet run;



               h.   On-site covered parking, subject to the
following requirements:



                  i.   Parking spaces may be in garages
or carports;



                  ii.   The total number of parking
spaces in garages or carports should not be less than 40% of the total number
of dwelling units;



                  iii.   If a garage or carport is
located between a primary building containing dwelling units and a front
yard, side yard or rear yard, any elevation located parallel to or within 30
degrees of being parallel to such front yard, side yard or rear yard shall
include at least two of the following:



                     A.   Facade modulation of at
least six inches for every 30 feet of wall length;



                     B.   Multiple building materials
(e.g., brick, fieldstone, limestone, marble, granite, textured block,
architectural pre-cast concrete, concrete composite siding, wood clapboard
siding, wood beaded siding, stucco, E.F.I.S., vinyl siding, aluminum siding
and the like);



                     C.   Multiple surface textures
(e.g., rough, striated, imprinted and the like) or patterns;



                     D.   Separation in roof pitch,
variation in direction of roof pitches, inclusion or dormers, or other
variation on roof design; or



                     U.    Use of false door or
window openings, defined by frames, sills and lintels.



.



Examples of Architectural Features for On-Site Garages



               i.   Centralized, on-site self-storage
units, in addition to any storage closets that may be provided on any patios
or balconies, in an amount not less than 20% of the total number of dwelling
units;







 



Example of On-Site Self Storage Units



               j.    On-site area set-aside as a car wash
facility, either covered or open, available to residents;







 



   Example of On-Site Car Wash Area



               k.    i.   Any multi-family dwelling
project shall include a walkway or pedestrian/bikeway system complying with
the following requirements as part of the site design:



                     A.    Shall functionally connect
front doors or primary building entries with planned or existing public
sidewalks on each public street frontage of the multi-family dwelling project;



                     B.   Shall provide a direct
linkage to any planned or existing town greenway which abuts or is adjacent
to the multi-family dwelling project;



                     C.   Shall provide a direct and
functional connection from the front doors or primary building entries to any
on-site, off-street parking area;



                     D.   Shall provide for
identifiable pedestrian crossing treatments along functional pedestrian
routes wherever a private walkway or pedestrian/bikeway system crosses an
interior access drive or interior access driveway; and



                     E.   Shall functionally connect
to the various required open space elements within the multi-family dwelling
project.



                  ii.   The owner of the real estate
shall be responsible for the perpetual maintenance of any private walkways or
pedestrian/bikeway systems.



               l.   The provision of parking spaces and
dwelling units accessible to individuals with disabilities, as defined in
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act, which exceed of the minimum
requirements specified by applicable federal rule by 50% or more; and



               m.   A fire protection system which includes
a sprinkler system and which provides access to all buildings over an
improved driving surface (grass-crete or similar surfaces may be used in
yards between buildings).



      (4)   Waiver of architectural and site design requirements. In
order to encourage innovative building and site designs capable of enhancing
the quality of the built environment within the R-6 District, a waiver of any
of the architectural features and site design features specified in this
Article 5.3B may be heard and determined in connection with the approval of a
development plan for architectural and site design review.



      (5)   Findings required for the approval of a waiver of
architectural and site design requirements of this Article 5.3B. A waiver of
the architectural and site design requirements specified in this Article 5.3B
may only be granted upon the finding that:



         (a)   1.   The proposed development represents an
innovative use of building materials, site design features or landscaping
which will enhance the use or value of area properties beyond the enhancement
that would otherwise occur under the strict application of the architectural
features and site design features set forth in Article 5.3B; or



            2.   The strict application of the terms of the
architectural features and site design features set forth in Article 5.3B,
represents an inappropriate pattern of development given the specific
location and surroundings of the proposed development.



         (b)   The proposed development is consistent with and
compatible with other development located within the R-6 District and the
surrounding area; and



         (c)   The proposed development is consistent with the
intent and purpose of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 5.4. DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR ALL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS (EXCEPT TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT)



§ 5.4  DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES FOR ALL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(EXCEPT TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT).



   (A)   The following development incentives are provided in order to
encourage flexibility and creativity in the design of commercial and
industrial sites.



   (B)   All development plans which utilize the development incentives
specified below in the commercial or industrial districts shall be filed for
review and approval by the Plan Commission or the Director, as specified
below.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 5.4A  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Each commercial or industrial site shall demonstrate compliance with
all applicable development standards of the commercial or industrial district
in which the lot is located and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver is not otherwise provided for in this
Article.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



§ 5.4B  WAIVER OF DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS.



      (1)   Common off-street parking areas.



         (a)   Purpose. To encourage desirable, efficient and
well planned and landscaped off-street parking areas, two or more uses may
create a common parking area. Such common parking areas shall be eligible for
up to a 10% reduction in the overall number of required parking spaces.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for common off-street parking areas
pursuant to this Article shall include the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Supporting information. A site plan and
overall plan as specified in Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Director may approve such parking
reduction upon a finding that: the proposed common parking area employs
improved design elements in access control, traffic circulation or
landscaping than otherwise required by the provisions of this ordinance.



      (2)   Alternate parking plan approval.



         (a)   Purpose. To encourage desirable, efficient and
well planned and landscaped off-street parking areas, the Director may
approve an alternative parking plan which deviates from the requirements of
this ordinance.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for alternate parking plan approval
pursuant to this Article shall include the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Site plan. A site plan as specified in
Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Director may approve such
alternative parking plan upon finding that such parking layout:



            1.   Is appropriate to the site and its
surroundings;



            2.   Makes provision for small car parking areas,
angled parking, one-way traffic patterns, handicapped parking or other
feature appropriate for the use and setting; and



            3.   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of
this ordinance.



      (3)   Depth of required yards and required bufferyards.



         (a)   Purpose. In order to facilitate urban development
and improve quality of landscaping in the built environment, the depth of a
required yard or a required bufferyard may be reduced as follows:



            1.   A required front yard or front bufferyard may
be reduced by up to 50% of its normally required depth, provided, however,
that any required front yard or front bufferyard along a primary arterial
street, secondary arterial street, collector street, local street or
cul-de-sac street shall not be reduced to a depth of less than 20 feet; or



            2.   A required side or rear yard or required side
or rear bufferyard may be reduced by up to 50% of its normally required depth.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for reduction of depth of required
yards and required bufferyards pursuant to this Article shall include the
following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Site plan. A site plan and landscape plan as
specified in Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Director may approve such depth of
yard and required bufferyard reduction upon a finding that:



            1.   a.   The plant unit value to be provided
in the required yard or required bufferyard exceeds the normal standard for
such yard by a multiple of 2.0 or more; or



               b.   For any building wall which is located
completely or partially within a reduced yard or bufferyard, the entire
length of such building wall shall be screened by foundation landscaping
which has been increased by a multiple of 2.0 or more, and the site will be
so designed and building placement so oriented that all parking areas,
interior access drives, loading areas, outside storage and operations, or
outdoor display areas shall be located so as to comply with the minimum
setback requirements, use of minimum yards and bufferyards requirements, and
landscaping requirements otherwise applicable to the site;



            2.   The proposed development is appropriate to
the site and its surroundings; and



            3.   The proposed development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (4)   Orientation of loading spaces.



         (a)   Purpose. In order to facilitate urban development
and to enhance the quality of landscaping in the built environment, the Plan
Commission may approve the orientation of loading spaces toward a front lot
line that faces a street classified as a collector or above or non-industrial
district. In addition, the Plan Commission may approve the location of
loading spaces between a front lot line that is located along a street
classified as a collector or above or a street bordering directly on a
non-industrial district and the front line of the building served.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for the front orientation or location
of loading spaces pursuant to this Article shall include the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Supporting information. A site plan and
landscape plan as specified in Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve such
loading space orientation or location upon a finding that:



            1.   a.   The required front yard or required
front bufferyard is effectively screened with a plant unit value which
exceeds the standard for such yard by adding a plant unit value of 4.0 to the
total plant unit value otherwise required by this ordinance or other
development incentive (e.g., a plant unit value of 5.0 would be required as a
base minimum [Level 1 + 4.0 = 5.0]; or a plant unit value of 6.0 would be
required if another development incentive would require a multiple of 2.0 or
more over a Level 1 [Level 1 X 2.0 = 2.0 + 4.0 = 6.0]; and so on); or



               b.   The required front yard or required
front bufferyard is effectively screened by the use of an architectural wall
or screen which is in harmony with the character of the building and
surrounding area and of sufficient height to screen the loading spaces, that
said yards will contain, at a minimum, the standard plant unit value required
for said yard, and that the architectural wall or screen shall be provided
with foundation plantings as required for a building in such district;



            2.   The proposed development is appropriate to
the site and its surroundings; and



            3.   The proposed development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (5)   Use of required yards in integrated centers or
industrial parks.



         (a)   Purpose. In order to facilitate urban development
and to enhance the quality of landscaping in the built environment, the Plan
Commission may approve the use of required side and rear yards which abut
other required side or rear yards of lots located within the same integrated
center or industrial park for parking areas, loading areas, interior drives,
interior access drives or outdoor storage.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for the use of required yards in
integrated centers or industrial parks pursuant to this Article shall include
the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Supporting information. A site plan, overall
plan and landscape plan as specified in Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Director may approve such use of
required side and rear yards upon finding that:



            1.   The required plant unit value in all required
front yards and required front bufferyards, whether located on a street
internal to the integrated center or industrial park or on the perimeter of
the integrated center or industrial park has been increased by a multiple of
2.0 or more;



            2.   The required plant unit value in all required
side or rear yards and required side or rear bufferyards on the perimeter of
the integrated center or industrial park has been increased by a multiple of
2.0 or more;



            3.   The area of required foundation planting
areas located along the building has been increased by a multiple of 2.0 or
more;



            4.   The plant unit value contained in such
enlarged foundation planting areas has been increased by a multiple of 2.0 or
more;



            5.   The proposed development is appropriate to
the site and its surroundings; and



            6.   The proposed development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (6)   Private streets in integrated centers or industrial
parks.



         (a)   Purpose. In order to encourage desirable,
efficient and well planned integrated centers and industrial parks, the Plan
Commission may approve lot frontage on private streets on the interior of an
integrated center or industrial park.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for the development of private streets
in integrated centers or industrial parks pursuant to this Article shall
include the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Overall plan. An overall plan as specified in
Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Plan Commission may approve such
private streets upon finding that:



            1.   Such private streets shall be constructed to
town standards for depth and materials;



            2.   Adequate provisions have been made for the
maintenance of such private streets and for the provision of services along
the private streets by the owner or owners thereof. Services shall, include,
but not limited to: regular trash pick-up; leaf pick-up; snow removal; daily
mail delivery service; roadway maintenance and repair, including, but not
limited to, driving surface, roadway subgrade, subsurface drainage, roadside
drainage, curbs, sidewalks, street lights, street name signs, traffic control
signs, and traffic control signals; and powers to enforce speed control and
parking regulations;



            3.   The use of private streets results in design
elements in access control and traffic circulation consistent with the intent
and purpose of this ordinance;



            4.   The proposed development is appropriate to
the site and its surroundings; and



            5.   The proposed development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this ordinance.



      (7)   Depth of yards along private streets in integrated
centers or industrial parks.



         (a)   Purpose. In order to encourage desirable,
efficient and well planned integrated centers and industrial parks, the Plan
Commission may approve a reduction in the depth of the required front yard
along private streets of up to 50% in integrated centers or industrial parks.



         (b)   Plan documentation and supporting information. All
requests for development plan approval for the reduction of required depth of
yards along private streets in integrated centers or industrial parks
pursuant to this Article shall include the following:



            1.   Sketch Plan One. Sketch Plan One shall depict
the development in full compliance with all use and development standards of
the applicable zoning district and all other applicable health, flood control
and subdivision laws, ordinances and regulations of the town;



            2.   Sketch Plan Two. Sketch Plan Two shall depict
the development pursuant to this Article; and



            3.   Supporting information. An overall plan,
landscape plan and sign plans as specified in Article 5.7 below.



         (c)   Findings. The Director may approve such reduction
of required front yard depth along private streets upon finding that:



            1.   a.   The required plant unit value in all
required front yards along such private street been increased by a multiple
of 2.0 or more; or



               b.   Adequate provision has been made for
the development of common or combined driveways between adjacent lots so as
to reduce the number of curb cuts and enhance the effectiveness of the
required front yard landscaping;



            2.   The proposed development is appropriate to
the site and its surroundings; and



            3.   The proposed development is consistent with
the intent and purpose of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 28-2008, passed
11-24-2008; Ord. 07-2012, passed - -2012)



ARTICLE 5.5. DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND
SITE DESIGN REVIEW FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT LOCATED IN ALL COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS (EXCEPT TC: TOWN CENTER OR MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT) AND ALL
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS WHEN LOCATED WITHIN 600 FEET OF A GATEWAY
CORRIDOR OR WITHIN 600 FEET OF A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



§ 5.5  INTENT.



   In order to: promote innovation and creativity in the design of the
built environment along the major corridors within the town; protect
residential neighborhoods from the potential negative impacts of nearby
commercial or industrial development; minimize the negative impacts on the
town associated with strip commercial development, service facilities,
loading facilities, storage facilities; minimize sign clutter and the
intrusion of signs on the landscape; and minimize the use of incompatible
building design features, all development located within 600 feet of the
right-of-way of any Gateway Corridor or within 600 feet of a residential
district shall be subject to the approval of a development plan by the Plan
Commission or by the Director, as specified below.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11- 2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09- 2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord.
27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5A  APPLICABILITY AND REVIEW AUTHORITY.



      (1)   Gateway Corridors. All development located in any
commercial district (except the TC: Town Center District, or MU: Mixed Use
District) and any industrial district when located within 600 feet of a
Gateway Corridor shall be subject to the filing of a development plan for
architectural and site design review as set forth in Table 5.5-A: Gateway
Corridor Development Plans.



      (2)   Adjoining residential districts. All development located
in any commercial district (except the TC: Town Center District, or MU: Mixed
Use District) and any industrial district when located within 600 feet of a
residential use which is not legal nonconforming shall be subject to the
filing of a development plan for architectural and site design review as set
forth in Table 5.5-B: Commercial and Industrial Development Plans Within 600
Feet of a Residential Use Which Is Not Legal Nonconforming.



      (3)   Development plans review authority.



         (a)   Review. All development shall be subject to the
filing, review and appeal procedures set forth in Article 5.8 - Procedures
for Submission and Review of Development Plans.



         (b)   Limitation on Director’s authority.
Notwithstanding anything in Table 5.5-A or Table 5.5-B to the contrary, any
development which requires a waiver of any development requirement of this
Article shall be required to file a development plan for review and
determination by the Plan Commission.



 


Table 5.5-A: Gateway Corridor Development Plans




Development Activity

 

Approval Authority






a.

 
New construction of a primary use building on lot with existing development *
 

Plan Commission




b.

 
Major building additions (greater than 10,000 sq. ft. or in excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing building(s)) *
 

Plan Commission




c.

 
New outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e., outdoor seating/dining
areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage area, off-street
parking area or off-street loading area
 

Director




d.

 
Minor building additions (less than 10,000 sq. ft. and less than 20% of gross
floor area of existing building(s))
 

Director




e.

 
Exterior building renovations (i.e., change in exterior building materials,
substantial change in exterior color, increase or decrease in facade
fenestration in excess of 10%)
 

Director




f.

 
Accessory buildings/structures (new or additions) - including by way of
example: trash enclosures; storage sheds; drive-through facilities; ATMs and
the like
 

Director




g.

 
Expanded or relocated outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e., outdoor
seating/dining areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage
area, off-street parking areas or off-street loading area (unless subject to
Article 5.4B(4))
 

Director




h.

 
All signs, including: freestanding identification signs (ground, pole or
pylon signs); building identification signs (wall, awning, canopy or marquee
signs); incidental signs (ground, projecting or wall signs); suspended signs;
or outdoor display area signs.
 

Director




i.

 
Landscaping
 

Director




j.

 
Lighting
 

Director




k.

 
Fences
 

Director



*   Includes complete review of site, landscape, lighting, sign and
building elevation plans


Plan Commission =   Determination by Plan Commission as set forth in
Article 5.8A(1)


Director = Administrative determination by Director as set forth in Article
5.8A(2) or Article 5.8E(3) and subject to compliance with the development
requirements of this Article 5.5




 



 


Table 5.5-B: Commercial/Industrial Development Plans Within 600 Feet of a
Residential Use Which Is Not Legal Nonconforming




Development Activity

 

Approval Authority






a.

 
New construction of a primary use building on lot with existing development *
 

Plan Commission




b.

 
Major building additions (greater than 10,000 sq. ft. or in excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing building(s)) *
 

Plan Commission




c.

 
New outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e., outdoor seating/dining
areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage area, off-street
parking area or off-street loading area
 

Director




d.

 
Minor building additions (less than 10,000 sq. ft. and less than 20% of gross
floor area of existing building(s))
 

Director




e.

 
Exterior building renovations (i.e., change in exterior building materials,
substantial change in exterior color, increase or decrease in facade
fenestration in excess of 10%)
 

Director




f.

 
Accessory buildings/structures (new or additions) - including by way of
example: trash enclosures; storage sheds; drive-through facilities; ATMs and
the like
 

Director




g.

 
Expanded or relocated outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e., outdoor
seating/dining areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage
area, off-street parking areas or off-street loading area (unless subject to
Article 5.4B(4))
 

Director




h.

 
All signs, including: freestanding identification signs (ground, pole or
pylon signs); building identification signs (wall, awning, canopy or marquee
signs); incidental signs (ground, projecting or wall signs); suspended signs;
or outdoor display area signs
 

Director




i.

 
Landscaping
 

Director




j.

 
Lighting
 

Director




k.

 
Fences
 

Director



*   Includes complete review of site, landscape, lighting, sign and
building elevation plans


Plan Commission = Determination by Plan Commission as set forth in Article
5.8A(1)


Director = Administrative determination by Director as set forth in Article
5.8A(2) or Article 5.8E(3) and subject to compliance with the development
requirements of this Article 5.5




 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5B  IDENTIFICATION OF GATEWAY CORRIDORS.



   Gateway Corridors include all land areas lying within the corporate
limits of the town which are within 600 feet of the greater of the existing
right-of-way or the proposed right-of-way of any of the following street
segments:



      (1)   S.R. 267 (Quaker Boulevard) from the south right-of-way
of U.S. 40 to the southern corporate limits of the town;



      (2)   U.S. 40 from the eastern corporate limits of the town to
the western corporate limits of the town;



      (3)   I-70 from the eastern corporate limits of the town to
the western corporate limits of the town;



      (4)   Stafford Road from the eastern right-of-way of S.R. 267
(Quaker Boulevard) to the eastern corporate limits of the town;



      (5)   North-South Corridor from the northern corporate limits
of the town to the southern corporate limits of the town;



      (6)   Perimeter Parkway, entire length, as identified in the
Thoroughfare Plan segment of the Comprehensive Plan; and



      (7)   Metropolis Parkway from the eastern right-of-way of new
S.R. 267 to the western right-of-way of Ronald Reagan Parkway.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5C  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   The development requirements specified below shall be satisfied prior
to the approval of a development plan for architectural and site design
review for any development located along a Gateway Corridor or located within
600 feet of a residential district.



      (1)   Each site shall demonstrate compliance with all
applicable development standards of the district in which the site is located
and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which
a waiver is not provided for in this Article.



      (2)   Submission of a site plan, landscape plan, lighting
plan, sign plan and building elevations, as set forth in Article 5.7.



      (3)   Building materials along a Gateway Corridor or located
within 600 feet of a residential district: the following building material
regulations shall apply to all lots located along a Gateway Corridor or
located within 600 feet of a residential district.



         (a)   New construction, new primary use buildings and
major building additions. In order to create variation and interest in the
built environment, all new construction, new primary use buildings and major
building additions located along a Gateway Corridor or located within 600
feet of a residential district shall use the exterior building materials
specified below for each facade oriented to any street if the lot is located
along a Gateway Corridor or within 600 feet of a residential district.



            1.    D et er mi n at io n of fa ca de or
ientation. A facade shall be considered to be oriented toward a street if the
lot is located along a Gateway Corridor or within 600 feet of a residential
district, pursuant angle of the facade as set forth below:







 



Facades Subject to Building Material Requirements



               a.    One-hundred percent of any facade
which is located parallel to or up to 120 degrees from being parallel to the
front lot line;



               b.    Fifty percent of the depth of any
facade, beginning at the point which is closest to the front lot line, of any
facade which is located more than 120 degrees or up to 135 degrees from being
parallel to the front lot line;







 



   Fifty Percent of Depth of Facade



               c.   The determination of being parallel to
the front lot line, or the number of degrees from a line being parallel to
the front lot line, shall be determined from a line which is perpendicular to
a line which represents the minimum setback of a building to a front lot
line; and



               d.   The determination shall apply to the
full length of a facade based upon an elevation view of the building.



            2.   Commercial districts.



               a.   All brick (excluding window, door,
roofing, fascia and soffit materials). The brick used on each applicable
facade shall include:



                  i.   At least two architectural
elements (e.g., quoins, pilasters, soldier courses, lintels, friezes,
cornices, dentils, architraves and the like); or



                  ii.   At least two colors of brick
(any secondary color shall constitute a minimum of 10% of the facade area,
exclusive of color variation resulting from windows, doors, roofing and
soffit materials).



               b.   Two or more building materials on each
applicable facade (excluding window, door, roofing and soffit materials)
provided:



                  i.   The primary building material
shall be either brick, stone (limestone, granite, fieldstone and the like),
architectural pre-cast (if the surface looks like brick or stone), or EIFS
(exterior insulation and finish system or comparable material) and shall
constitute a minimum of 50% of each applicable facade;



                  ii.   Any secondary building material
shall constitute a minimum of 20% of the facade. Glass used as a curtain wall
(above transom level) or a faux window may qualify as a secondary building
material. If EIFS is used as the primary building material, the secondary
building material shall be brick, stone (limestone, granite, fieldstone and
the like) or architectural pre-cast (if the surface looks like brick or
stone); and



                  iii.   The exterior building material
selection shall be supplemented with the use of multiple colors, textures
(e.g., rough, smooth, striated and the like) or architectural elements (e.g.,
quoins, pilasters, soldier courses, lintels, friezes, cornices, dentils,
architraves and the like) on each applicable facade.



               c.   Exterior building materials, whether as
a primary building material, a secondary building material, or an accent
material, shall not include vinyl or aluminum horizontal lap siding.



            3.   Industrial districts. The primary building
material (excluding window, door, roofing and soffit materials) used on each
applicable facade shall be brick or other masonry material. If a masonry
material other than brick is utilized, it shall include at least two textures
(e.g., rough, smooth, striated and the like) or at least two colors with the
secondary texture or color constituting a minimum of 10% of the facade
(exclusive of texture or color variation resulting from windows, doors,
roofing and soffit materials).



         (b)   Additions to an existing building. All additions
to an existing buildings shall utilize building materials with a style,
color, texture and architectural detailing which is compatible and harmonious
with the materials used on the existing building.



         (c)   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions.



            1.   Exterior building facade renovations which
involve no building additions or only minor building additions shall
demonstrate reasonable efforts to incrementally bring the exterior facade,
which is being renovated or added to, into compliance with the provisions for
new construction specified above. Full compliance with the provisions for new
construction shall not be a requirement for approval.



            2.   Exterior building facade renovations shall
not include the painting of brick, stone, architectural pre-cast or other
natural exterior wall or siding products.



         (d)   Exterior building facade renovation with major
building additions. Exterior building facade renovations performed in
connection with a major building addition as described herein shall comply
with the provisions for new construction specified above.



      (4)   Building orientation and site design.



         (a)   Building facades. All building facades facing a
Gateway Corridor or a residential district shall be a finished facade in
compliance with the building materials requirements set forth above.



         (b)   Loading spaces. No loading spaces shall be
permitted to face a Gateway Corridor or other street where a residential
district exists on the opposite side of said street.



         (c)   Outside storage. No outside storage shall be
permitted between an established building line and the right-of-way of a
Gateway Corridor or other street where a residential district exists on the
opposite side of said street.



         (d)   Mechanical equipment. In order to minimize the
negative visual impact associated with the location of mechanical equipment
(e.g., HVAC systems and related components; pedestals for electrical,
telephone or cable service; above-ground water and gas utility meters; and
the like) in required yards, on buildings or adjacent to buildings,
mechanical equipment shall be screened as follows.



            1.   All commercial districts.



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon an elevation view of the
building on all sides.



               b.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides by: the building; screen
walls or fences of a material and color which is compatible with the primary
building; or evergreen or densely twigged hedge plants (with or without
mounding) of a height at time of planting which is not less than the height
of the mechanical equipment to be screened.



            2.   All industrial districts.



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon a line-of-site view of the
building from a point four feet above grade located at:



                  i.   The centerline of the street
immediately in front of the building; or



                  ii.   Any side lot line or rear lot
line of a bufferyard.



               b.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened from any front lot line or any
bufferyard by: the building; screen walls or fences of a material and color
which is compatible with the primary building; or evergreen or densely
twigged hedge plants (with or without mounding) of a height at time of
planting which is not less than the height of the mechanical equipment being
screened.



         (e)   Trash enclosures.



            1.   The materials of the three solid-walled sides
of the enclosure shall be consistent and compatible with the materials of the
primary building.



            2.   When a solid-walled side of a trash enclosure
abuts or adjoins a yard or bufferyard, such side shall be provided with
foundation landscaping of not less than hedge plants spaced four feet
on-center.



            3.   Gates shall be located on the
non-solid-walled side of the trash enclosure and shall be covered with a
wood, simulated wood or a similar material painted a compatible color with
the primary building.



         (f)   Trash compactors.



            1.   Abutting a primary building. Trash compactors
which abut a primary building:



               a.   Shall be oriented toward a side lot
line or a rear lot line;



               b.   Shall not be located between the front
lot line and the front line of any portion of the building served; and



               c.   Shall not be located in a required side
yard or rear yard or required side bufferyard or rear bufferyard.



            2.   Freestanding. Trash compactors located as a
freestanding unit shall be screened consistent with the requirements set
forth above for a trash enclosure, provided, however, a man-door shall be
permitted in the otherwise solid walls.



         (g)   Pedestrian connectivity - new construction. All
new construction of a commercial or industrial project shall, in all cases
where a sidewalk, pathway or town greenway either exists or is required to be
developed as part of the project, include a walkway or pedestrian/bikeway
system in compliance with the following requirements:



            1.   Sidewalk connection. A private walkway or
pedestrian/bikeway system shall functionally connect front doors, storefronts
or primary building entries with planned or existing public sidewalks,
pathways or town greenway on each public street frontage of the project;



            2.   Greenway connection. A private walkway or
pedestrian/bikeway system shall provide a direct linkage to any planned or
existing town greenway which abuts or is adjacent to the project; and



            3.   Delineation. A private walkway or
pedestrian/bikeway system shall provide for identifiable pedestrian crossing
treatments along functional pedestrian routes wherever a private walkway or
pedestrian/bikeway system crosses an interior access drive or interior access
driveway.



         (h)   Grading. In order to ensure that Gateway Corridors
have a neat and kept appearance, the temporary storing of topsoil and grading
shall comply with the following development requirements:



            1.   The mounding of topsoil shall not have a
slope greater than three to one;



            2.   Topsoil mounds shall be sowed with an
appropriate ground cover that can be mowed to prevent erosion; and



            3.   Topsoil mounds shall not be located within a
front or side yard setback and shall be located adjacent to the rear yard
setback.



      (5)   Landscaping. Front yards and front bufferyards shall be
landscaped in compliance with the provisions of Article IV, provided,
however, that at least 50% of the required plant unit value shall be made up
of deciduous shade (overstory) trees, deciduous ornamental (understory) trees
or evergreen trees, unless such yard is subject to a stricter requirement for
bufferyards, in which case the requirements for bufferyards shall control.



      (6)   Lighting. Site lighting shall comply with the following
development requirements.



         (a)   Pole lights. All pole light fixtures used to
illuminate off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas, delivery areas
or service areas shall be a “shoebox” style light (which may be square,
rectangular or round in shape).



         (b)   Wall mounted light fixtures. All wall pack light
fixtures on a building facade visible from a Gateway Corridor or a
residential district shall be a “shoebox” style light (except for low
level architectural lighting for buildings, structures, signs, sidewalks or
landscape features and approved as part of a development plan).



         (c)   All light fixtures. All exterior lighting,
including pole lights and wall pack lights, shall be of metal halide or LED
(light emitting diode) (except for low level architectural lighting for
buildings, structures, signs, sidewalks or landscape features, which may be
incandescent or other type of lighting deemed appropriate and approved as
part of a development plan).



         (d)   Pole and wall pack light fixtures. All pole light
fixtures and wall pack light fixtures with a wattage of 400 watts or above,
shall be equipped with a flat lens that does not protrude below the bottom
edge of the “shoebox”.



         (e)   Pole and wall pack light fixtures. All pole light
fixtures and wall pack light fixtures shall be mounted parallel with the
horizon and shall utilize a rigid mounting arm with no built-in up-tilt and
no adjustment feature.



         (f)   Vehicular canopy light fixtures. All vehicular
canopy light fixtures, including, but not limited to, gasoline service
station canopies and bank drive-through canopies, regardless of wattage,
shall be equipped with a flat lens that does not protrude below the bottom
edge of the light fixture.



      (7)   Signs.



         (a)   All signs. All signs shall be designed to create a
unified and consistent sign package for the development. Elements of a
unified and consistent sign package include:



            1.   Type of sign: a sign package shall specify
the type of freestanding identification sign proposed (e.g., ground sign,
pylon sign, pole sign), and the type of building identification sign proposed
(e.g., individual letters, raceway mount, box, painted and the like);



            2.   Materials (e.g., limestone base with bronze
letters, routed aluminum cabinet with plexiglass face and the like);



            3.   Size and proportion of signs (e.g., maximum
height, maximum width, maximum sign surface area and the like);



            4.   Style and color (e.g., style and color pallet
for letter colors, background colors and text font); and



            5.   Illumination (e.g., internally illuminated,
or external illumination with similar type outdoor light fixture).



         (b)   Freestanding identification signs. In order to
create a unified and consistent treatment, new freestanding identification
signs shall be erected in accordance with the regulations of Article 7.4A,
7.4B and 7.4C.



         (c)   Wall signs. In order to create a unified and
consistent treatment, new wall signs shall be erected in accordance with the
following regulations.



            1.   New construction/major building additions.
Wall signs for new construction projects and major building addition projects
shall be consistent with the type of wall sign selected from the alternatives
hierarchy listed below and approved by the Plan Commission.



            2.   Alternatives hierarchy. The order of ranking
of the various types of wall signs, from the highest to the lowest, shall be
Article 5.5C(7)(c)2.a., 5.5C(7)(c)2.b., 5.5C(7)(c)2.c. and 5.5C(7)(c)2.d.
outlined below:



               a.   An individual letter sign (including,
but not limited to: internally illuminated channel letters, logos or script;
illuminated or non-illuminated pin-mounted letters, logos or script; or
plaque with raised or routed letters, logos or script);



               b.   A raceway mounted sign (including, but
not limited to: channel letters, logos or script);



               c.   A box sign; and



               d.   A painted board sign or a sign painted
directly on a wall of a building.



            3.   Existing integrated centers. Any new wall
sign on an existing integrated center shall be of an equivalent type or
higher rated type than the predominant type of wall signs existing throughout
the integrated center.



            4.   Existing single use sites. Any new wall sign
on an existing single use site shall be the greater of either an equivalent
type or higher rated type wall sign than:



               a.   The previously existing wall sign; or



               b.   The predominant type of wall signs
existing on the subject lot and any immediately adjacent single use sites
located within the same block face.



         (d)   Illuminated wall signs and bufferyards.
Illuminated wall signs, whether internally or externally illuminated, shall
not be permitted on a building facade oriented to a side bufferyard or rear
bufferyard.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5D  PERMITTED USES.



   All uses which are permitted in a given site’s underlying primary
zoning district, except those uses expressly excluded in Article 5.5E of this
ordinance, are permitted within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor or residential
district.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5E  EXCLUDED USES.



   (A)   The following uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts
within 600 feet of Gateway Corridor or residential district.



   (B)   Prohibited uses:



      (1)   Antique mall;



      (2)   Discount retailer; and



      (3)   Flea market.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5F  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   Where a legally established nonconforming building or structure located
within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor or residential district exists on the
effective date of this ordinance that was not constructed in compliance with
the terms of this ordinance with regards to development requirements of
Article V, the use of the building or structure may continue to exist so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to compliance with the following
provisions:



      (1)   The use was not discontinued or abandoned for a period
of six months or more; and



      (2)   In the event the building or structure has lost its
legally established nonconforming status based on the above provisions, prior
to the reuse of the building or structure, the owner shall make application
for an improvement location permit (ILP) for compliance with the development
requirements of Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5G  FINDINGS.



   The Plan Commission or the Director may approve a development plan for
architectural and site design review upon a finding that:



      (1)   The development plan complies with all applicable
development standards of the district in which the site is located;



      (2)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver has not
been granted;



      (3)   The development plan complies with all applicable
provisions for architectural and site design review for which a waiver has
not been granted;



      (4)   The proposed development is appropriate to the site and
its surroundings; and



      (5)   The proposed development is consistent with the intent
and purpose of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



§ 5.5H  WAIVERS AND FINDINGS.



   In order to encourage innovative building and site designs capable of
enhancing the quality of the built environment along a Gateway Corridor or
adjoining a residential district, the Plan Commission or the Director (in
matters delegated to the Director) may grant a waiver of the: landscaping;
lighting; sign; building orientation and site design; or building materials
along a Gateway Corridor, development requirements specified in this Article
5.5 for architectural and site design review upon finding that the proposed
development:



      (1)   Represents a innovative use of building materials,
lighting, signs, site design features or landscaping which will enhance the
use or value of area properties;



      (2)   Is consistent with and compatible with other development
located along the Gateway Corridor or within 600 feet of a residential
district; and



      (3)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005;
Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 27-2007,
passed - -2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 18-2010, passed
11-22-2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 12-2011, passed - -2011)



ARTICLE 5.6. DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND
SITE DESIGN REVIEW IN THE TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT, THE R-U: URBAN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND THE MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT



§ 5.6  DEVELOPMENT PLANS REQUIRED FOR ARCHITECTURAL AND SITE DESIGN REVIEW
IN THE TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT, THE R-U: URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND THE
MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT.



   In order to: assure the continued development and redevelopment of the
downtown area of the town as the “center place” of the community which
provides a high character “sense of place” in the style of a traditional
downtown; provide and enhance the quality and character of the downtown area;
and provide for interconnectivity of downtown neighborhoods with the
commercial downtown area, all development located in the TC: Town Center
District, the R-U: Urban Residential District and the MU: Mixed Use District
shall be subject to the approval of a development plan by the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



§ 5.6A  APPLICABILITY AND REVIEW AUTHORITY.



      (1)   TC: Town Center District. Development located within the
TC: Town Center District shall be subject to the filing of a development plan
for architectural and site design review as set forth in Table 5.6-A: Town
Center Development Plans.



      (2)   R-U and MU Districts. Development located within the
R-U: Urban Residential District and the MU: Mixed Use District when located
within the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated in the Town Center
Plan shall be subject to the filing of a development plan for architectural
and site design review as set forth in Table 5.6-B: R-U: Urban Residential
District and MU: Mixed Use District Development Plans.



      (3)   Residential uses in TC District. Notwithstanding
anything above to the contrary, any single-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling or multi-family dwelling located in the TC: Town Center District
shall be subject only to the development requirements contained in Section
5.6C below, for single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling or multi-family
dwelling development located within the R-U: Urban Residential District and
the MU: Mixed Use District.



      (4)   Nonresidential uses in RU or MU Districts.
Notwithstanding anything above to the contrary, any nonresidential use
located within the R-U: Urban Residential District or the MU: Mixed Use
District when located within the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated
in the Town Center Plan shall be subject to the development requirements for
development within the TC: Town Center District set forth in:



         (a)   Section 5.6B(5) - Architectural Design;



         (b)   Section 5.6B(7) - Lighting;



         (c)   Section 5.6B(8) - Accessory Structures and
Facilities;



         (d)   Section 5.6B(9) - Additions to an Existing
Building;



         (e)   Section 5.6B(10) - Exterior Building Facade
Renovations With No Building Additions or Minor Building Additions; and



         (f)   Section 5.6B(11) - Exterior Building Facade
Renovation With Major Building Additions below.



      (5)   Multi-family dwelling projects in the RU: Urban
Residential District. All multi- family dwelling projects on all Lots in the
RU: Urban Residential District, when located elsewhere in the town and not
located within the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated in the Town
Center Plan shall be subject only to the development requirements contained
in Article 5.6C(2) below, for multi- family dwellings.



      (6)   Development plan review authority.



         (a)   Procedures. All development shall be subject to
the filing, review and appeal procedures set forth in Article 5.8 -
Procedures for Submission and Review of Development Plans.



         (b)   Limitation on Director’s authority.
Notwithstanding anything in Table 5.6-A or Table 5.6-B to the contrary, any
development which requires a waiver of any development requirement of this
Article shall be required to file a development plan for review and
determination by the Plan Commission.



 


Table 5.6-A: TC: Town Center District Development Plans




Development Activity

 

Approval Authority






a.

 
New construction *
 

Plan Commission




b.

 
New construction of a primary use building on lot with existing development *
 

Plan Commission




c.

 
Major building additions (greater than 10,000 sq. ft. or in excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing building(s)) *
 

Plan Commission




d.

 
New outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e.: outdoor seating/dining
areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage area, off-street
parking area or off-street loading area
 

Director




e.

 
Minor building additions (less than 10,000 sq. ft. and less than 20% of gross
floor area of existing building(s))
 

Director




f.

 
Exterior building renovations (i.e., change in exterior building materials,
substantial change in exterior color, increase or decrease in facade
fenestration in excess of 10%)
 

Director




g.

 
Accessory buildings/structures (new or additions) - including by way of
example: trash enclosures; storage sheds; drive-through facilities; ATMs and
the like
 

Director




h.

 
Expanded or relocated outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e.: outdoor
seating/dining areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage
area, off-street parking areas or off-street loading area (unless subject to
Article 5.4B(4))
 

Director




i.

 
All signs, including: freestanding identification signs (ground, pole or
pylon signs); building identification signs (wall, projecting, awning, canopy
or marquee signs); incidental signs (ground or wall signs); suspended signs;
or outdoor display area signs
 

Director




j.

 
Landscaping
 

Director




k.

 
Lighting
 

Director




l.

 
Fences
 

Director



*   Includes complete review of site, landscape, lighting, sign and
building elevation plans


Plan Commission = Determination by Plan Commission as set forth in Article
5.8A(1)


Director = Administrative Determination by Director as set forth in Article
5.8A(2) or Article 5.8E(3) and subject to compliance with the Development
Requirements of this Article 5.6










 


Table 5.6-B: R-U: Urban Residential District and MU: Mixed Use District
Development Plans




Development Activity

 

Approval Authority






a.

 
New construction (excluding individual single-family dwellings and two-family
dwellings) *
 

Plan Commission




b.

 
New construction of a primary use building on lot with existing development
(excluding individual single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings) *
 

Plan Commission




c.

 
Major building additions (greater than 10,000 sq. ft. or in excess of 20% of
gross floor area of existing building(s)) (excluding individual single-family
dwellings and two- family dwellings) *
 

Plan Commission




d.

 
New outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e., outdoor seating/dining
areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage area, off-street
parking area or off-street loading area
 

Director




e.

 
Individual single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings
 

Director




f.

 
Minor building additions (less than 10,000 sq. ft. and less than 20% of gross
floor area of existing building(s))
 

Director




g.

 
Exterior building renovations (i.e., change in exterior building materials,
substantial change in exterior color, increase or decrease in facade
fenestration in excess of 10%)
 

Director




h.

 
Accessory buildings/structures (new or additions) - including by way of
example: trash enclosures; storage sheds; drive-through facilities; ATMs;
detached garages; and the like
 

Director




i.

 
Expanded or relocated outdoor display area, outdoor operations (i.e.: outdoor
seating/dining areas; processing; servicing; and the like), outside storage
area, off-street parking areas or off-street loading area (unless subject to
Article 5.4B(4))
 

Director




j.

 
All signs, including: freestanding identification signs (ground, pole or
pylon signs); building identification signs (wall, projecting, awning, canopy
or marquee signs); incidental signs (ground or wall signs); suspended signs;
or outdoor display area signs
 

Director




k.

 
Landscaping
 

Director




l.

 
Lighting
 

Director




m.

 
Fences
 

Director



*   Includes complete review of site, landscape, lighting, sign and
building elevation plans


Plan Commission = Determination by Plan Commission as set forth in Article
5.8A(1)


Director = Administrative Determination by Director as set forth in Article
5.8A(2) or Article 5.8E(3) and subject to compliance with the development
requirements of this Article 5.6




 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



§ 5.6B  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT.



   The development requirements specified below shall be satisfied prior
to the approval of a development plan for architectural and site design
review for any development located in the TC: Town Center District:



      (1)   Compliance. Each site shall demonstrate compliance with
all applicable development standards of the TC: Town Center District and all
applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Ordinance for which a waiver
is not provided for in this Article;



      (2)   Submission. Submission of a site plan, landscape plan,
lighting plan, sign plan and building elevations, as set forth in Article 5.7;



      (3)   Town Center context. Development shall incorporate
references to the “Old National Road” design theme into the overall
development through building design and detailing, and sign design (including
graphics);



      (4)   Site layout.



         (a)   Entrances. Major building entrances shall be
oriented toward the front lot line;



         (b)   Building Placement in the TC: Town Center District
along Main Street (U.S. 40) from East Street to Mill Street. Building
placement for all new construction on any lot which abuts Main Street (U.S.
40) between East Street and Mill Street shall be in compliance with the
following provisions:



            1.   For sites containing one building. In
elevation view from the front lot line, at least 75% of the length of the
facade of the building facing a street shall be located between the front lot
line and the lesser of a five foot setback or the established setback in the
same block face;



            2.   For sites containing multiple buildings. In
elevation view from the front lot line, at least 75% of the visible facades
of the buildings facing a street shall be located between the front lot line
and the lesser of a five foot setback or the established setback in the same
block face; and



            3.   Corner lots. On corner lots located along
Main Street (U.S. 40), the primary facade of the building shall be oriented
toward Main Street (U.S. 40).



         (c)   Building placement for any other location in the
TC: Town Center District and Building Placement in the R-U: Urban Residential
District and the MU: Mixed Use District.



            1.   For sites containing one building. In
elevation view from the front lot line, at least 50% of the length of the
facade of the building facing a street shall be located between the front lot
line and the lesser of a 20 foot setback or the established setback in the
same block face; and



            2.   For sites containing multiple buildings. In
elevation view from the front lot line, at least 50% of the visible facades
of the buildings facing a street shall be located between the front lot line
and the lesser of a 20 foot setback or the established setback in the same
block face.



         (d)   Plazas. Plazas shall be provided along all
non-building portions of a front yard in the TC: Town Center District in
compliance with the following requirements:



            1.   Plazas shall be separated from the front lot
line by a five foot deep planting bed;



            2.   Plazas shall be located adjacent to a
building;



            3.   Plazas shall be surfaced with concrete, brick
or other form of hardsurface pavers appropriate for the proposed development,
except for those areas used for trees, foundation landscaping or planters;



            4.   Plazas shall maintain surface areas at a
slope of less than 3%, surface areas may be stepped, where appropriate, as
necessary to accommodate natural topography; and



            5.   That portion of the plaza perimeter located
adjacent to a front lot line shall include shade or ornamental trees planted
with a maximum spacing of 25 feet on-center. If plaza trees have already been
installed on an abutting lot, the on-center spacing shall be measured from
the existing plaza trees. Overall plazas tree location within each TC
District shall begin in any block with a measurement from the edge of the
nearest vision clearance area.



         (e)   Landscaping.



            1.   Front yards. All non-building portions of
front yards and non-building portions of front bufferyards (except along Main
Street (U.S. 40)) shall be landscaped as follows:



               a.   Depth of landscaping. A planting bed
with a minimum depth of five feet measured from the front lot line shall be
provided along all non-building portion of the front lot lines;



               b.   Plantings. All planting beds shall
include a continuous hedge row with hedge plants planted three feet on-center
and a shade tree or ornamental tree planted every 25 feet on-center; and



               c.   Size of plant materials.



                  i.   All hedge plants shall be a
minimum size of 24 inches at time of planting;



                  ii.   All shade trees shall be a
minimum size of two and one-half inch caliper at time of planting; and



                  iii.   All ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of one and one-half inch caliper at time of planting.



            2.   Front yards along Main Street (U.S. 40). All
non-building portions of front yards and non-building portions of front
bufferyards along Main Street (U.S. 40) shall be landscaped as follows:



               a.   Depth of landscaping. A planting bed
with a minimum depth of five feet measured from the front lot line shall be
provided along all non-building portion of the front lot lines;



               b.   Screen wall required. Any non-building
portion of a front yard or non-building portion of a front bufferyard shall
be screened by a low masonry wall or combination of masonry piers and wrought
iron fencing located adjacent to the front lot line;



               c.   Trees required. On the lot side of the
screen wall, a shade tree or ornamental tree planted every 25 feet on-center;
and



               d.   Size of plant materials.



                  i.   All shade trees shall be a
minimum size of two and one-half inch caliper at time of planting; and



                  ii.   All ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of one and one-half inch caliper at time of planting.



            3.   Side lot lines and rear lot lines. All
non-building portions of side yards, rear yards, side bufferyards or rear
bufferyards shall be landscaped as follows:



               a.   Plantings. All planting beds shall
include a continuous hedge row with hedge plants planted three feet on-center
and a shade tree or ornamental tree planted every 25 feet on-center; and



               b.   Size of plant materials.



                  i.   All hedge plants shall be a
minimum size of 24 inches at time of planting;



                  ii.   All shade trees shall be a
minimum size of two and one-half inch caliper at time of planting; and



                  iii.   All ornamental trees shall be a
minimum of one and one-half inch caliper at time of planting.



         (f)   Trash enclosures. All trash enclosures shall
utilize three solid-walled sides. The materials of the three solid-walled
sides of the enclosure shall be consistent and compatible with the materials
of the primary building. Gates shall be located on the non-solid-walled side
of the trash enclosure and shall be covered with a wood, simulated wood or a
similar material painted a compatible color with the primary building;



         (g)   Minimum lot coverage. The minimum lot coverage
shall not be less than 50%;



         (h)   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Site design
shall minimize conflicts between pedestrian and vehicular traffic;



         (i)   Site access. Driveways shall not provide direct
access to Main Street (U.S. 40). Access to Main Street (U.S. 40) shall occur
via side streets or public alleys;



         (j)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking areas shall
be located to the side or rear of a building, provided however, in no case
shall an off-street parking area be located within five feet of a front lot
line;



         (k)   Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities
shall be located at the rear of the building or at the rear of the lot; and



         (l)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities
shall be located at the rear of the building or at the rear of the lot.



      (5)   Architectural design.



         (a)   Materials.



            1.   Brick shall be utilized as the primary
exterior building material on each facade oriented toward a public street; and



            2.   Each facade oriented toward a side lot line
or rear lot line and which intersects a front facade shall incorporate a
minimum 24 inch brick return. The remaining portion of such facade shall be
recessed from the brick return by a minimum of three inches.



         (b)   Minimum front facade height.



            1.   In the TC: Town Center District.



               a.   Lot abutting Main Street (U.S. 40)
between East Street and Mill Street. In the elevation view from the front lot
line, the minimum front facade height shall be not less than 27 feet with a
minimum of two stories capable of being occupied; and



               b.   All other locations. In the elevation
view from the front lot line, the minimum front facade height shall be not
less than 22 feet.



            2.   In the MU: Mixed Use District. In the
elevation view from the front lot line, the minimum front facade height shall
be not less than 22 feet.



         (c)   Articulation. In order to assure that new
development in the Town Center maintains a scale and relationship to the
street and sidewalk which can promote pedestrian activity in the downtown
area, all buildings shall comply with the following design features:



            1.   Human scale. Architectural elements such as
colonnades, canopies, awnings, display windows, lighting and variation in
building materials may be used to create a human scale to buildings;



            2.   Detailing. Architectural detailing (i.e.,
variation in building materials, surface recesses, protrusions, cornices and
the like) shall be used to distinguish the ground floor from upper levels of
a building. Such architectural detailing used to distinguish the ground floor
from upper levels shall be no lower than 18 feet above grade;



            3.   Vertical rhythm. The vertical rhythm of
architectural detailing on a building shall be consistent or compatible with
the pattern established on adjacent buildings located within the same block
face;



            4.   Building entrances. All buildings which front
on Main Street (U.S. 40) shall orient a main entrance to Main Street (U.S.
40); and



            5.   Mechanical equipment.



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon an elevation view of the
building on all sides; and



               b.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides by: the building; screen
walls or fences of a material and color which is compatible with the primary
building; or evergreen or densely twigged hedge plants (with or without
mounding) of a height at time of planting which is not less than the height
of the mechanical equipment to be screened.



         (d)   Fenestration.



            1.   Ground floor. Window openings on the ground
floor of a building shall occupy a minimum of 60% of the ground floor facade
area (i.e., that portion of the facade located below 18 feet above grade);



            2.   Upper floors. Window openings on the upper
floors of buildings shall occupy no more than 40% of the entire upper floor
facade area (i.e., that portion of the facade located above 18 feet above
grade);



            3.   Nonresidential building. Any nonresidential
building taller than 20 feet shall have windows (or faux windows) on the
upper facade (i.e., that portion of the facade located below 18 feet above
grade);



            4.   Window size and shape. Window size and shape
shall be compatible with those of adjacent buildings and shall have a
generally vertical orientation; and



            5.   Windows, doors, eaves and parapets. Windows,
doors, eaves and parapets on a building shall be proportional and shall
relate to one another.



      (6)   Signs.



         (a)   Freestanding identification signs, where permitted
by Article 7.5A. Freestanding identification signs in the TC: Town Center
District and the MU: Mixed Use District, shall comply with the following:



            1.   The sign structure shall be constructed of
materials which are in harmony with and architecturally compatible with the
primary building or integrated center served by the freestanding
identification sign;



            2.   Freestanding identification signs shall not
be internally illuminated;



            3.   If illuminated, freestanding identification
signs shall be illuminated by way of:



               a.   Sign structure mounted gooseneck type
fixtures;



               b.   Wall-wash lights mounted behind opaque
individual letters or elements; or



               c.   Ground mounted up-lights located
beneath the building identification sign.



         (b)   Building identification signs. Building
identification signs installed above a storefronts or on the ground floor
facade should from a clearly articulated band and be integrated into the
overall building facade design;



         (c)   Building identification signs. Building
identification signs shall be designed so as to not interfere with
architectural details, or interrupt the rhythm of columns or fenestration;



         (d)   Building identification signs. Building
identification signs shall be eligible for an increase in sign surface area
in compliance with the provisions of Article 5.6E(1)(a)4. and Article
5.6E(2)(b) below;



         (e)   Illumination. Building identification signs shall
comply with the following regulations:



            1.   Building identification signs shall not be
internally illuminated.



            2.   External illumination shall be by way of:



               a.   Wall or sign structure mounted
gooseneck type fixtures;



               b.   Wall-wash lights mounted behind opaque
individual letters or elements; or



               c.   Up-lights mounted in a open area
beneath the building identification sign.



         (f)   Window signs. Window signs shall not exceed 15% of
available window space;



         (g)   Marquee signs. Marquee signs shall be limited to
theater uses; and



         (h)   Awnings and canopies.



            1.   Any awning or canopy that includes graphics,
lettering, logos or text in excess of ten inches in any overall dimension
shall be classified as building identification signs and such awning or
canopy shall comply with the provision of this Article 5.6B(6)(c) above;



            2.   Any awning or canopy shall utilize canvas or
canvas-like material. Vinyl coated fabric, fixed metal, transparent or opaque
vinyl or wood shall not be utilized for any awning or canopy; and



            3.   Awnings or canopies on a building and within
a block face shall produce a consistent pattern through size, location, shape
and color.



      (7)   Lighting. The design of outdoor light fixtures and the
supports for such outdoor light fixtures shall be architecturally compatible
with the building;



      (8)   Accessory structures and facilities.



         (a)   Drive-through facilities. Drive-through facilities
shall be located at the rear of the properties so as to take advantage of
public alleys, interior access drives and interior access driveways for, with
a circulation and queuing of vehicles;



         (b)   Accessory structures. Brick, with color and
architectural detailing consistent with the primary building, shall be used
on all accessory structures or drive-through facilities; and



         (c)   Planting bed. A three foot planting bed located
between any sidewalk or off-street parking area and any accessory structures
or drive-through facility.



      (9)   Additions to an existing building. All additions to an
existing buildings shall utilize building materials with a style, color,
texture and architectural detailing which is compatible and harmonious with
the materials used on the existing building;



      (10)   Exterior building facade renovations with no building
additions or minor building additions. Exterior building facade renovations
which involve no building additions or only minor building additions shall
demonstrate reasonable efforts to incrementally bring the exterior facade of
the entire building into compliance with the provisions of Articles 5.6B(3)
through 5.6B(8) specified above. Full compliance with the provisions of
Articles 5.6B(3) through 5.6B(8) specified above shall not be a requirement
for approval of a development plan; and



      (11)   Exterior building facade renovation with major building
additions. Exterior building facade renovations performed in connection with
a major building addition as described herein shall comply with the
provisions Articles 5.6B(3) through 5.6B(8) specified above.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



§ 5.6C  DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS IN THE R-U: URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT AND
THE MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT WHEN LOCATED WITHIN THE “TOWN CENTER
NEIGHBORHOOD” AS DESIGNATED IN THE TOWN OF PLAINFIELD, IN, TOWN CENTER PLAN
AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING PROJECTS IN THE R-U URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT NOT
WITHIN THE “TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD”.



   The development requirements specified below shall be satisfied, based
upon the use of the proposed building or structure, prior to the approval of
a development plan for architectural and site design review for any
development located in the R-U: Urban Residential District and MU: Mixed Use
District when located within the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated
in the Town Center Plan, and for multi-family dwelling projects in the RU:
Urban Residential District when located elsewhere in the town and not in the
“Town Center Neighborhood”:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings.



         (a)   Each site shall demonstrate compliance with all
applicable development standards of the R-U: Urban Residential District or
MU: Mixed Use District and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver is not provided for in this Article 5.6;



         (b)   Submission of a site plan and building elevations,
as set forth in Article 5.7;



         (c)   All new construction and major building additions
shall reflect the prevailing visual character of adjacent properties within
the same block face;



         (d)   Entrances and windows shall be the dominant
element of the front facade of each dwelling (rather than garages). Where a
front loaded attached or detached garage is provided, the front facade of the
garage shall be off-set and stepped back from the front building line of the
living area by a minimum of five feet;



         (e)   Roof forms on all parts of a dwelling, including
any attached or detached garage, shall be consistent in form and pitch; and



         (f)   Each front, side and rear facade of a dwelling
shall utilize a coherent architectural composition with graceful transitions.



      (2)   Multi-family.



         (a)   Each site shall demonstrate compliance with all
applicable development standards of the R-U: Urban Residential District or
MU: Mixed Use District and all applicable provisions of the Subdivision
Control Ordinance for which a waiver is not provided for in this Article 5.6;



         (b)   Submission of a site plan, landscape plan,
lighting plan, sign plan and building elevations, as set forth in Article 5.7;



         (c)   All buildings shall comply with the following
architectural features:



            1.   All buildings, including community
building/club house, storage buildings, maintenance buildings, garages,
carports and buildings containing dwelling units shall utilize a minimum of
four of the following five architectural features:



               a.   Building materials shall comply with
the following:



                  i.   All brick or stone veneer
supplemented with significant use of architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like); or



                  ii.   Multiple building materials with
the primary building material being brick, fieldstone, limestone, marble,
granite and comprising a minimum of:



                     A.   Eighty-five percent of the
area of each elevation for a one-story elevation;



                     B.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation for a two-story elevation; or



                     C.   One hundred percent of the
area of the first floor of each elevation and 60% of the total area of each
elevation for more than two-story elevations. (Note: elevation wall area is
exclusive of window or door areas.)



                  iii.   In the case of multiple
building materials, secondary building should comprise a minimum of 10% of
the elevation area. Recommended secondary materials include: textured block,
architectural precast concrete, concrete composite siding, wood clapboard
siding, wood beaded siding, stucco, E.F.I.S. and the like;



               b.   Multiple surface textures (e.g., rough,
striated, imprinted and the like);



               c.   Facade or elevation modulations (e.g.,
building off-sets of at least two feet in depth for every 40 feet of building
wall length);



               d.   Architectural elements (e.g., quoins,
pilasters, soldier courses, friezes, cornices, dentils and the like); or



               e.   Multiple colors (i.e., the use of a
maximum of three discernable colors, with primary color constituting a
minimum of 60% of the applicable elevation and the secondary color
constituting a minimum of 10% of the applicable elevation) on each exterior
wall surface.







 



Example of Multiple Building Materials, Multiple Textures,



   Facade Modulation, Architectural Elements and Multiple Colors



            2.   Each dwelling unit shall provide a minimum of
two of the following three items:



               a.    Amenities such as fireplaces, private
patios or private balconies;



               b.   Minimum floor area of 1,100 per
dwelling unit; or



               c.   Laundry facility hook-ups in each
dwelling unit.



            3.   Additional architectural features for
multi-family townhouses: multi- family townhouse developments shall utilize
the following architectural features:



               a.   i.   The roof of each dwelling unit
shall be distinct from the roof of adjacent dwelling units either through:
separation of roof pitches; varying the direction of roof pitches; inclusion
of dormers; or other variation in roof design; or



                  ii.   Each dwelling unit is designed
with a covered front porch occupying a minimum of 50% of the overall width of
the dwelling unit.



               b.     All garages, carp orts or other
off-street parki ng areas reser ved for the owners or occupant s of the town
house dwelling units, whether attached or detached, shall be provided with
rear access from an adjoining public or private alley.







Multi-Family Townhouse with Covered Front Porch







A lley Access to Townhouse Garages







M ulti-Family T ownhouses with R oof Lines Changes



            4.   Mechanical equipment. In order to minimize
the negative visual impact associated with the location of mechanical
equipment (e.g., HVAC systems and related components; pedestals for
electrical, telephone or cable service; above-ground water and gas utility
meters; and the like) in required yards, on buildings or adjacent to
buildings, mechanical equipment shall be screened as follows:



               a.   Roof mounted. All roof mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened based upon an elevation view of the
building on all sides; and



               d.   Ground mounted. All ground mounted
mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides by: the building; screen
walls or fences of a material and color which is compatible with the primary
building; or evergreen or densely twigged hedge plants (with or without
mounding) of a height at time of planting which is not less than the height
of the mechanical equipment being screened.



         (d)   All first floor dwelling units shall have direct
pedestrian ingress and egress from adjoining streets or common areas;



         (e)   Off-street parking areas shall be screened and
landscaped in compliance with Article 4.7D;



         (f)   Each dwelling unit shall be provided with both
common open space and private open space; and



         (g)   All outdoor light fixtures shall utilize a common
theme or style for wall mounted lights and pole mounted lights. Pole mounted
lights shall not exceed an overall height of 15 feet above grade.



      (3)   Nonresidential uses. Any nonresidential use located
within the R-U: Urban Residential District or the MU: Mixed Use District when
located within the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated in the Town
Center Plan shall be subject to the development requirements for development
within the TC: Town Center District set forth in:



         (a)   Section 5.6B(5) - Architectural Design;



         (b)   Section 5.6(B)(7) - Lighting;



         (c)   Section 5.6(B)(8) - Accessory Structures and
Facilities;



         (d)   Section 5.6(B)(9) - Additions to an Existing
Building;



         (e)   Section 5.6(B)(10) - Exterior Building Facade
Renovations With No Building Additions or Minor Building Additions; and



         (f)   Section 5.6B(11) - Exterior Building Facade
Renovation With Major Building Additions, above.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



§ 5.6D  FINDINGS.



   The Plan Commission shall grant development plan approval for
architectural review in the TC: Town Center District, R-U: Urban Residential
District or the MU: Mixed Use District, upon finding that the proposed
development:



      (1)   Represents a use of building materials, site design
features, architectural design, signs, lighting or other features which will
enhance the use or value of area properties;



      (2)   Is consistent with and compatible with development
located in the vicinity; and



      (3)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



§ 5.6E  WAIVERS.



      (1)   Authorized waivers of development requirements. In order
to encourage innovative building and site designs capable of enhancing the
quality of the built environment within the historic downtown portion of the
town, the Plan Commission may grant a waiver of the following development
requirements to the extent specified:



         (a)   Development requirements in the TC: Town Center
District which may be waived:



            1.   Town Center context. All provisions of
Article 5.6;



            2.   Site layout. All provisions of Article 5.6;



            3.   Architectural design. All provisions of
Article 5.6;



            4.   Signs.



               a.   All provisions of Article 5.6 and the
provisions of Article 7.5B regarding the total sign surface area of building
identification signs to allow a maximum sign surface area of up to 40% of the
applicable facade; or



               b.   The provisions of Article 7.8D(2) so as
to not include graphics, letters, logos or text which is ten inches or less
in overall height in the calculation of sign surface on an awning or canopy.



            5.   Lighting. All provisions of Article 5.6;



            6.   Accessory structures and facilities. All
provisions of Article 5.6;



            7.   Additions to an existing building. All
provisions of Article 5.6;



            8.   Exterior building facade renovations with no
building additions or minor building additions. All provisions of Article
5.6; or



            9.   Exterior building facade renovation with
major building additions. All provisions of Article 5.6.



         (b)   Development requirements in the R-U: Urban
Residential District and MU: Mixed Use District which may be waived:



            1.   Single-family dwellings and two-family
dwellings. All provisions of Article 5.6;



            2.   Multi-family. All provisions of Article 5.6;
or



            3.   Nonresidential uses. All applicable
provisions of Article 5.6.



      (2)   Findings required to grant a waiver of development
requirements. A waiver of development requirements, to the extent specified
in this Article 5.6 for architectural and site design review, shall only be
granted upon finding that the proposed development:



         (a)   Represents an innovative use of building
materials, site design features, architectural design, landscaping, signs,
lighting or other features which will enhance the use or value of area
properties;



         (b)   Regarding building identification signs, the
building demonstrates exceptional compliance with the “Old National Road”
theme and exceptional compliance with the site layout, architectural design,
sign and lighting development requirements of Article 5.6,B of this ordinance;



         (c)   Is consistent with and compatible with other
development located within and near the TC: Town Center District; and



         (d)   Is consistent with the intent and purpose of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 32-2005,
passed 5-9-2005)



ARTICLE 5.7. PLAN DOCUMENTATION AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION



§ 5.7  PLAN DOCUMENTATION AND SUPPORTING INFORMATION.



   In any case where the plan documentation and supporting information for
a development plan requires the submission of a site plan, overall plan,
landscape plan, building elevations, sign plan or lighting plans, such plans
and elevations shall be submitted in compliance with the following
requirements.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7A  SITE PLAN.



   (A)   A site plan filed in connection with the submission of a
development plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch equals 100
feet and shall include the following items:



      (1)   North arrow and scale;



      (2)   Address of the site;



      (3)   Proposed name of the development;



      (4)   Area map insert showing the general location of the site
referenced to major streets and section lines;



      (5)   Legal description of the real estate;



      (6)   Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of
the site;



      (7)   Names, centerlines and right-of-way widths of all
streets, alleys and easements;



      (8)   Layout, number and dimension of all lots and out lots
with zoning setback lines or building setback lines;



      (9)   Location and dimensions of all existing structures,
including paved areas;



      (10)   Location and dimensions of all proposed structures,
including paved areas, and indicated by cross-hatching;



      (11)   Location and name of all existing and proposed public
or private streets, access easements and rights-of-way within 200 feet of the
real estate;



      (12)   Location of all floodway and floodway fringe areas
within the boundaries of the site;



      (13)   Location of all existing and proposed utility
facilities and easements, including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer,
water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and cable;



      (14)   Use of each structure by labeling including approximate
density or size of all proposed uses and structures on the site (e.g. parking
- number of parking spaces required and provided, residence - number of
dwelling units per acre, office - gross floor area);



      (15)   Structures proposed for demolition should be indicated
as such;



      (16)   Distance of all structures from front, rear and side
lot lines. (This distance is measured as a line from the point where the
structure is closest to the lot line. This line is perpendicular to the lot
line);



      (17)   Location of any proposed or existing driveway and its
width at the lot line. (Any connection to an alley must also be indicated);



      (18)   All improvements to street system on-site and off-site;



      (19)   Sidewalk plan or alternate plan for pedestrian ways;



      (20)   Measurement of curb radius and/or taper;



      (21)   Names of legal ditches and streams on or adjacent to
the site;



      (22)   Location, dimensions, and type (e.g. ground, pole,
wall) of all signs on the site. Include separate elevations of proposed sign
structures with all dimensions drawn to scale;



      (23)   Location, size and species of all proposed and existing
trees over six inches in caliper at four and one-half feet above grade and
all proposed and existing landscaping;



      (24)   Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation,
wetland, common area, lake or other similar uses;



      (25)   Building elevations, including building materials and
colors; and



      (26)   Any other information requested in writing by the Plan
Commission or Director.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the site plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7B  OVERALL PLAN.



   (A)   An overall plan filed in connection with the submission of a
development plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch equals 100
feet and shall include the following items:



      (1)   North arrow and scale;



      (2)   Address of the site;



      (3)   Proposed name of the development;



      (4)   Area map insert showing the general location of the site
referenced to major streets and section lines;



      (5)   Legal description of the real estate;



      (6)   Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of
the site;



      (7)   Names, centerlines and right-of-way widths of all
streets, alleys and easements;



      (8)   Layout, number and dimension of all lots and out lots
with zoning setback lines and/or building setback lines;



      (9)   Location and name of all existing and proposed public or
private streets, access easements and rights-of-way within 200 feet of the
real estate;



      (10)   Location of all floodway and floodway fringe areas
within the boundaries of the site;



      (11)   Location of all existing and proposed utility
facilities and easements, including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer,
water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and cable;



      (12)   All improvements to street system on-site and off-site;



      (13)   Sidewalk plan or alternate plan for pedestrian ways;



      (14)   Location, dimensions, and type (e.g. ground, pole,
wall) of all signs on the site. Include separate elevations of proposed sign
structures with all dimensions drawn to scale;



      (15)   Areas reserved for park, recreation, conservation,
wetland, common area, lake or other similar uses; and



      (16)   Any other information requested in writing by the Plan
Commission or Director.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the overall plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7C  BUILDING ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   Building elevations filed in connection with the submission of
a development plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following
items:



      (1)   Address of the site;



      (2)   Proposed name of the development;



      (3)   Scale;



      (4)   Elevations for each facade of the building;



      (5)   Specification or sample of the type and color of
building materials to be used for all wall, window, roof and other
architectural features;



      (6)   A separate true color rendering of the proposed
building, including any proposed wall sign;



      (7)   Placement, size, color and illumination details for any
proposed wall sign;



      (8)   Details of any exterior architectural lighting proposed
on or around the building; and



      (9)   Any other information requested in writing by the Plan
Commission or Director.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the building elevation requirements listed above, as
circumstances dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7D  SIGN PLAN.



   (A)   Sign plans filed in connection with the submission of a
development plan shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following
items:



      (1)   Address of the site;



      (2)   Proposed name of the development;



      (3)   Scale;



      (4)   A site plan indicating the location of any existing or
proposed freestanding signs;



      (5)   A site plan indicating the location of any building upon
which a sign is to be mounted, with the location of the signs indicated;



      (6)   Elevation of proposed signs including size, materials
and color;



      (7)   A true color rendering of the proposed signs;



      (8)   Illumination details for proposed signs;



      (9)   Placement, size, color and illumination details for any
proposed wall sign; and



      (10)   Any other information requested in writing by the Plan
Commission or Director.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the sign plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7E  LANDSCAPE PLAN.



   (A)   Landscape plans filed in connection with the submission of a
development plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch equals 100
feet and shall include the following items:



      (1)   Address of the site;



      (2)   Proposed name of the development;



      (3)   Scale;



      (4)   The location of any existing or proposed freestanding
signs;



      (5)   Outline of all existing or proposed buildings or
structures, including parking and loading areas;



      (6)   Boundary lines of the site;



      (7)   Location of all floodway and floodway fringe areas
within the boundaries of the site;



      (8)   All existing elevations and proposed land contour lines
having at least two-foot intervals;



      (9)   Proposed sidewalk or alternate plan for pedestrian ways;



      (10)   Size, species and spacing (on center) of all proposed
trees, landscaping and ground cover;



      (11)   Survey of existing trees in required yards and required
bufferyards, indicating exact location or existing trees over six inch
caliber at four and one-half feet above grade and all flowering trees, shrubs
and evergreens over six feet in height;



      (12)   Description of methods to preserve trees without injury
and with sufficient area for the root system to sustain the tree;



      (13)   Description of protective care and physical restraint
barriers at the drip line to prevent alteration, compaction or increased
depth of the soil in the root system area prior to and during groundwork and
construction; and



      (14)   Any other information requested in writing by the Plan
Commission or Director.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the landscape plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



§ 5.7F  LIGHTING PLANS.



   (A)   Lighting plans filed in connection with the submission of a
development plan shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch equals 100
feet and shall include the following items:



      (1)   North arrow and scale;



      (2)   Address of the site;



      (3)   Proposed name of the development;



      (4)   Boundary lines of the site including all dimensions of
the site;



      (5)   Location and dimensions of all existing structures,
parking areas and walkways;



      (6)   Type and location of all exterior of lighting fixtures,
including, wattage and type of light;



      (7)   Intensity of lighting at base of light structure and at
the lot line measured in footcandles; and



      (8)   If architectural building lighting is proposed,
elevations for each facade of the building indicating the location, type and
intensity of lighting on each building facade and the intensity of such
lighting at the lot line measured in footcandles.



   (B)   The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or
relax any of the lighting plan requirements listed above, as circumstances
dictate.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000)



ARTICLE 5.8. PROCEDURES FOR SUBMISSION AND REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS



§ 5.8A  APPLICATION.



      (1)   Application for development plan approval by the Plan
Commission shall be in compliance with the following procedures:



         (a)   Who may file. Development plans may be initiated
by a petition signed by the owners of the land involved in the petition.



         (b)   Filing deadline.



            1.   Pre-filing conference. In order to avoid
delays in the processing of a development plan, the applicant is encouraged
to prepare a concept plan and consult with the Director on an informal basis
to learn of any comments, concerns and questions regarding the proposed
development plan application. The concept plan shall be prepared with as much
information and detail as is available at the time of presenting the concept
plan. The applicant is hereby advised that the greater the level of
information and detail shown on the concept plan, the greater the value of
the concept plan review and comments.



            2.   Architectural and site design review. All
development plan petitions submitted for architectural and site design review
only shall be filed at least 37 days prior to the initial public hearing at
which they are to be considered by the Plan Commission.



            3.   Development incentives. All other development
plan petitions shall be filed at least 37 days prior to the initial public
hearing at which they are to be considered by the Plan Commission.



         (c)   Form of filing. All development plan approval
petitions to the Plan Commission shall be on forms provided by the Department
of Planning and Zoning. In addition, site plans, surveys, legal descriptions,
building elevations, sign details, proposed commitments and any other
relevant supporting documentation shall be of a usable scale and quality.



         (d)   Findings of fact. The petitioner shall, at the
time of filing of the petition, file proposed detailed written findings of
fact.



         (e)   Specifying of request. All development plan
approval petitions shall specify the approvals requested. Any items,
including proposed waivers of development requirements in connection with a
development plan approval, even if indicated on the proposed plans, shall not
be considered a part of the request presented to the Plan Commission for its
consideration unless such waivers are specified in the petition.



         (f)   Docketing by Director. Each petition filed in
proper form pursuant to the guidelines established by the Department of
Planning and Zoning shall, within ten days of filing, be numbered and
docketed by the Director for an initial hearing by the Plan Commission.



         (g)   Investigation of petitions. Upon assignment of a
number and hearing date, the Director shall distribute a copy of the petition
and relevant supporting documentation to the members of the Technical
Advisory Committee or Design Review Committee for review and comment.



         (h)   Notice requirements. Notice of all petitions for
development plan approval which require a public hearing before the Plan
Commission shall be given to all interested parties or property owners in the
following manner.



            1.   Notice by publication. Notice shall be
published by the Plan Commission in accordance with I.C. 5-3-1 at least 15
days prior to the date of the public hearing.



            2.   Notice by mailing.



               a.   Notice, in a form approved by the
Director, shall be mailed to each interested party.



               b.   Notice by mailing shall be given by
registered or certified mail at least 15 days prior to the date of the
hearing.



               c.   Interested parties for a development
plan approval shall include all owners of adjoining parcels to a depth of two
ownerships or 600 feet, whichever is less, surrounding the perimeter of the
area included in the petition.



            3.   Posted notice on subject property. Notice, on
a form prescribed by the Plan Commission, shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the subject property at least 15 days prior to the date of the
hearing.



            4.   Affidavit of notice. Petitioner shall file an
affidavit of notice with the Department of Planning and Zoning, in a form as
specified by the Department of Planning and Zoning, indicating compliance
with the above notice requirements not less than one business day prior to
the date of the public hearing. Copies of all “receipt for certified
mail” (white slips) and the originals of the “domestic return receipts”
(green cards) shall be filed with the affidavit of notice.



         (i)   Conduct of public hearings. All public hearings on
a development plan approval shall comply with the conduct of public hearings
section of the rules of procedure of the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Application for development plan approval by the
Director shall be accomplished in compliance with the following procedures.



         (a)   Contact the Director to make an appointment to
deliver the required plans and provide a brief explanation of the proposed
development plan.



         (b)   The Director shall have a period of not more than
15 days in which to review the proposed development plan and either make a
decision concerning the development plan or request, in writing, additional
information from the applicant.



         (c)   The Director may seek the advice and comment of
members of the Technical Advisory Committee or the Design Review Committee
prior to making a decision.



         (d)   Any development plan approval which has been
delegated to the Director may occur without public notice and without a
public hearing and shall be submitted as an improvement location permit (ILP).



         (e)   Any decision of the Director under this Article,
may be appealed by any interested party to the Plan Commission within 30 days
of such decision by filing a letter with the Plan Commission requesting a
hearing by the Plan Commission. Said appeal shall be heard by the Plan
Commission at the Plan Commission’s next regularly scheduled public hearing
for which published notice of the appeal pursuant to I.C. 5-3-1 can be
provided.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39- 2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8B  FEES.



   In order to defray administrative costs, the fees as set forth in the
fee schedule as approved by the Plan Commission and the Town Council for
development plan approval by Director and for development plan approval by
the Plan Commission, are to be paid by the applicant at the time of filing an
application for development plan approval.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8C  NOTICE.



      (1)   All notices for public hearings regarding a development
plan approval before the Plan Commission shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements set forth in the rules of procedure of the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Notice shall not be required for development plan
approvals delegated to Director.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8D  HEARINGS.



   All public hearings regarding a development plan approval before the
Plan Commission shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the rules of procedure of the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8E  AMENDMENTS.



      (1)   Amendments to development plans pending determination by
the Plan Commission. Amendments to development plans pending determination by
the Plan Commission may be made by the applicant at any time prior to a vote
being called for by the Plan Commission. If, in the sole discretion of the
Plan Commission, the proposed amendment is of such a nature that additional
time is needed for review, the Plan Commission may continue the consideration
of such amended development plan to the next meeting of the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Amendments to development plans pending determination by
the Director. Amendments to development plans pending determination by the
Director may be made by the applicant at any time prior to a determination
being made by the Director. If, in the sole discretion of the Director, the
proposed amendment is of such a nature that additional time is needed for
review, the amended development plan shall be reviewed within the time frames
set forth above for the review of development plans by the Director.



      (3)   Amendments to approved development plans.



         (a)   Applicability. The amendment procedures of this
Article 5.8E(3) shall apply to:



            1.   Minor amendments to any development plan
which has already received approval from the Plan Commission or the Director;
and



            2.   Minor additions to sites which include
existing development authorized prior to the effective date of this ordinance.



         (b)   Determination of minor amendments or minor
additions.



            1.   Those projects listed in:



               a.   Table 5.5-A: Gateway Corridor
Development Plans;



               b.   Table 5.5-B: Commercial/Industrial
Development Plans Within 600 Feet of a Residential District;



               c.   Table 5.6-A: TC: Town Center District
Development Plans; or



               d.   Table 5.6-B: R-U: Urban Residential
District and MU: Mixed Use District Development Plans, as having an
“approval authority” of “Director” shall be eligible for review and
determination through the improvement location permit process as a minor
amendment or a minor addition without the filing of a development plan.



            2.   All projects listed on said Tables as having
an “approval authority” of “Plan Commission” shall file a development
plan for review and determination by the Plan Commission.



         (c)   Director’s authority.



            1.   The Director is hereby authorized to approve
minor amendments to development plans or minor additions to sites which
include existing development through the improvement location permit process
and without a public hearing if, in the determination of the Director, the
requested minor amendments or minor additions:



               a.   Do not adversely impact the purpose or
intent of the overall development;



               b.   Do not include a substantial increase
in intensity of any land use relative to the previous land use on the real
estate; and



               c.   Comply with the applicable development
requirements specified in Article 5.2, Article 5.3, Article 5.4, Article 5.5
or Article 5.6.



            2.   a.   If the Director determines that a
request for minor amendment to a development plan or a minor addition to an
existing development does not comply with the requirements set forth above,
the Director may:



                  i.   Deny the request; or



                  ii.   Refer to the request to the Plan
Commission for determination.



               b.   Any request referred to the Plan
Commission for determination shall be accompanied by an application for
development plan approval and shall be subject to all application, fee,
notice and hearing requirements specified above for new development.



         (d)   Reporting. Minor amendments or minor additions
authorized by the Director shall be reported, in writing, to the Plan
Commission at the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission.



         (e)   Appeal.



            1.   Any decision of the Director regarding a
minor amendment of a development plan or a minor addition may be appealed by
any interested party as follows:



               a.   An appeal of the interpretation of a
development standard of the applicable district shall be to the Board of
Zoning Appeals;



               b.   An appeal of the interpretation of any
other development requirement specified in this Article V shall be to the
Plan Commission; and



               c.   An appeal of a determination to approve
or deny a minor amendment of a development plan or a minor addition shall be
to the Plan Commission.



            2.   All appeals shall be filed within 30 days of
such determination.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8F  FINDINGS.



   All findings specified above for the approval of a development plan
shall be reduced to writing and signed by the Director of the Department of
Planning and Zoning in the case of a determination by the Director, or by the
President of the Plan Commission in the case of a determination by the Plan
Commission, and retained as a part of the permanent record of the
determination.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



§ 5.8G  DURATION OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.



   Any development plan authorized by Article 5 - Development Plan
Approvals shall be subject to the following duration provisions.



      (1)   Any development plan which has been approved by the Plan
Commission or the Director pursuant to this Article shall be valid for a
period not to exceed three years from the date of approval of such
development plan.



      (2)   In the case of a development plan approved by the Plan
Commission, a complete improvement location permit application shall be filed
with the Department of Planning and Zoning prior to the expiration of such
three-year period and shall be subject to the provisions of Article 11.2
-Improvement Location Permits.



      (3)   In the case of a development plan approved by the
Director in the form of an improvement location permit, notwithstanding the
one year duration specified in Article 11.2B(1) the duration of such
improvement location permit shall be three years. The improvement location
permit shall comply with all current development standards and requirements.
All other provisions of Article 11.2 - Improvement Location Permits shall
apply.



      (4)   If an improvement location permit has not been filed
with the Department of Planning and Zoning within one year of approval of the
development plan, the development plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis
by the Director for compliance with current development standards and
requirements.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011)



ARTICLE 6.1. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT



§ 6.1A  INTENT.



      (1)   The Planned Unit Development (PUD) District is designed
to: encourage creativity and innovation in the design of developments;
provide for more efficient use of land including the reduction of land area
disturbed for utility lines and motor vehicle access; permit special
consideration of property with outstanding natural or topographical features;
facilitate use of the most appropriate construction techniques in the
development of land; and to provide for any individual land use not otherwise
specified elsewhere in this ordinance. The PUD District provides flexibility
in land use regulations by allowing for the consolidation of the subdivision
and zone map change procedures as set forth below. The PUD District
encourages imaginative uses of open space, promotes high standards in design
and construction, and furthers the purposes of the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   The PUD District is not intended for the development of
residential subdivisions or other developments which are provided for as a
matter of right within any individual district of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1B  PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



      (1)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Primary uses in the PUD District shall be any use
or range of uses specified in the PUD District ordinance establishing such
District and shall be the same as those specified in the petition for zone
map change, either in text form or as noted in the preliminary plan filed
with the petition for zone map change. Primary uses, by way of example, may
include any residential, commercial or industrial land use, or any individual
land use or combination of land uses deemed appropriate for the real estate.



         (b)   Accessory uses, home occupations or temporary
uses, unless otherwise specified in the PUD District ordinance and the
petition for zone map change, shall be permitted in a manner customarily
associated with the primary use specified in the PUD District ordinance.



      (2)   Development requirements. Development requirements
applicable to a PUD shall be those development standards and other
requirements specified in the PUD District ordinance establishing such
District and shall be the same as those specified in the petition for zone
map change, either in text form or as noted on the preliminary plan filed
with the petition for zone map change. Every petition for zone map change to
the PUD District shall specify development standards applicable to each
permitted use in the development and, at a minimum, shall adopt or include a
variation of each development standard that is applicable to each such use in
a district in which each such use is listed as a primary use. In any case in
which an applicable development requirement or development standard has not
been specified in the petition for zone map change, the applicable
development requirement or development standard shall be that which is
specified in the district which lists such use as a primary use and which
imposes the highest standard for site development (i.e., minimum yards,
minimum bufferyards, landscaping, lighting, architectural and site design
requirements and the like). If the petitioner does not want an otherwise
applicable development requirement or development standard for any permitted
use in the development to be applicable, then the petition for zone map
change shall contain a statement to such effect.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1C  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Overview.



         (a)   The complete review and approval process for a PUD
consists of three elements:



            1.   Concept plan design review;



            2.   Zone map change, including a preliminary
plan; and



            3.   Secondary review of a final detailed plan.



         (b)   To facilitate the use of this PUD District, after
completion of the concept plan review, a petitioner may elect to proceed with
the zone map change, including a preliminary plan, approval of a final
detailed plan, and primary plat approval separately or may elect to combine
any or all of those elements for joint approval. If a petitioner elects to
combine any or all of those elements, all elements elected to be combined
shall be docketed before the Plan Commission for a joint hearing.



         (c)   If filed separately, the procedure for filing for
approval of a zone map change including a preliminary plan shall be the same
as that required for any other petition for zone map change before the Plan
Commission, except as otherwise provided for in this Article. The procedure
for filing for approval of a final detailed plan is set forth in Article 6.1D.



      (2)   Filing for concept plan review.



         (a)   The petitioner shall submit a concept plan
consisting of:



            1.   A written description of the proposed
preliminary PUD; and



            2.   A sketch plan for the proposed development,
for review by the staff prior to filing a petition for zone map change to the
PUD District.



         (b)   Staff shall review the proposed concept plan
taking into consideration information regarding the terrain of the site and
any unique natural features of the site. In doing so, the staff’s review
may include, but not be limited to, the following:



            1.   Protection of unique topographical features
on the site, including, but not limited to, slopes, streams and natural water
features;



            2.   Protection and preservation of wooded areas,
individual trees of significant size, wetlands or other environmentally
sensitive features;



            3.   Development of common open space and
recreational areas (passive or active) accessible to the residents or users
of the PUD by way of sidewalks, footpaths or combined walkways/bikeways;



            4.   A more efficient use of the land including
the reduction of land area disturbed for utility lines and motor vehicle
access;



            5.   Creation of innovative residential and
business environments;



            6.   Minimize the alteration of the natural site
features through the design and situation of individual lots, streets and
buildings;



            7.   Diversity and originality in lot layout;



            8.   Utilization of individual building designs
which achieve an enhanced relationship between the development and the land;
and



            9.   Relationship to surrounding properties.



         (c)   The Director shall notify the petitioner of any
staff comments related to the proposed concept plan within 15 days of the
submittal.



         (d)   The petitioner may modify the proposed concept
plan and file a petition for zone map change, including a preliminary plan,
after the earlier of:



            1.   Receipt of comments from the staff; or



            2.   The expiration of the 15-day period referred
to above.



         (e)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this
ordinance to the contrary, neither the staff’s review of the proposed
concept plan submitted for review nor staff’s comments to the petitioner
relating thereto shall be considered a denial, approval or decision
concerning the proposed concept plan.



      (3)   Filing for zone map change, including a preliminary
plan, with the Plan Commission.



         (a)   Filing deadline. All petitions for zone map
change, including a preliminary plan, shall be filed at least 45 days prior
to the initial public hearing at which they are to be considered by the Plan
Commission.



         (b)   Petition. After completion of the concept plan
review, an application for zone map change to the PUD District, which
includes a preliminary plan, may be filed with the Plan Commission. All
petitions for zone map change to the PUD District shall contain a preliminary
plan that satisfies the requirements of set forth below, and shall specify in
either general terms or detailed terms the development requirements that will
apply to the real property that is included in the petition.



         (c)   Detailed terms.



            1.   For a preliminary plan to be deemed to have
expressed development requirements in detailed terms, said preliminary plan
shall include site plans, building elevations, landscape plans, lighting
plans, sign plans or any other plan required by this ordinance in sufficient
detail to fulfill the requirements for the issuance of an improvement
location permit.



            2.   If the preliminary plan expresses development
requirements in detailed terms, the petitioner may also request approval of a
final detailed plan in connection with the approval of the zone map change,
provided that any such approval shall be conditioned upon the Town Council
adopting the zone map change to the PUD District. The requirements for
approval of a final detailed plan are set forth in Article 6.1D below.



         (d)   General terms. All preliminary plans or submittals
which do not comply with the requirements above for detailed terms shall be
deemed to have expressed the development requirements that apply to the
proposed PUD in general terms only and shall be required to file for and
obtain approval of a final detailed plan from the Plan Commission, as set
forth below, prior to the issuance of an improvement location permit.



         (e)   Preliminary plan. A preliminary plan filed with
the Plan Commission shall satisfy the following requirements:



            1.   A preliminary plan shall include:



               a.   A sketch plan which depicts the
location of proposed land uses and maximum land use densities (i.e., lot
area, floor area, ratio of floor area to lot area, identification of areas in
which buildings may be located, open space, setback lines, distance between
buildings, height of structures, signs, parking areas, loading areas and
landscaping);



               b.   Proposed layout of streets, open space
and other basic elements of the development;



               c.   Proposals for handling traffic,
parking, sewage disposal, drainage, tree preservation and removal, and other
pertinent development features;



               d.   The current zoning of the area proposed
to be developed as well as the current zoning of the adjacent land;



               e.   A proposed breakdown of sections to be
contained in the overall development along with a statement as to the order
and timing of development;



               f.   All public and private streets and
pedestrian ways within 200 feet of the site;



               g.   North arrow, written and graphic scale,
general location map; and



               h.   Percentage of site devoted to open
space.



            2.   The preliminary plan, which may be a sketch
plan, shall be drawn to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet.



         (f)   Primary plat. If desired, the petitioner may also
file for primary plat approval before the Plan Commission in the manner set
forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance, provided that any such approval
shall be conditioned upon the Town Council adopting the zone map change to
the PUD District. Said primary plat approval shall be set for a joint hearing
before the Plan Commission with the petition for zone map change, including a
preliminary plan, and, notwithstanding anything in the Subdivision Control
Ordinance to the contrary, shall comply with the 45 filing deadline set forth
above.



      (4)   Determination by the Plan Commission. In its
determination of the appropriateness of the proposed PUD and whether to
recommend approval of the zone map change, including a preliminary plan, to
the Town Council, the Plan Commission shall be guided by the extent to which
the proposal:



         (a)   Accomplishes the intent set forth in Article 6.1A
above; and



         (b)   Provides for the protection or provision of the
site features and amenities outlined in Article 6.1C(2) above.



      (5)   Commitments, conditions or surety.



         (a)   Commitments. The Plan Commission may require or
permit the owner of a parcel of property to make written commitments
concerning the use or development of the subject property in connection with
the recommendation of approval of a PUD or a final detailed plan secondary
approval pursuant to Article 4.15 of this ordinance.



         (b)   Conditions. Conditions may be imposed on the
approval of a PUD District which are reasonably necessary to assure
compliance with the permitted use, development requirements, development
standards and other minimum requirements of the PUD District Ordinance.



         (c)   Surety. Bonds or other written assurance may be
required which are reasonably necessary to guarantee the timely completion of
a public improvement required by the proposed by the PUD District ordinance.
Such bond or other written assurance shall be of a form and substance
approved by the Town Engineer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1D  SECONDARY REVIEW - FINAL DETAILED PLAN.



      (1)   Secondary review required. Secondary review of a final
detailed plan is required in the PUD District as a prerequisite to the
issuance of an improvement location permit for development of any real
property in such district. The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove
each detailed final plan submitted to it for review pursuant to this Article.



      (2)   Single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling
exception. The provisions of this Article regarding final detailed plans for
single-family dwelling and two-family dwelling portions of a PUD shall be
deemed to have been fulfilled through the review and approval of a primary
plat and secondary plat in conformance with the procedures set forth in the
Subdivision Control Ordinance and compliance with the terms of any
commitments, conditions or surety required by the Plan Commission.



      (3)   Time limit for approval of a final detailed plan. If a
final detailed plan is not approved by the Plan Commission in a joint hearing
with the petition for zone map change, petitioner shall have a period of up
to three years from the date of the approval of the petition for zone map
change in which to file for approval of a final detailed plan, in total or in
phases, for approval by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall review
the final detailed plan for consistency with the preliminary plan approved by
the Town Council in connection with the petition for zone map change. If a
request for approval of a final detailed plan is filed for in phases, each
subsequent phase shall be filed for within three years of the approval of the
prior phase.



      (4)   Public hearing. A determination by the Plan Commission
on whether or not to approve a final detailed plan shall be made at a public
hearing of the Plan Commission. The nature and type of application, and any
other relevant matters for the review and approval of a final detailed plan
shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 5.8A and as
specified in the rules of the Plan Commission for a development plan petition
submitted for architectural and site design review. Fees shall be in
accordance with the schedule adopted pursuant to Article 10.2C(20) of this
ordinance.



      (5)   Expiration of preliminary plan. In the event that
approval of a final detailed plan is not obtained for all or a portion of the
PUD within the time frames outlined above, the preliminary plan shall be
deemed to have expired for that portion of the PUD that has not received
approval of a final detailed plan, except for the location and density of
proposed land uses depicted on such preliminary plan. Once a preliminary plan
has expired for any portion of the PUD, no development shall occur within the
expired portions of the PUD until:



         (a)   A new preliminary plan is approved by the Plan
Commission at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given in the same
manner as for a petition for zone map change; and



         (b)   Approval of a final detailed plan as required by
this Article has been obtained.



      (6)   Expiration of final detailed plan.



         (a)   A final detailed plan shall expire upon the later
of:



            1.   Three years after the date of approval by the
Plan Commission; or



            2.   The expiration of a building permit issued
for the use or development of the property.



         (b)   Once a final detailed plan has expired for any
portion of the PUD, no development shall occur within the expired portions of
the PUD until a new final detailed plan as required by this Article has been
approved by the Plan Commission.



      (7)   Final detailed plan requirements. Before the Plan
Commission approves a final detailed plan, the petitioner must submit a final
detailed plan consisting of the following:



         (a)   Area map insert showing the general location of
the proposed development referenced to major streets and section lines;



         (b)   Location map showing the names of all metes and
bounds property owners, boundary lines of recorded subdivisions, zoning and
land uses of adjacent properties;



         (c)   Proposed name of the PUD;



         (d)   Legal description of the real estate;



         (e)   Boundary lines of the proposed PUD;



         (f)   Location and name of all existing and proposed
public or private roads, access easements and rights-of-way within 200 feet
of the real estate;



         (g)   Location of all existing and proposed utility
facilities and easements, including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer,
water, storm water management, electric, gas, telephone and cable;



         (h)   Layout, number and dimension of all lots and out
lots with zoning setback lines;



         (i)   Location, delineation and elevation of all
floodway and floodway fringe areas within the boundaries of the PUD;



         (j)   Drainage plan for all watersheds in and around the
proposed PUD, indicating the general drainage pattern of lots, the location
of all drainage channels and sub-surface drainage structures, the proposed
method of disposing of all storm water runoff including data to show that the
proposed outlet(s) are adequate to accommodate the drainage requirements of
the PUD, and all existing and proposed detention facilities;



         (k)   An erosion control plan for all areas of site
disturbance;



         (l)   Topographic contour every five feet superimposed
upon the proposed final detailed plan;



         (m)   Proposed elevation of all building pads within the
proposed development;



         (n)   All improvements to street system on-site and
off-site;



         (o)   Sidewalk plan or alternate plan for pedestrian
ways;



         (p)   Plans and specifications for all infrastructure
improvements required or proposed in the PUD;



         (q)   Areas reserved for park, conservation, wetland,
common area, lake or other similar uses;



         (r)   Proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions;



         (s)   The character and approximate density of all
proposed uses and structures in the plan area; and



         (t)   Any other information requested in writing by the
Plan Commission or staff.



      (8)   Findings.



         (a)   The Plan Commission may approve a final detailed
plan only upon a finding that:



            1.   The final detailed plan satisfies the
development requirements and development standards specified in the PUD
District ordinance establishing such District;



            2.   The final detailed plan accomplishes the
intent set forth in this Article VI; and



            3.   The final detailed plan provides for the
protection or provision of the site features and amenities outlined in
Article 6.1C(2) above.



         (b)   The Plan Commission shall specify any plan
documentation or supporting information in addition to that required by this
Article that must be supplied before an improvement location permit may be
issued for the development of any real estate located in the PUD District.



         (c)   The Plan Commission shall make written findings
concerning each decision to approve or disapprove a final detailed plan, and
each such written finding shall be signed by the President of the Plan
Commission.



      (9)   Plan Commission seal. Said final detailed plan, upon
approval, shall be sealed with the Plan Commission seal and retained in the
office of the Plan Commission to be used in its continuing administration of
the PUD.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1E  MODIFICATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.



      (1)   Minor modifications to an approved PUD District
ordinance which do not involve an increase in intensity of land uses or the
designation of additional land uses may be authorized by the Director without
a public hearing in its continuing administration of the PUD if, in the
determination of the Director, the requested modifications do not adversely
impact the purpose or intent of the overall development.



      (2)   If the Director determines that the proposed
modification is of such a nature as to adversely impact the purpose or intent
of the overall development, or if the proposed modification includes an
increase in intensity of any land use or if the proposed modification
includes the designation of an additional land use(s), petitioner shall be
required to file a new petition for zone map change.



      (3)   Any decision of the Director under this Article 6.1E may
be appealed by the petitioner to the Plan Commission within 30 days of being
notified of such determination.



      (4)   The Plan Commission is delegated the authority to
establish rules governing the nature of proceedings and notice required to
make a modification under this Article.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1F  SECONDARY PLAT APPROVAL.



   Secondary plat approval for any development pursuant to this PUD
ordinance shall be issued in a manner consistent with that for any other
subdivision under the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission in compliance with
the procedures set forth in the Subdivision Control Ordinance and with any
additional requirements or commitments entered into in connection with the
approval of the final detailed plan pursuant to this PUD ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1G  MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE.



   In those PUDs in which common areas or recreation areas are provided
for the use and enjoyment of residents or users of the PUD, the petitioner
shall file documentary assurances with the Plan Commission that the permanent
dedication and continuous maintenance of open space shall be made in
accordance with the preliminary plan and final detailed plan approved by the
Plan Commission, and that the common areas and recreation areas shall be made
available to the residents and users of the overall PUD at a reasonable and
non-discriminatory rate of charge, prior to obtaining secondary plat
approval. Such documentary assurances shall be incorporated into the
secondary plat that is recorded in the office of the County Recorder or
otherwise provided for through legally binding perpetual agreements as
approved by the Plan Commission. Such open space shall perpetually run with
the PUD and shall not be developed or separated from the PUD at a later date
(unless no development of any portion of the PUD which is benefitted by the
common areas or recreation areas has occurred and the entire area subject to
the PUD is presented for zone map change).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



§ 6.1H  EXTENSIONS.



   Extensions of time, in six month increments not to exceed a total of
two years, for obtaining approval of a final detailed plan may be granted by
the Director for good cause shown. In the event that the Director disallows a
requested extension, the petitioner may appeal said determination to the Plan
Commission within 30 days of being notified of such determination.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 7.1. SIGN REGULATIONS: INTENT AND APPLICATION



§ 7.1  INTENT AND APPLICATION.



      (1)   Articles 7.1 through 7.8 of this appendix shall
hereinafter be known and cited as the “Sign Regulations.” The sign
regulations are intended to:



         (a)   Ensure that signs may be used to exercise the
constitutional right to free speech;



         (b)   Encourage signs that are integrated with and
harmonious with their environment;



         (c)   Eliminate signs that are excessive, cluttered, and
confusing;



         (d)   Eliminate signs that are hazardous to motorists
and pedestrians;



         (e)   Support land use objectives of the town;



         (f)   Preserve and improve the aesthetic appearance of,
property values within, and public and private economic investment in the
town; and



         (g)   Otherwise protect and promote the pubic health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the visitors and resident s of the
town.



      (2)    The sign regulations apply to the location, erection
and maintenance of signs in any zoning district regulated by this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.2. SIGNS: EXEMPT



§ 7.2  EXEMPTIONS.



   Unless otherwise stated, the following items are exempt from the Sign
Regulations and all other Articles of this appendix, with the exception of
Article 4.14.



   (A)   Public health, safety, and welfare signs.



      (1)   Official Signs. Signs authorized by a government or
governmental unit which give traffic, directional, or warning information;
signs of public service companies indicating danger; and signs erected by, or
on the order of, a public officer in the performance of their public duty
which aide service or safety.



      (2)   Traffic Control Signs. Traffic signs such as “Stop”,
“Yield” and similar signs, which are located along a private street,
interior access drive or interior access driveway, which contain no
commercial message, and which do not exceed the area or height requirements
of the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices, latest version.







 



      (3)   Parking signs. Signs which limit the use of individual
off-street parking spaces (i.e., “Handicapped Parking”, “No Parking”,
“Reserved Parking”, “Two Hour Parking”, and similar signs), which
contain no commercial message, and do not exceed one and one-half square feet
in sign surface area.



      (4)   Amenity and utility signs. Signs only indicating the
location of public telephones and restrooms, underground public utilities, or
similar location signs and containing four square feet or less in sign
surface area.



      (5)   Signs required or authorized by law. Signs required or
specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or
ordinance, which may be any type, number, area, height above grade, location
or illumination required by the law, statute or ordinance under which the
signs are erected.



      (6)   Private signs for the public. These signs include:



         (a)   Signs only giving property identification, names
and numbers of occupants, and containing two square feet or less in sign
surface area; and



         (b)   Signs posted on private property only to identify
or warn about “Private Property”, “Private Parking”, “No
Trespassing” or “Danger” from animals and containing two square feet or
less in sign surface area.



   (B)   Interior Signs. Signs located within the interior of any
building (i.e., an inner or outer lobby, court or entrance), which are not
viewable or intended to be viewable from the public right-ofway and do not
qualify as window signs.



   (C)   Window signs.



      (1)   Window signs, provided that they shall not exceed the
lesser of:



         (a)   Fifty percent (50%) of the surface area of the
window on which such signs are placed or through which such signs are viewed,
provided, in the case of multi-pane windows, the surface area of the window
shall be the combined surface area of the individual panes or, in the case of
a glass curtain wall, the surface area of the window shall be the combined
surface area of the individual glass panels; or



         (b)   Ten percent (10%) of the total area of the front
facade of the Structure or tenant space.



      (2)   If a window sign complies with this regulation, the sign
surface area of the window sign shall not be included in the calculation of
the total sign surface area of permitted building identification signs.



   (D)   Commemorative and monumental signs on buildings. Signs which
are carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or are made of bronze,
aluminum or other permanent type construction; and are made an integral part
of the building.



   (E)   Architectural features of buildings. Integral, decorative, or
architectural features of buildings which do not contain letters, logos,
lighting, or trademarks.



   (F)   Exterior illumination of buildings. Highlighting and outlining
of structural and architectural elements of buildings (such as roof lines,
doors, window or wall edges) by illumination, which does not contain letters,
logos, or trademarks and is not flashing or animated.



   (G)   Tombstones, headstones, and gravestones. Tombstones,
headstones, and gravestones so long as they are located in an authorized
district.



   (H)   Symbols of a nation, state or political subdivision. Flags,
pennants, emblems, and insignia of a nation, state, or political subdivision.
These flags, pennants, emblems, and insignia must comply with the setback
requirements for signs and cannot be affixed to poles in excess of 35 feet in
height.



   (I)   Works of art. Two dimensional and three dimensional works of
art, which are clearly artistic in nature and do not promote commercial.
These works of art must comply with the following size and location
requirements:



      (1)   Two dimensional works of art which exceed five 5% of the
side or rear facade of a building on which they are placed shall require
development plan approval as a wall sign; and



      (2)   Two dimensional works of art, regardless of their size,
shall not be permitted on the front facade of any building.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 3-2002,
passed - -2002; Ord. 26- 2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 02-2009, passed
1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2011, passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.3. SIGNS: PROHIBITED



§ 7.3  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:



   (A)   Signs which interfere, obstruct, or cause confusion in
connection with any authorized traffic signal, device, or sign; any sign
listed in Article 7.2(A)(1)-(5); any street intersection; or any vision
clearance areas as specified in Article 4.14;



   (B)   Signs attached to trees, fire hydrants, utility poles, or
public or government property (except for signs listed in Article
7.2(A)(1)-(5)).



   (C)   Signs located on, in, or above the right-of-way of any street
or alley (except for signs listed in Article 7.2(A)(1)-(5) and projecting
signs as permitted by Article 7.4.G and J.).



   (D)    Signs erected on or wholly constructed upon a roof of any
Building and supported solely on the roof structure;







Examples of Roof Signs



   (E)   Portable signs, including but not limited to the following
types of signs, without regard to their content:



      (1)   A-frame signs (except as permitted in Article 7.5.K.);



      (2)   T-frame signs (except as permitted in Article 7.5.K.);



      (3)   Trailer frame signs;



      (4)   Menu and sandwich board signs (except as permitted by
Article 7.2.L.); and



      (5)   Signs attached to or painted on a vehicle parked and
visible from the public right-of-way.



      (6)   Exception: the following vehicles, used in the normal
day-to-day operation of a business (such as for deliveries) are exempt from
the prohibition on portable signs: automobiles, trucks, and delivery vans.
However, trucks with a one ton or greater load capacity, used in the normal
day-to-day operation of a business, must be parked to the side of or behind
the building associated with such business.



   (F)   Wind signs, banner signs, pennants, and streamers (except
those explicitly authorized in Article 7.2.H.).



   (G)   Signs or any portion thereof which contains intermittent
light, flashing light, light of changing degrees of intensity, rotating
beams, search lights, video or logo projection, laser show, or beacons
(except as explicitly authorized in Article 7.2.L.). Outline lighting of open
sales areas and lot lines is also prohibited.



   (H)   Signs or any portion thereof which moves or assumes any motion
or gives the illusion of moving, including changeable copy signs on which the
message changes more than once every ten seconds.



   (I)   Signs that bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an
obscene, pornographic, immoral character, or which contain advertising matter
which is untruthful or will offend pubic morals or decency.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 26-2004,
passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 28- 2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 24-2009, passed
1-26-2009; Ord. 22-2013, passed 8-12-2013; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.4. SIGNS: ON-PREMISES SIGNS: COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(EXCEPT FOR THE TC: TOWN CENTER DISTRICT AND MU: MIXED USE DISTRICT)



§ 7.4A  FREESTANDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR SINGLE USE SITES.



      (1)   Type of signs.



         (a)   Freestanding identification signs shall be
permitted as follows.



         (b)   Ground signs are permitted in all NR, OD, GC, I-1,
I-2, I-3 and I-4 Districts.



      (2)   Number of signs.



         (a)   One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted for each street frontage of a lot.



         (b)   When a lot has more than one street frontage and
qualifies for an additional freestanding identification sign, the minimum
separation between freestanding identification signs on the lot, regardless
of the orientation of the freestanding identification signs, shall be 100
feet.



         (c)   Exception: when a lot has frontage in excess of
500 feet on the same street, one additional freestanding identification sign
shall be permitted on that street frontage, provided that:



            1.   The minimum separation between freestanding
identification signs along the same street shall be 300 feet;



            2.   The additional freestanding identification
sign is oriented to the street with frontage in excess of 500 feet;



            3.   The minimum separation between freestanding
identification signs on the lot, regardless of the orientation of the
freestanding identification signs, shall be 100 feet; and



            4.   The total sign surface area of all
freestanding identification signs does not exceed the maximum sign surface
area permitted below.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area of freestanding signs.



         (a)   Maximum sign surface area shall apply individually
to each street frontage.



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area shall not exceed
that specified in Table 7.4 - A: Maximum Sign Surface Area below:



 


Table 7.4 - A: Maximum Sign Surface Area
Freestanding Signs for Single Use Sites




Frontage

 

NR, OD, I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-4 Districts (2)

 

GC District






300 ft.

 

64 sq. ft.

 

100 sq. ft.




> 300 ft.— 500 ft.

 

100 sq. ft.

 

140 sq. ft.




> 500 ft.— 1,000 ft.

 

150 sq. ft. (1)

 

200 sq. ft. (1)




> 1,000

 

200 sq. ft. (1)

 

300 sq. ft. (1)



(1)   Sign surface area may be all in one freestanding sign or divided
between two freestanding signs


(2)   Sign surface areas for signs along the Ronald Reagan Parkway
corridor will be limited in size to the NR and the like column




 



      (4)   Minimum front, side and rear setback for freestanding
identification signs.



         (a)   Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback
for any freestanding identification sign shall be:



            1.   Required front yard. Ten feet from proposed
right-of-way; and



            2.   Required front bufferyard. Twenty feet
proposed right-of-way.



         (b)   Side and rear yard setback. The minimum side or
rear yard setback for a freestanding identification sign shall be the same as
required for any building or structure in the applicable zoning district.



      (5)   Maximum height of freestanding identification signs. The
maximum height of a freestanding identification sign shall be determined by
the type of sign structure.



         (a)   Ground sign. The maximum height of a freestanding
ground identification sign shall not exceed six feet in height above grade.



      (6)   Special regulations for lots abutting SR 267 or Ronald
Reagan Parkway. Number of freestanding identification signs; a single use
site located on a lot which abuts the limited access right- of-way of SR 267
between the north right-of-way line of Hadley Road/CR 600S to the south
right-of-way line of U.S. 40 or which abuts the Ronald Reagan Parkway shall
be permitted one additional freestanding identification sign which shall be
oriented toward SR 267 or Ronald Reagan Parkway, as appropriate, provided:



         (a)   Any other permitted freestanding identification
sign is oriented toward the street frontage of the lot which permits such
sign;



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area of the freestanding
identification sign oriented toward SR 267 or Ronald Reagan Parkway, as
appropriate, shall be determined by the length of the property line abutting
the appropriate right-of-way and in accordance with Table 7.4 - A above; and



         (c)   All other requirements of Article 7.4A are met.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26- 2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28- 2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06- 2011,
passed 6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed
9-11-2017)



§ 7.4B  FREESTANDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR INTEGRATED CENTERS.



      (1)   Type of signs. Freestanding identification signs shall
be permitted as follows:



         (a)   Ground signs. NR, OD, GC, I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-4
Districts;



         (b)   Pylon signs. GC District; and



         (c)   Pole signs. GC District.



      (2)   Type of signs based on size of integrated centers.



         (a)   Integrated centers with a total gross floor area
larger than 10,000 square feet, but less than 200,000 square feet may use
ground or pylon signs for freestanding integrated center signs.



         (b)   Integrated centers with a total gross floor area
larger than 200,000 square feet may use ground, pylon, or pole signs for
freestanding integrated center signs.



      (3)   Number of signs.



         (a)   One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted for each street frontage of an integrated center. Said freestanding
identification sign shall include the name of the integrated center and shall
allocate a minimum of 10% of the sign surface area to the name of the
integrated center.



         (b)   When an integrated center has more than one street
frontage and qualifies for an additional freestanding identification sign,
the minimum separation between freestanding identification signs on the
integrated center, regardless of the orientation of the freestanding
identification signs, shall be 100 feet.



         (c)   Exception: when an integrated center has frontage
in excess of 500 feet on the same street, one additional freestanding
identification sign shall be permitted on that street frontage, provided that:



            1.   The minimum separation between freestanding
identification signs along the same street is 500 feet;



            2.   The additional freestanding identification
sign is oriented to the street with frontage in excess of 300 feet;



            3.   The minimum separation between freestanding
identification signs in the integrated center, regardless of the orientation
of the freestanding identification signs, shall be 100 feet; and



            4.   The total sign surface area of all
freestanding identification signs does not exceed the maximum sign surface
area permitted below.



      (4)   Maximum sign surface area of freestanding signs for an
integrated center.



         (a)   Maximum sign surface area shall apply individually
to each street frontage.



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area shall not exceed
that specified in Table 7.4 - B: Maximum Sign Surface Area, below:



 


Table 7.4 - B: Maximum Sign Surface Area Freestanding Signs for Integrated
Centers




Frontage

 

NR, OD, I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-4 Districts (4)

 

GC District






< 300 ft.

 

64 sq. ft.

 

100 sq. ft.




> 300 ft.— 500 ft.

 

140 sq. ft. (1)

 

200 sq. ft. (1)




> 500 ft.— 1,000 ft.

 

200 sq. ft. (1)

 

300 sq. ft. (1)




> 1,000

 

400 sq. ft. (2)

 

600 sq. ft. (3)



(1)   Sign surface area may be all in one freestanding sign or divided
between two freestanding signs


(2)   Sign surface area may be all in one freestanding sign or divided
between two freestanding signs, provided that the maximum sign surface area
for any individual freestanding sign shall not exceed 300 square feet


(3)   Sign surface area may be all in one freestanding sign or divided
between two freestanding signs, provided that the maximum sign surface area
for any individual freestanding sign shall not exceed 400 square feet


(4)   Sign surface areas for signs along the Ronald Reagan Parkway
corridor will be limited in size to the NR and the like column




 



      (5)   Minimum front, side and rear setback for freestanding
identification signs.



         (a)   Ground signs or pylon signs.



            1.   Front setback. The minimum front setback for
any freestanding ground or pylon identification sign shall be:



               a.   Required front yard. Ten feet from
proposed right-of-way; and



               b.   Required front bufferyard. Twenty feet
from proposed right-of-way.



            2.   Side and rear setback. The minimum side or
rear yard setback for a freestanding ground or pylon identification sign
shall be the same as required for any building or structure in the applicable
zoning district.



         (b)   Pole signs.



            1.   Front setback. The minimum front setback for
any freestanding pole identification sign shall be:



               a.   Required front yard. Ten feet from
proposed right-of-way plus one additional foot of setback for each one
additional foot of overall height over 20 feet above grade until the maximum
height permitted below is reached; and



               b.   Required front bufferyard. Twenty feet
from proposed right-of-way plus one additional foot of setback for each one
additional foot of overall height over 20 feet above grade until the maximum
height permitted below is reached.



            2.   Side and rear setback. The minimum side or
rear yard setback for a freestanding pole identification sign shall be the
same as required for any building or structure in the applicable zoning
district.









 



   Pole Sign Setback Formula



      (6)   Maximum height of freestanding identification signs. The
maximum height of a freestanding identification sign shall be determined by
the type of sign structure:



         (a)   Ground sign. The maximum height of a freestanding
ground identification sign shall not exceed six feet in height above grade;



         (b)   Pylon sign. The maximum height of a freestanding
pylon identification sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height above grade; and



         (c)   Pole sign. The maximum height of a freestanding
pole identification sign shall not exceed 35 feet in height above grade.



      (7)   Special regulations for integrated centers abutting
Ronald Reagan Parkway.



         (a)   The type of integrated center sign permitted along
the Ronald Reagan Parkway will be limited to a ground or pylon sign.



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area of the integrated
center sign oriented toward Ronald Reagan Parkway shall be determined by the
length of the property line abutting the Ronald Reagan Parkway Right-of-way
and in accordance with Table 7.4 - B above.



      (8)   Special regulations for lots abutting SR 267. Number of
freestanding identification signs - an integrated center located on a lot
which abuts the limited access right-of-way of SR 267 between the north
right-of-way line of Hadley Road/CR 600S to the south right-of-way line of
U.S. 40 shall be permitted one additional freestanding identification sign
which shall be oriented toward SR 267, provided:



         (a)   Any other permitted freestanding identification
sign is oriented toward the street frontage of the lot which permits such
sign;



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area of the freestanding
identification sign oriented toward SR 267 shall be determined by the length
of the property line abutting the SR 267 right-of-way and in accordance with
Table 7.4 - B above; and



         (c)   All other requirements of Article 7.4B are met.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4C  FREESTANDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS FOR OUT LOTS IN AN INTEGRATED
CENTER.



      (1)   Number of freestanding identification signs for out lots.



         (a)   Commercial and industrial districts. In addition
to the freestanding identification signs permitted above for an integrated
center, individual out lots within an integrated center shall be permitted an
individual ground sign as set forth below.



         (b)   Industrial districts exception. If an out lot in
an industrial district has more than one street frontage, one additional
ground identification sign shall be permitted for each street frontage of the
out lot. If an out lot in an industrial district qualifies for an additional
ground identification sign, the minimum separation between the additional
ground identification sign and any other permitted freestanding
identification sign, regardless of orientation of the signs, shall be 100
feet.



      (2)   Maximum sign surface area of freestanding ground
identification signs on out lots. The maximum sign surface area of
freestanding ground identification signs on out lots shall be 48 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback for
freestanding ground identification signs on out lots.



         (a)   Front yard setback. The minimum front setback for
any freestanding ground identification sign on an out lot shall be:



            1.   Required front yard. Ten feet from proposed
right-of-way;



            2.   Required front bufferyard. Twenty feet from
proposed right-of-way.



         (b)   Side and rear yard setback or side and rear
bufferyard. The same as that required for any building or structure in the
applicable zoning district.



      (4)   Special regulations for out lots abutting SR 267. Number
of freestanding identification signs: an out lot located within an integrated
center where the out lot abuts the limited access right-of-way of SR 267
between the north right-of-way line of Hadley Road/CR 600 S to the south
right-of-way line of U.S. 40 shall be permitted one additional freestanding
identification sign which shall be oriented toward SR 267, provided:



         (a)   Any other permitted freestanding identification
sign is oriented toward a street frontage or interior access drive from which
the out lot gains access; and



         (b)   All other requirements of Article 7.4C are met.



      (5)   Special regulations for out lots containing gasoline
service stations. An out lot which contains a gasoline service station shall
be permitted one freestanding ground identification sign per street frontage,
provided:



         (a)   The minimum separation between any freestanding
ground identification sign and any other permitted freestanding
identification sign, regardless of orientation of the signs, shall be 100
feet; and



         (b)   No more than one freestanding ground
identification sign shall be oriented toward each street frontage.



      (6)   Special regulations for out lots located in any OD, NR
or GC District which utilize a development incentive for the use of required
yards in an integrated center.



         (a)   In order to minimize sign proliferation, the
Director may approve a combined freestanding identification sign which may
identify more than one out lot located in the same integrated center and
located in any OD, NR or GC District, without such combined freestanding
identification sign being considered an off-premises signs, for one or more
individual out lots, provided:



            1.   Such out lots are contiguous with each other;



            2.   Such out lots are subject to an approved
development incentive for the use of required yards in an integrated center;



            3.   The development incentive has resulted in a
design of such out lots involved which has reduced the number of access
locations to such out lots from either a public street or an interior access
drive and provides for shared circulation along the lot line in common
between such out lots;



            4.   The out lots served by the combined access
would each be permitted their own on-premises freestanding identification
signs under the terms of Article 7.4C;



            5.   Combined freestanding identification sign
shall not exceed a frequency of: one sign for two out lots served; two signs
for three, four or five out lots; and the like; one additional sign for each
two additional out lots served;



            6.   No more than one combined freestanding
identification sign shall be permitted on any one out lot, regardless of
orientation;



            7.   Any out lot which is identified on such a
combined freestanding identification sign shall not be permitted a separate
individual freestanding identification sign; and



            8.   Documentary assurances are provided on the
secondary plat or by other legally binding instrument which bind the
adjoining out lots to be developed in compliance with the special provisions
of this Article 7.4C(6) regarding freestanding identification signs.







 



         (b)   Any combined freestanding identification sign
authorized by the Director under the special regulations of this Article
7.4C(6) shall comply with the following regulations:



            1.   Type of sign. Such combined freestanding
identification sign shall be limited to a ground sign.



            2.   Maximum height of freestanding identification
sign. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article 7.4C or in Article
13 of this ordinance to the contrary, the maximum height of a combined
freestanding ground identification sign shall be six feet above grade and may
be increased by one foot above grade for each one additional out lot
identified on such sign, to a maximum height of ten feet above grade.



            3.   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign
surface area of a combined freestanding ground identification sign for such
out lots shall not exceed:



               a.   Forty-eight square feet; plus



               b.   An additional 12 square feet of sign
surface area for each additional out lot beyond one which is identified on
such combined freestanding ground identification sign.



            4.   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback for
freestanding ground identification signs on out lots.



               a.   Front yard setback. The minimum front
setback for any combined freestanding ground identification sign on an out
lot shall be:



                  i.   Required front yard. Ten feet
from proposed right-of-way; and



                  ii.   Required front bufferyard.
Twenty feet from proposed right-of-way.



               b.   Side and rear yard setback or side and
rear bufferyard. The same as that required for any building or structure in
the applicable zoning district.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed - -2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4D  BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.



      (1)   Type of signs. Building identification signs shall be
limited to wall signs.



      (2)   Number of building identification signs. There shall be
no limit to the number of wall building identification signs per facade,
provided that the total sign surface area of all wall signs located on each
building facade shall not exceed the maximum sign surface area for the
building facade upon which such signs are located.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area of building identification
signs.



         (a)   The total sign surface area of all building
identification signs, except those located on a building’s architectural
features (including, but not limited to, gables, towers and the like)
oriented to an individual facade shall not exceed:



            1.   Ten percent of the total area of an
individual facade plane of the structure or tenant space on which the sign is
located; and



            2.   The linear measurement of a business
identification wall sign, or grouping thereof, shall not exceed 80% of the
linear width of the facade plane of the structure or tenant space on which
the sign is located.



         (b)   Signs located on an architectural feature shall
not exceed 50% of the total area of the facade plane or tenant facade plane
area where the sign is located, and the linear width shall not exceed 95% of
the linear width of the facade plane or tenant width where the sign is
located.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed - -2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4E  INCIDENTAL SIGNS.



      (1)   Type of signs. Incidental signs shall be ground,
projecting or wall signs.



      (2)   Number of signs.



         (a)   If a lot or integrated center has one driveway,
two incidental directional signs shall be permitted at the driveway entrance
or exit;



         (b)   If a lot or integrated center has more than one
driveway, one incidental directional sign shall be permitted for each
driveway;



         (c)   One incidental directional sign or one incidental
parking and loading sign shall be permitted at each critical turning point
when required to safely direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic (e.g., to
direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to: a drive-through facility; a
customer or employee parking area; or a delivery or loading area);



         (d)   If a lot is occupied by a use which includes a
drive-through facility, two menu boards shall be permitted adjacent to the
drive-through facility as incidental directional signs to announce the
selection of services or products available at the drive-through facility and
the prices thereof; and



         (e)   If a lot is occupied by a use which includes a
drive-through facility, up to two projecting signs shall be permitted along
the drive-through facility as incidental directional signs to indicate
payment windows and other drive-through stops as necessary.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area of incidental signs in the NR,
OD and GC Districts.



         (a)   Incidental signs shall not exceed six square feet
in sign surface area per sign.



         (b)   A menu board permitted as an incidental
directional sign adjacent to the drive-through facility shall not exceed 48
square feet in sign surface area.



         (c)   Any drive-through projecting signs may be up to
two and one-half square feet in sign surface area per sign.



      (4)   Maximum sign surface area of incidental signs in the
I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-4 Districts.



         (a)   Incidental directional signs shall not exceed six
square feet in sign surface area per sign.



         (b)   Incidental parking and loading signs shall not
exceed 48 square feet in sign surface area per sign.



      (5)   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback for
freestanding, incidental signs.



         (a)   Front yard setback or front bufferyard setback.
Three feet from proposed right-of-way.



         (b)   Side and rear yard setback or side and rear
bufferyard setback. The same as required for any building or structure in the
applicable zoning district.



      (6)   Maximum height of incidental signs.



         (a)   The maximum height of a freestanding incidental
ground sign shall not exceed four feet in height above grade except in all
industrial districts where the maximum height of a freestanding incidental
ground sign shall not exceed seven feet in height above grade.



         (b)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article
7.4E or in Article 13 of this ordinance to the contrary, the maximum height
of a menu board permitted as a freestanding incidental directional ground
sign adjacent to a drive-through facility shall not exceed seven feet in
height above grade.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed - -2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4F  SUSPENDED SIGNS IN INTEGRATED CENTERS.



   Suspended signs shall be permitted on any building containing two or
more individual, non-related and separately operated uses subject to the
following regulations.



      (1)   There shall be no more than one suspended sign per
customer entrance per building facade of a grade-level tenant.



      (2)   The maximum sign surface area of a suspended sign shall
not exceed five square feet.



      (3)   All portions of the suspended sign or sign structure
shall be not less than eight feet above finished grade.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed - -2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4G  SIGNS ON LIGHT POLES.



   Signs shall be permitted on light poles which serve to illuminate an
off-street parking area in the GC District as specified below:



      (1)   Type. Signs on light poles shall be limited to banner
signs:



         (a)   Which are mounted on light poles located on the
lot; and



         (b)   Which are mounted to the light poles with upper
and lower horizontal supports.







 



      (2)   Maximum individual sign surface area. Individual light
pole banner signs shall not exceed the maximum dimensions of three and
one-half feet in width by eight feet in height;



      (3)   Configuration and placement on light poles. All
individual light pole banner signs placed on a lot:



         (a)   Shall be of the same dimensions; and



         (b)   Shall be placed at the same relative height and
location on all light poles.



      (4)   Number. Each light pole may contain two banner signs,
provided, however, if the light poles are located at the perimeter edge of an
off-street parking area, only one banner sign, which shall be oriented toward
the interior of the off-street parking area, shall be permitted;



      (5)   Total sign surface area. The total sign surface area of
all light pole banner signs on a lot shall not exceed a ratio of one square
foot for each off-street parking space within the off-street parking area
which is generally illuminated by the lights on the light poles which support
the light pole banner signs;



      (6)   Placement on lot. Light pole banner signs shall be
evenly distributed within or along the edge of the off-street parking area
used to determine the total sign surface area permitted as set forth in
Article 7.4G(5) above; and



      (7)   Content. Light pole banner signs may announce the name
of the business, operation, manufacturer, product, items or services
available on the lot.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006;
Ord. 09-2007, passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord.
24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 06-2010, passed - -2010; Ord. 06-2011, passed
6-13-2011; Ord. 02-2015, passed 3-9-2015; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.4H  ROOF SIGNS FOR LARGE WAREHOUSES IN THE I-2 AND I-3 DISTRICTS.



   Roof Signs in the I-2 and I-3 districts. Roof signs shall be prohibited
with the exception signs painted flat on the roof surface that can be seen
only from the air are permitted in the I-2 Office/Warehouse Distribution
district and the I-3 Light Manufacturing district provided:



      (1)   Twenty percent (20%) of the roof sign shall identify the
jurisdiction as “PLAINFIELD, INDIANA” written in all CAPITAL letters in
the font A RIAL centered below the name of the company.



      (2)   A flat, non-reflective paint shall be used and the roof
sign cannot be illuminated.



      (3)   “PLAINFIELD, INDIANA” shall be painted in colors
black or red (Pantone 185) as approved by the Town of Plainfield.



      (4)   Company logos are allowed as part of the roof sign.



      (5)   Roof signs can only identify the company occupying the
Building or the owner of the building/property. Roof signs cannot be used as
“paid advertising” or as an advertising off-premise sign or
“billboard”.



      (6)   The roof sign shall be approved by the Town of
Plainfield before work commences.



      (7)   The roof sign must be in full compliance with FAA Form
7460 regarding “glare”.



      (8)   The total sign surface area of the roof sign shall not
exceed 80% of the unified roof surface section.



      (9)   Only one roof sign may be allowed per building, property
or lot.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.5. ON-PREMISES SIGNS: TC AND MU DISTRICTS



§ 7.5A  FREESTANDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of freestanding identification
shall be permitted in the TC and MU Districts:



         (a)   Ground signs; and



         (b)   Pylon signs.



         (c)   Exception: Freestanding identification signs are
not permitted on the following lots in the TC District:



            1.   Any lot abutting Main Street (U.S. 40)
between East Street and Mill Street;



            2.   Any lot abutting East Street or Mill Street;
and



            3.   Any lot located between East Street and Mill
Street.



      (2)   Number.



         (a)   One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted for each street frontage of a lot.



         (b)   When a lot has more than one street frontage, one
freestanding identification sign shall be permitted for each street frontage
of the lot provided that the separation between freestanding identification
signs on the lot, regardless of the orientation of the freestanding
identification signs, is at least 100 feet.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area.



         (a)   The maximum sign surface area for freestanding
identification signs shall apply individually to each street frontage.



         (b)   The maximum sign surface area shall not exceed one
square foot for each one lineal foot of street frontage to a maximum sign
surface area of 64 square feet per street frontage.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no required minimum
setback for freestanding identifiction sighs however, such signs may not
encroach into a public right-of-way unless allowed per Article 7.5.C.
Sidewalk Signs and may not interfere with a vision clearance area as
specified in Article 4.14.



      (5)   Maximum height. The maximum height of freestanding
identification signs shall be determined by the location of the freestanding
identification signs in relation to the lot lines on the lots on which the
signs are located.



         (a)   Freestanding identification signs shall have a
maximum height of up to six feet above grade when located at the lot line.
The maximum height may be increased by one foot in height for each additional
one foot of setback from the lot line until the maximum height allowed for
the applicable type of sign structure is reached.



         (b)   The maximum height for ground signs shall be six
feet in height above grade and the maximum height for pylon signs shall be 15
feet in height above grade.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 09-2007,
passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.5B  BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of building identification
signs shall be permitted:



         (a)   Wall signs;



         (b)   Projecting signs.



      (2)   Maximum sign surface area.



         (a)   The total sign surface area of all building
identification signs oriented to an individual facade shall not exceed:



            1.   Front facade. Ten percent of the total area
of the lesser of the following calculations:



               a.   The first 25 feet of actual building
height;



               b.   The height of the building from grade
to the bottom of the window sills on the second story, if any; or



               c.   The highest part of the building under
a roof or cornice line.



            2.   Side and rear facades. Five percent of the
total area of a side or rear facade using the same method of calculation as
set forth above for a front facade.



         (b)    Provided, that for any building which has more
that one street frontage, the maximum sign surface area of 10% shall apply to
all facades on that building with street frontages.







 



      (3)   Height and projection.



         (a)   Projecting signs and their sign structures shall
not:



            1.   Extend above the roof line of their
supporting building;



            2.   Extend more than eight feet from or beyond
their supporting building;



            3.   Extend any closer to an imaginary
perpendicular vertical plane located at the street pavement line, curb or
outside edge of sidewalk than three feet; or



            4.   Extend lower, as measured from their bottom
edge, than ten feet above grade over a walkway or 15 feet above grade over a
driveway.



         (b)   Projecting signs in compliance with the above
regulations may project into the air rights of a public right-of-way if
approval for such encroachment into the air rights of a public right-of-way
is obtained from the governmental authority having jurisdiction prior to the
placement of the projecting sign.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 09-2007,
passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.5C  SIDEWALK SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of sidewalk signs shall be
permitted:



         (a)   A-frame signs; and



         (b)   T-frame signs.



      (2)   Number. One sidewalk sign is permitted per business use
on a property.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface area
of sidewalk signs shall not be eight square feet. Additionally, sidewalk
signs shall not exceed two feet in width.



      (4)   Maximum height. The maximum height of sidewalk signs
shall be five feet in height above grade.



      (5)   Location. Sidewalk signs may be located outside th main
entrance of the business for which they are established provided that:



         (a)   They are located within ten feet of the main
entrance of the business;



         (b)   They are placed so that they leave at least a five
foot wide walking aisle on the sidewalk, between the business and the street
and parallel to the street;



         (c)   The separation between sidewalk signs along the
same street is at least ten feet; and



         (d)   They do not interfere with pedestrian movement or
create a public safety hazard.



      (6)   Special regulations. Sidewalk signs must be removed from
the public right-of-way at the close of business.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 32-2005, passed 5-9-2005; Ord. 09-2007,
passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.5D  INCIDENTAL SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of incidental signs shall be
permitted:



         (a)   Ground signs; and



         (b)   Wall signs.



      (2)   Number.



         (a)   If a lot has one driveway, two incidental
directional signs shall be permitted at the driveway entrance or exit;



         (b)   If a lot has more than one driveway, one
incidental directional sign shall be permitted for each driveway; and



         (c)   One incidental sign shall be permitted at each
critical turning point when required to safely direct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic (e.g., to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to a drive-up
window; a customer or employee parking area; or a delivery or loading area).



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface area
for incidental signs shall be six square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no minimum required
setback for incidental ground signs, however, such signs may not encroach
into a public right-of-way and may not interfere with a vision clearance area
as specified in Article 4.14.



      (5)   Maximum height. The maximum height for incidental ground
signs shall be four feet in height above grade.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.5E  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of temporary  signs shall be
permitted:



         (a)   Ground signs; and



         (b)   Window signs.



      (2)   Number. Two temporary signs shall be permitted per lot.
However, no more than one ground sign shall be permitted per street frontage
of a lot.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area.



         (a)   The maximum sign surface area of ground signs
shall be six square feet.



         (b)   The total sign surface area of window signs shall
not exceed the lesser of:



            1.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the
window, provided, in the case of multi-pane windows the surface are of the
window shall be the combined surface area of the individual panes, or in the
case of a glass curtain wall the surface area of the window shall be the
combined surface area of the individual glass panels; or



            2.   Six square feet in sign surface area.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no required minimum
setback for temporary signs however, such signs may not encroach into a
public right-of-way and may not interfere with a vision clearance area as
specified in Article 4.14.



      (5)   Maximum height. The maximum height for ground signs
shall be four feet in height above grade.



      (6)   Special regulation. No temporary sign shall be permitted
on any lot without the prior authorization of the owner of that lot.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.6. SIGNS: ON-PREMISES, RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, RU AND AG
DISTRICTS



§ 7.6A  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DWELLING, RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES
FOR THE MENTALLY ILL, RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
AND CHILD CARE HOME USES.



   Freestanding identification signs shall be permitted for single-family
dwellings, two-family dwelling, residential facilities for the mentally ill,
residential facilities for the developmentally disables, and child care home
uses provided they are constructed of a material(s) which blend in with the
residential character of the neighborhood (such as but not limited to, wood
or stone); and comply with the following regulations:



      (1)   Type. The following type of freestanding identification
signs shall be permitted: ground signs.



      (2)   Number. One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted per street frontage of a lot.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface area
of freestanding identification signs shall be two square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no required minimum
setback for freestanding identification signs, however, such signs may not
encroach into a public right-of-way and may not interfere with a vision
clearance area as specified in Article 4.14.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004,
passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.6B  MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING USES.



   Freestanding identification signs shall be permitted for multi-family
dwelling uses, provided the signs comply with the following regulations.



      (1)   Type. The following type of freestanding identification
signs shall be permitted: ground signs.



      (2)   Number. One freestanding identification sign shall be
permitted per street frontage of a lot.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface for
freestanding identification sighs shall be 32 square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback. 



         (a)   Minimum front setback. The minimum front setback
for freestanding identification signs shall be ten feet from the proposed
right-of-way.



         (b)   Minimum side setback and minimum rear setback. The
minimum side setback and minimum rear setback for freestanding identification
signs shall be consistent with the requirements for an accessory structure in
the district to which the real estate is zoned.



      (5)   Freestanding identification signs may not interfere with
a vision clearance area as specified in Article 4.14.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004,
passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.6C  RECORDED, PLATTED RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION USES.



   Freestanding identification signs shall be permitted for recorded,
platted residential subdivision uses provided the signs are constructed of
ornamental metal, stone masonry, or other permanent material; and comply with
the following regulations:



      (1)   Type. The following types of freestanding identification
signs shall be permitted at recorded, platted subdivisions: ground signs.



      (2)   Number. Two freestanding identification signs shall be
permitted at each entrance to the subdivision. However, only one freestanding
identification sign shall be permitted in each quadrant of an intersection.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface area
for freestanding identification signs shall be 32 square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no required minium
setback for freestanding identification signs however, such signs may not
encroach into a public right-of-way and man not interfere with a vision
clearance area as specified in Article 4.14.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004,
passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.6D  BUSINESS AND OTHER USES PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS BY
SPECIAL EXCEPTION.



   The following regulations shall apply to all businesses and other uses
permitted in the residential districts by special exception.



      (1)   Freestanding identification signs.



         (a)   Type. The following types of freestanding
identification signs shall be permitted: ground signs.



         (b)   Number. One freestanding identification sign shall
be permitted for each street frontage of a lot.



         (c)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign
surface area for freestanding identification signs shall be 32 square feet.



         (d)   Minimum.



            1.   Minimum front setback. The minimum front
setback for freestanding identification sighs shall be ten feet from the
proposed right-of-way.



            2.   Minimum side setback and minimum rear
setback. The minimum side setback and minimum rear setback for a freestanding
identification sign shall be the same as required for an accessory structure
in the applicable zoning district.



         (e)   Maximum height. The maximum height of a
freestanding identification sign shall be six feet in height above grade.



      (2)   Building identification signs.



         (a)   Type. The following types of building
identification signs shall be permitted: wall signs.



         (b)   Number. There shall be no limit to the number of
building identification signs, provided that the total sign surface area of
all building identification signs located on a building shall not exceed the
maximum sign surface area for the building.



         (c)   Maximum sign surface area.



            1.   The total sign surface area of all building
identification signs oriented to an individual facade of a building shall not
exceed:



               a.   Front facade. Five percent of the total
area of a front facade of a building; and



               b.   Side and rear facades. Three percent of
a side or rear facade of a building.



            2.   Provided, that for any building which has
more that one street frontage, the maximum sign surface area of 5% shall
apply to all facades on that building with street frontages.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004,
passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.6E  INCIDENTAL SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of incidental signs shall be
permitted:



         (a)   Ground signs; and



         (b)   Wall signs.



      (2)   Number.



         (a)   If a lot has one driveway, two incidental signs
shall be permitted at the driveway entrance or exit.



         (b)   If a lot has more than one driveway, one
incidental sign shall be permitted for each driveway.



         (c)   One incidental sign shall be permitted at each
critical turning point when required to safely direct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area. The maximum sign surface area
for incidental signs shall be two square feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback.



         (a)   Minimum front setback. The minimum front setback
for ground signs shall be three feet from the proposed right-of-way.



         (b)   Minimum side setback and minimum rear setback. The
minimum side setback and minimum rear setback for ground signs shall be the
same as required for an accessory structure in the applicable zoning district.



      (5)   Maximum height. The maximum height for ground signs
shall be four feet in height above grade.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.6F  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



      (1)   Type. The following types of temporary  signs shall be
permitted:



         (a)   Ground signs; and



         (b)   Window signs.



      (2)   Number. Two temporary signs shall be permitted per lot.
However, no more than one ground sign shall be permitted per street frontage
of a lot.



      (3)   Maximum sign surface area.



         (a)   The maximum sign surface area of ground signs
shall be six square feet.



         (b)   The total sign surface area of window signs shall
not exceed the lesser of:



            1.   Twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the
window, provided, in the case of multi-pane windows the surface are of the
window shall be the combined surface area of the individual panes, or in the
case of a glass curtain wall the surface area of the window shall be the
combined surface area of the individual glass panels; or



            2.   Six square feet in sign surface area.



      (4)   Minimum setback. There shall be no required minimum
setback for temporary signs however, such signs may not encroach into a
public right-of-way and may not interfere with a vision clearance area as
specified in Article 4.14.



      (5)   Maximum height. The maximum height for ground signs
shall be four feet in height above grade.



      (6)   Special regulation. No temporary sign shall be permitted
on any lot without the prior authorization of the owner of that lot.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.7. SIGNS: OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING



§ 7.7A  DISTRICTS ALLOWED.



   Off-premise signs shall be permitted in GC and I-4 Districts provided
the signs and their supports, uprights, bracing and framework are of steel
construction; they are not located within 600 feet of the proposed
right-of-way of any gateway corridor, they are not located within 600 feet of
a residential district; and they comply with the following regulations.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7B  TYPE OF SIGNS.



   The following type of off-premises signs shall be permitted:



      (1)   Pylon signs; and



      (2)   Pole signs.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7C  NUMBER.



   Off-premises signs shall not contain more than two signs per sign
surface.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7D  MAXIMUM SIGN SURFACE AREA FOR OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.



      (1)   The maximum sign surface area of off-premise signs shall
be 300 square feet.



      (2)   Exception. Temporary extensions or embellishments
integrally incorporated into the sign surface having a vertical height of no
more than four feet above the top of a sign; a maximum horizontal dimension
of no more than one foot beyond the sides of the sign; and, a maximum
vertical dimension of one foot below the bottom of the sign, shall be allowed.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7E  MINIMUM SETBACK.



   The minimum front setback for off-premise signs shall be 60 feet from
the proposed right-of-way.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7F  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.



      (1)   Off-premises signs may have a maximum height of up to
four feet above grade when located at the minimum side setback or minimum
rear setback. The maximum height may be increased by one foot in height for
each additional one foot of setback from the minimum side setback or minimum
rear setback until the maximum height allowed for an off-premises sign is
reached.



      (2)   The maximum height of a pylon sign shall be six feet in
height above grade and the maximum height of a pole sign shall be 35 feet in
height above grade.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.7G  SPACING.



   The minimum distance between off-premises signs shall be as specified
below.



      (1)   Linear spacing. The minimum distance between
off-premises signs located along and oriented towards the same side of a
public street shall be 2,500 linear feet subject to the following:



         (a)   The spacing requirement shall be applied equally
to both sides of the street at the same time regardless of whether the
off-premises signs are on the same side of the street;



         (b)   The spacing requirement shall be applied
continuously along a street to all off-premises signs oriented towards that
street in either direction whether the off-premises signs are in the same
block or are in different blocks separated by an intersecting street;



         (c)   For purposes of applying the spacing requirement
to off-premise signs, ground signs and pole signs shall be treated the same,
whether double-faced or single-faced; and



         (d)   Off-premises signs located at the same
intersection are not in violation of the minimum spacing requirement
specified herein, because of their nearness to one another if they are
located so that their messages are directed towards traffic flowing in
different directions.



      (2)   Measurement of linear spacing. The method of measurement
of the spacing between off-premises signs oriented towards the same street
shall be along the centerline of the street to which the off-premises sign is
oriented from the point in the street’s centerline closest to the leading
edge of the off-premises sign.



      (3)   Radial spacing. In no event shall an off-premises sign
be closer than 1,000 feet from any other off-premises sign regardless of
location or orientation.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



ARTICLE 7.8. SIGNS: GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 7.8A  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS BY TYPE OF SIGN.



      (1)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   Landscaping of freestanding signs.



            1.   All freestanding signs shall be provided with
a landscaped area at least equal to the sign surface area of the sign and be
provided with at least six evergreen shrubs of any height.



            2.   Landscaping may include any size or variety
of annuals, perennials, ornamental grasses, hedge plants, or trees.



            3.   Plant materials used to satisfy this
provision shall not be used to satisfy the calculation of plant unit value
required by any other provision of this ordinance.



         (b)   On-premises freestanding signs as accessory
structures. On-premises freestanding signs and sign structures are hereby
declared to be accessory structures. As accessory structures, on-premises
freestanding signs and sign structures may not occupy a lot without a primary
use or primary building also being legally located on the lot.



         (c)   Removal of on-premises freestanding signs.
Notwithstanding anything contained in article ix to the contrary, on-premises
freestanding signs, including business identification signs and incidental
signs, and sign structures, shall be subject to the following removal
provisions:



            1.   When the building, or any business, product,
activity or service offered on the premises but not located in a building, is
removed, any on-premises freestanding sign and sign structure located on the
lot to identify such building, business, product, activity or service shall
also be removed coincidently with the removal of such building, business,
product, activity or service. Any new on-premises freestanding sign or sign
structure located after such coincident removal, shall be located in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.



            2.   When a legally established nonconforming
building, or any business, product, activity or service offered on the
premise  but  not  located  in  a  legally established nonconforming
building, suffers a partial destruction in excess of two-thirds of its the
fair market value (including the fair market value of any sign and sign
structure) and such legally established nonconforming building, business,
product, activity or service must be removed and brought into compliance with
the terms of this ordinance, any on-premise freestanding sign or sign
structure located on the lot shall also be brought into compliance with the
terms of this ordinance.



      (2)   Pole signs. If any support, upright, bracing or
framework located between grade and ten feet above grade is proposed to
support a pole sign and has a width or diameter in excess of ten inches in
any dimension, said support, upright, bracing or framework shall be encased
in an ornamental shell of stone, brick, ornamental metal or similar
materials, or shall be constructed of an external support structure including
stone, brick, ornamental metal or similar materials, provided that the width
of the ornamental shell or external support structure does not exceed 24
inches and the maximum number of supports, uprights, bracing or framework
extending between grade and ten feet above grade shall not exceed two.



      (3)   Illuminated signs.



         (a)   No sign within 600 feet of any residential
district shall be illuminated between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
unless the sign is visibly obstructed from the residential district.



         (b)   Lighting directed towards a sign shall be shielded
so that it illuminates only the sign surface and does not shine on, cause
glare to or otherwise impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle
traveling on a public right-of-way.



         (c)   Article 7.8B(3)(a) and (b) do Not apply to signs
that do not exceed two square feet in area.



      (4)   Awning signs, canopy signs, and marquee signs. In any
district in which building identification signs are permitted in the form of
wall signs, the use of an awning signs, canopy signs, or marquee signs shall
be allowed subject to the following provisions:



         (a)   Total area.



            1.   The total area of the awning, canopy, or
marquee (i.e., the combined two dimensional surface area of all sides of the
awning, canopy or marquee) shall not exceed the sign surface area allocated
to the facade of the building upon which the awning, canopy or marquee is
attached.



            2.   Sign surface. The portion of the awning,
canopy or marquee which includes a sign surface shall not exceed 50% of the
total area of an awning or canopy or 75% of the total area of a marquee.



         (b)   Clearance to grade.



            1.   The bottom edge of an awning or canopy shall
not be less than eight feet above grade over a walkway or sidewalk for any
portion of a rigid framing and shall not be less than seven feet above grade
over a walkway or sidewalk for any portion of a flexible cloth, vinyl, canvas
or similar skirt, valence, or flaps which may be suspended below the rigid
framing a maximum of one foot;



            2.   The bottom edge of a marquee shall not be
less than nine feet above grade over a walkway or sidewalk; or



            3.   An awning, canopy or marquee shall not be
less than 15 feet above grade over a driveway, interior access drive or alley.



         (c)   Projection from building. An awning, canopy or
marquee shall not extend more than eight feet from or beyond its supporting
building and shall not extend any closer to an imaginary perpendicular
vertical plane located at the street pavement line, curb or outside edge of
sidewalk than three feet.



      An awning, canopy or marquee is in compliance with the above
regulations and may project into the air rights of a public right-of-way if
approval for such encroachment into the air rights of a public right-of-way
is obtained from the governmental authority having jurisdiction over the
public right-of-way prior to the placement of the awning, canopy or marquee.



      (5)   Gasoline service station signs.



         (a)   If a freestanding business identification sign is
permitted at a gasoline service station, such sign may contain pricing
information.



         (b)   Business identification signs may be located on a
gasoline island canopy, spandrel, dispenser or pump islands, provided that
such signs do not exceed 10% of the surface area of the facade of the canopy
on which the sign is located or 50% of the spandrel, dispenser or pump island
upon which the sign is located.



         (c)    However, business identification signs cannot be
located on both a spandrel and a pump island. Business identification signs
must be located on either apandrel and a pump island.







 



      (6)    Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs shall be
permitted as part of an otherwise permitted sign, provided that:



         (a)   At a single use site, a maximum of one changeable
copy sign shall be permitted which may be part of either a freestanding sign
or a wall sign.



         (b)   At an integrated center, either one changeable
copy sign shall be permitted as part of a freestanding sign, or each
individual use within an integrated center shall be permitted one changeable
copy sign as part of a wall sign.



         (c)   At a gasoline service station or convenience
store, up to two signs shall be permitted as individual changeable copy signs.



         (d)   1.   A changeable copy sign may be used as part
of either a freestanding sign or as part of a wall sign, but not both.



            2.   In the case of signs at a gasoline service
station or convenience store, a changeable copy sign is not required to be
part of an identification sign.



         (e)   1.   The changeable copy sign shall not exceed
40% of the sign surface area of the permitted sign.



            2.   In the case of signs at a gasoline service
station the changeable copy sign shall not exceed 40% of the allowed sign
surface area as designated in article 7.4A(3), article 7.4C(3), or article
7.4D(3). If located on a gasoline island canopy, the changeable copy sign may
be the only sign which is limited in size in article 7.8A(5)(b).



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.8B  CALCULATION OF SIGN SURFACE AREA.



      (1)   Multi-faced signs. The sign surface area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the sign surface area
of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two sign faces are placed
back to back, or at no greater than 15 degrees from one another, so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign
faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches
apart, the sign surface area shall be computed by the measurement of one of
the sign faces.







 



      (2)   Pole cover in excess of 24 inches. In the case of a
freestanding sign with an ornamental shell or external support structure in
excess of 24 inches, the ornamental shell or external support structure shall
be considered to be the background of the display used to differentiate the
sign from the backdrop and the area of ornamental shell or external support
structure shall be included in the calculation of sign surface area.



      (3)   Sign surface area determinations.



         (a)   When calculating the sign surface area of any
sign, in addition to the provisions identified in Articles 7.8B(1) and
7.8B(2) above, a maximum of three distinct and abutting “areas” made up
of circles, ovals, squares or rectangles may be used to encompass the extreme
limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed.



         (b)   In the case of a freestanding sign with a base or
pole cover in excess of 24 inches in width, a maximum of two “support
areas” shall be permitted which shall not be included in the count of the
maximum number of “areas”. If three or more “support areas” are used,
regardless of width, such additional “support areas” shall be included in
the count of the maximum number of “areas”. Any such additional
“support areas” or “support areas” in excess of 24 inches in width
shall be included in the overall calculation of sign surface area.



         (c)   In the case of a ground sign or pylon sign, an
ornamental or decorative base of brick, stone or other similar material which
is not in excess of two feet in height above grade or one-half the overall
height of the ground sign or pylon sign, whichever is less, shall not be
included in the overall calculation of sign surface area, provided that no
lettering, logo, text or other display of any kind shall be allowed on such
base (except for a street number placed in compliance with Fire Code
requirements).







 



      (4)   Pylon signs. Pylon signs shall be designed so that the
sign surface area begins at a point no higher above grade than 25% of the
overall height of the sign.







   Ground or Pylon Sign                     Wall
Sign                        Pylon Sign



      (5)   Ground sign/pylon sign exceptions. In order to encourage
creativity in the design of ground signs and pylon signs which are harmonious
with the built environment and the primary buildings on a lot, a ground sign
or pylon sign which complies with the following exceptions may be approved by
the Director:



         (a)   The overall maximum sign surface area of a ground
sign or pylon sign with a permitted maximum sign surface area of up to 140
square feet may be increased by 25% beyond the maximum sign surface area
permitted on the lot;



         (b)   The actual logo, text or message portion of the
ground sign or pylon sign increased in size pursuant to division (5)(a)
above, shall not exceed 75% of the maximum sign surface area permitted on the
lot;



         (c)   The primary material of the ground sign or pylon
sign shall be brick or stone. Along a Gateway Corridor or within 600 feet of
a residential district, other materials may be approved by the Plan
Commission when requested as a waiver of this provision and such waiver
request is filed as part of a development plan for architectural and site
design review; and



         (d)   The design of the ground sign or pylon sign shall
be “free form” and designed to blend with the environment rather than a
design which utilizes individual or multiple squares or rectangles.







 



      (6)   Signs on ornamental, decorative fence or masonry wall
for residential subdivisions. The sign surface area of a sign face located on
an ornamental, decorative fence or masonry wall shall be limited to the area
of the sign face only if the fence or wall has a length of not less than
three times the width of the sign or message element. If a fence or wall is
less than three times the width of the sign or message element, the fence or
wall shall be deemed to be part of the background of the display used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop and the entire area of the fence or
wall shall be considered part of the sign surface area.







 



   Ornamental, Decorative Fence or Masonry Wall Greater Than Three Times
Length of Sign



      (7)   (a)   Architectural embellishments exception for
freestanding sign. Architectural embellishments which simply add to the
design of a freestanding sign but which do not contain any logos, text or
other form of message, may be added to an otherwise permitted freestanding
sign provided they comply with the following regulations:



            1.   Ground signs. Architectural embellishments on
ground signs shall not extend more than 12 inches above or 24 inches in width
to either side beyond the highest or widest point of any portion of a logo,
text or other form of message.



            2.   Pylon signs. Architectural embellishments on
pylon signs shall not extend more than 24 inches in height above or 24 inches
in width to either side beyond the highest or widest point of any portion of
a logo, text or other form of message.



            3.   Pole signs. Architectural embellishments on
pole signs shall not extend more than 36 inches in height above or 24 inches
in width to either side beyond the highest or widest point of any portion of
a logo, text or other form of message.



         (b)   For the purposes of interpreting and applying this
architectural embellishments exception to freestanding signs, a base or pole
cover of up to 24 inches in width shall be considered an architectural
embellishment.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.8C  MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS AND AREAS AROUND SIGNS.



      (1)   Maintenance of signs. Nothing contained in this
ordinance shall be construed to prevent the maintenance, repainting or
posting of legally established signs. Maintenance may include the replacement
of sign surfaces within a sign structure provided that the sign structure is
not removed or changed in any dimension.



      (2)   Maintenance of areas around signs. No person, for the
purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, shall damage,
trim, destroy, or remove any tree, shrub or other vegetation located:



         (a)   Within any public right-of-way unless the work is
done pursuant to the express written authorization of the governmental
department having jurisdiction over said public right-of-way;



         (b)   On property that is not under ownership or control
of the person doing or responsible for such work unless the work is done
pursuant to the express, written authorization of the person owning the
property where such trees or shrubs are located; or



         (c)   In any area where such trees or shrubs are
required to remain under a permit issued under this ordinance.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.8D  SUBSTITUTION.



   Any sign permitted under the sign regulations may be substituted with
non-commercial copy provided that the sign otherwise remains in compliance
with the sign regulations.



(Ord. 25-2017, passed 9-11-2017)



§ 7.8E  FREESTANDING ON-PREMISES SIGNS AS ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Freestanding on-premises signs and sign structures are hereby declared
to be accessory structures. As accessory structures, freestanding on-premises
signs and sign structures may not occupy a lot without a primary use or
building also being legally located on the lot.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 7.8F  REMOVAL OF FREESTANDING ON-PREMISES SIGNS.



   Notwithstanding anything contained in Article IX to the contrary,
freestanding on-premises signs, including business identification signs and
incidental signs, and sign structures, shall be subject to the following
removal provisions.



      (1)   When the building, or any business, product, activity or
service offered on the premises not located in a building, is removed, any
on-premises sign and sign structure located on the lot to identify such
building, business, product, activity or service shall also be removed
coincidently with the removal of such building, business, product, activity
or service. Any new on-premises sign or sign structure located after such
coincident removal, shall be located in compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance.



      (2)   When a legally established nonconforming building, or
any business, product, activity or service not located in a building, suffers
a partial destruction in excess of two-thirds of it’s fair market value
(including the fair market value of the sign and sign structure) and such
building, business, product, activity or service must be removed and brought
into compliance with the terms of this ordinance, any on-premises sign or
sign structure located on the lot shall also be brought into compliance with
the terms of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 7.8G  WIDTH OF POLES/POLE COVER.



   If any support, upright, bracing or framework located between grade and
ten feet above grade is proposed to support a pole sign and has a width or
diameter in excess of ten inches in any dimension, said support, upright,
bracing or framework shall:



      (1)   Be encased in an ornamental shell of stone, brick,
ornamental metal or similar materials; or



      (2)   Be constructed of an external support structure
including stone, brick, ornamental metal or similar materials, provided that:



         (a)   The width of the ornamental shell or external
support structure does not exceed 24 inches; and



         (c)   The maximum number of supports, uprights, bracing
or framework extending between grade and ten feet above grade shall not
exceed two.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 7.8H  GASOLINE SERVICE STATION SIGNS.



   Gasoline service stations shall be subject to the following exceptions.



      (1)   If a freestanding business identification sign is
permitted, such business identification sign may contain pricing information.



      (2)   Business identification signs may be located on a
gasoline island canopy, spandrels, dispenser or pump islands, provided that
such signs do not exceed:



         (a)   Ten percent of the surface area of the facade of
the canopy on which the sign is located; or



         (b)   Fifty percent of the spandrel, dispenser or pump
island upon which the sign is located.



      (3)    Business identification signs may be located on either
a spandrel or a pump island, but not both.







 



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 7.8I  CALCULATION OF SIGN SURFACE AREA.



 



§ 7.8J  CHANGEABLE COPY SIGNS.



   Changeable copy signs shall be permitted as part of an otherwise
permitted identification sign, provided that:



      (1)   If a single use site, a maximum of one changeable copy
sign shall be permitted which may be part of either a freestanding
identification sign or a wall sign;



      (2)   If an integrated center, either one changeable copy sign
shall be permitted as part of a freestanding identification sign, or each
individual use within an integrated center shall be permitted one changeable
copy sign as part of a wall sign;



      (3)   At a gasoline service station or convenience store, up
to two fuel price signs shall be permitted as individual changeable copy
signs;



      (4)   (a)   A changeable copy sign may be used as part of
either a freestanding identification sign or as part of a wall sign, but not
both; and



         (b)   In the case of fuel price signs at a gasoline
service station or convenience store, a changeable copy sign is not required
to be part of an identification sign.



      (5)   (a)   The changeable copy sign shall not exceed 40%
of the sign surface area of the permitted identification sign; and



         (b)   In the case of fuel price signs at a gasoline
service station the changeable copy sign shall not exceed 40% of the allowed
sign surface area as designated in Article 7.4A(3), Article 7.4C(2) or
Article 7.4D(3). If located on a gasoline island canopy, the changeable copy
sign may be the only sign which is limited in size in Article 7.8H(2)(a).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



§ 7.8K  LANDSCAPING OF FREESTANDING SIGNS.



      (1)   All freestanding signs shall:



         (a)   Be provided with a landscaped area at least equal
to the sign surface area of the sign; and



         (b)   Be provided with at least six evergreen shrubs of
any height.



      (2)   Landscaping may include any size or variety of annuals,
perennials, ornamental grasses, hedge plants or trees.



      (3)   Plant materials used to satisfy this provision shall not
be used to satisfy the calculation of plant unit value required by any other
provision of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 26-2004, passed 11-8-2004; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007; Ord.
28-2008, passed 11-24-2008)



ARTICLE 8. DISTRICTS AND MAPS



§ 8.1  OFFICIAL ZONE MAP.



   All real property located within the corporate boundaries of the town
and under the jurisdiction of the Plan Commission as set forth in this
ordinance is hereby divided into districts as shown on the official zone map
which, together with all explanatory matter, is incorporated by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 8.2  IDENTIFICATION OF THE OFFICIAL ZONE MAP.



   The official zone map shall be identified by a geographic coverage
layer entitled “Zoning” that is maintained as part of the town’s
geographic information system (GIS) in digital format under the direction of
the Director and shall be amended as needed when properties are rezoned. The
Director may authorize printed copies of the official zoning map to be
reproduced, and shall maintain digital or printed copies of superseded
versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. Two copies of
the official zoning map shall be on file and available for public inspection
in the Planning and Zoning Department.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 8.3  OFFICIAL ZONE MAP CHANGES.



   (A)   If, after the certification of the official zone map by the
Plan Commission, the Town Council, in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance and I.C. 36-7-4-600 et seq., changes any of the district boundaries
or other matter portrayed on the official zone map, such changes shall be
entered by staff on a working copy of the official zone map which is
maintained in the office of the Department of Planning and Zoning. The
working copy of the official zone map shall be available for public
inspection and reference during all normal business hours. In case of
discrepancy between changes noted on the working copy of the official zone
map and the official printed record of the Town Council, the official printed
record of the Town Council shall control.



   (B)   In the event that the official zone map becomes damaged, lost
or difficult to interpret, staff shall, on an as needed basis, prepare a
revised official zone map for review and recommendation by the Plan
Commission at a public hearing for which proper notice is provided. A revised
official zone map shall incorporate all official actions of the Town Council
related to matters depicted on the official zone map since the adoption of
the prior official zone map. A revised official zone map may also include
revisions to correct drafting errors and changes in the base information
related to plats or streets.



   (C)   The Plan Commission shall certify its recommendation of such
revised official zone map to the Town Council for official adoption by the
Town Council.



   (D)   No change of any nature shall be made in the official zone
map, or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the amendment
procedures set forth in this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 8.4  RETENTION AND PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.



   Unless the prior official zone map has been lost or completely
destroyed, the prior official zone map, along with all available records
pertaining to its adoption or amendment, shall be retained and preserved in
the office of the Department of Planning and Zoning.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 8.5  INTERPRETATION OF THE OFFICIAL ZONE MAP.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts
shown on the official zone map, the following rules shall apply to the
interpretation of those boundaries.



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of thoroughfares, highways, streets or alleys shall be construed
to follow the centerlines.



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed to follow the platted lot lines.



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the corporate
boundary of the town shall be construed as following the corporate boundary
of the town.



   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines
shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   (E)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall
be construed as following the centerlines.



   (F)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following floodplain
lines shall be construed to follow the floodplain lines.



   (G)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated on the divisions above shall be so controlled. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official zone map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.



   (H)   Where a discrepancy exists between the depictions on the
official zone map and the text of a legal description accompanying an
ordinance for zone map change duly adopted by the Town Council, the text of
the legal description shall control.



   (I)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground do
not agree with those shown on the official zone map, or in other
circumstances not covered above, the Director shall interpret the boundaries.
Any party dissatisfied with the interpretation of the Director may appeal
such interpretation to the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



§ 8.6  ZONING OF NEWLY ANNEXED LAND.



   (A)   All real property annexed into the town, after the effective
date of this ordinance shall be considered zoned to the AG District of this
ordinance.



   (B)   In those instances in which the owner of real property
proposed for annexation into the town desires annexation only if the zoning
of the real property is zoned to a district other than AG, such owner may
file a petition for zone map change which would identify the real property
and the requested district. Said petition shall be filed in compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance and any applicable rules of procedure. The
Plan Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, with notice, in
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and any applicable rules of
procedure. After the public hearing and vote on the matter, the Plan
Commission shall then certify the petition for zone map change to the Town
Council with a favorable recommendation, an unfavorable recommendation or no
recommendation. The Town Council shall consider the request for annexation
and zone map change at a combined hearing and shall determine the annexation
question and zone map change under a single combined vote. The Plan
Commission and Town Council shall have all powers delegated to them by I.C.
36-7-4 et seq. and this ordinance in determining the zone map change.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 27-2007, passed - -2007)



ARTICLE 9.1. NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR SIGNS



§ 9.1A  INTENT.



      (1)   Within the zoning districts established by this
ordinance, there exist:



         (a)   Nonconforming lots of record;



         (b)   Nonconforming buildings or structures;



         (c)   Nonconforming uses of land;



         (d)   Nonconforming uses within nonconforming buildings
or structures; and



         (e)   Nonconforming signs, which were legally
established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, but which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the provisions of this ordinance.



      (2)   It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these
legally established nonconforming lots, buildings, structures, signs and uses
to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival.



      (3)   It is further the intent of this ordinance that legally
established nonconforming buildings, structures, signs and uses shall not:



         (a)   Be enlarged upon, expanded or extended; or



         (b)   Be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses which are prohibited elsewhere in the same district.



      (4)   Nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming buildings or
structures, nonconforming uses of land, and nonconforming uses within
nonconforming buildings or structures that are either illegal or not legally
established on the effective date of this ordinance shall not become legally
established or validated by virtue of the enactment of this ordinance.



      (5)   Previously illegal or not legally established
nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming buildings or structures,
nonconforming uses of land, nonconforming uses within nonconforming buildings
or structures, and nonconforming signs which are in full compliance with the
regulations of this ordinance pertaining to the permitted uses and
development standards of the district to which the real estate is zoned
shall, after the effective date of this ordinance, be considered validated as
conforming lots of record, buildings, structures, uses and signs for the
purposes of interpreting and applying this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51- 2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1B  INCOMPATIBILITY OF LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING USES.



      (1)   Legally established nonconforming uses are declared by
this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zoning district
in which such legally established nonconforming use is located.



      (2)   A legally established nonconforming use of a building or
structure, or a legally established nonconforming use of land, shall not be
extended, expanded or enlarged, nor shall additional signs for such legally
established nonconforming use be erected on the lot, after the effective date
of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1C  AVOIDANCE OF UNDUE HARDSHIP.



   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans for or construction of any building, structure
or sign or the designation of use of any building or structure, for which an
improvement location permit has been properly filed for or issued prior to
the effective date of this ordinance; provided that the construction of such
building, structure or sign is commenced within six months of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion; and provided further however
that such construction shall be completed within two years of the issuance of
said improvement location permit.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1D  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD.



   Any legally established lot recorded or any legally established platted
lot recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance, having less than
the required minimum lot area or minimum lot width required by the applicable
zoning district regulations of this ordinance, shall be deemed a permitted
exception to such minimum lot area or minimum lot width and may be used for
any use permitted within the applicable zoning district in which such lot is
located provided that:



      (1)   All other development standards are met; and



      (2)   Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1E  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURES (EXCLUDING
SIGNS).



   Where a legally established nonconforming building or structure
(excluding signs) exists on the effective date of this ordinance that could
not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on:
gross floor area; lot coverage; building height limitations; front, side and
rear setbacks and yards; location on the lot; bulk; or other provisions of
this ordinance applicable to the building or structure, such building or
structure may continue to exist so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to compliance with the following provisions:



      (1)   Such legally established nonconforming building or
structure may not be enlarged, expanded or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity, provided such building or structure may be altered so as
to decrease the extent of nonconformity;



      (2)   Should such legally established nonconforming building
or structure, or legally established nonconforming portion of a building or
structure, be damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of more than
two-thirds of the fair market value of the building or structure immediately
prior to the damage or destruction, said building or structure shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; and



      (3)   Should such building or structure be moved for any
reason for any distance whatsoever, such building or structure shall
thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1F  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   Where legally established nonconforming uses of land exist on the
effective date of this ordinance which would not be permitted by the
provisions of this ordinance, such uses may be continued so long as they
remain otherwise lawful provided that:



      (1)   Such legally established nonconforming uses shall not be
enlarged, expanded, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied on the effective date of this ordinance;



      (2)   Such legally established nonconforming uses shall not be
expanded or increased by:



         (a)   Volume;



         (b)   Activity on the land occupied; or



         (c)   Other means, where such expanded or increased
legally established nonconforming use results in a difference in the quality,
character or degree of the legally established nonconforming use, or results
in a legally established nonconforming use that has an increased and
detrimental impact or effect on any adjoining property or the surrounding
area. A difference in the quality, character or degree, or an increased and
detrimental impact or effect may include, but not be limited to, any impact
or effect resulting from: an increase in traffic volume; a change in the
nature of vehicular traffic (i.e., both type and size of vehicles); change in
hours of operation (i.e., from normal business hours to include evening or
24-hour operations); or an increase in vibration, smoke, dust, odor, noise,
glare or any other activity or characteristic of the legally established
nonconforming use which impacts any of the items listed as performance
standards in Article 4.8 of this ordinance.



      (3)   Such legally established nonconforming uses shall not be
moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that
occupied by such uses on the effective date of this ordinance; and



      (4)   No additional building or structure shall be erected in
connection with such legally established nonconforming use of land.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1G  DISCONTINUATION OF LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND.



   Any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the provisions of this
ordinance if any legally established nonconforming use of land is:



      (1)   Abandoned for any period of time; or



      (2)   Discontinued for more than six months (except when
government action impedes access to the premises).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1H  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING USES WITHIN LEGALLY ESTABLISHED
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



      (1)   If any legally established nonconforming use is located
within a legally established nonconforming building or structure and such
legally established nonconforming building or structure becomes unsafe or
unlawful by reason of physical condition and is razed, the legally
established nonconforming use previously being conducted in such legally
established nonconforming building or structure shall be extinguished and no
longer permitted.



      (2)   If any legally established nonconforming use is located
within a legally established nonconforming building or structure and such
legally established nonconforming building or structure is damaged or
destroyed by any means to the extent of more than two-thirds of the fair
market value of the building or structure immediately prior to the damage or
destruction the legally established nonconforming use previously being
conducted in such legally established nonconforming building or structure
shall be extinguished and no longer permitted unless application in
compliance with the provisions of Article XI is made for an improvement
location permit within 180 days of such damage or destruction and an
improvement location permit demonstrating compliance with the following
regulations is issued pursuant to such application:



         (a)   The proposed redevelopment shall, to the maximum
extent practical, comply with the development standards, including, but not
limited to, lot coverage, off-street parking, off-street loading, lighting,
landscaping, minimum yards or bufferyards, use of minimum yards and
bufferyards, building setbacks, maximum building height, main floor area, and
outside storage and operations, applicable to the legally established
nonconforming use in the district in which such use is first identified as a
permitted use; and



         (b)   The gross floor area and the maximum building
height devoted to the legally established nonconforming use shall not be
increased, except as such increase is required to comply with other
applicable federal, state or local regulations (i.e., minor enlargements to
accommodate ADA Accessibility Guidelines or current Building Codes).



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1I  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING
BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES (EXCLUDING SIGNS).



      (1)   Ordinary repairs. On any legally established
nonconforming building or structure (excluding signs), or portion of a
building or structure containing a legally established nonconforming use,
work may be done on ordinary repairs or on the repair or replacement of
non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic feet
content existing when the building or structure, or portion of a building or
structure containing a legally established nonconforming use became
nonconforming shall not be increased. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening, repairing or restoring to safe condition of any
building or structure (excluding signs), or part thereof, declared to be
unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order
of such official.



      (2)   Reconstruction prohibited. If a legally established
nonconforming building or structure (excluding signs) or portions of a
building or structure containing a legally established nonconforming use
becomes unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition and is razed, such
building or structure (excluding signs) shall not thereafter be rebuilt or
used except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.



      (3)   Remodeling. The gross floor area and the maximum
building height devoted to the legally established nonconforming use shall
not be increased, except as such increase is required to comply with other
applicable federal, state or local regulations (i.e., minor enlargements to
accommodate ADA Accessibility Guidelines or current Building Codes).



      (4)   Parking area, outside storage area or outdoor operations
area. A legally established nonconforming parking area, outside storage area
or outdoor operations area may be maintained, repaired or upgraded by
hardsurfacing with asphalt or concrete provided that there is no increase in
the total area occupied by the parking area or outside storage area and, if,
in the discretion of the Director, the hardsurfacing would serve to reduce a
potential negative impact of the existing parking area or outside storage
area on surrounding properties. In case of disagreement with the
determination of the Director, any aggrieved party may file and appeal with
the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the provision of Article X of this
ordinance. Such hardsurfacing shall require an improvement location permit
and shall also be subject to full review under and compliance with Ord. 17-97
- Drainage Ordinance, as codified in §§ 54.01 through 54.15 of this code of
ordinances.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1J  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



      (1)   Any legally established nonconforming sign within the
town may continue to exist, including the performance of normal and routine
maintenance, so long as such sign remains otherwise lawful.



      (2)   Legally established nonconforming signs may receive
normal and routine repair and maintenance subject to the following provisions:



         (a)   A legally established nonconforming sign may not
be enlarged, expanded or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity;



         (b)   A legally established nonconforming sign erected
pursuant to the grant of a variance of either a previously enacted zoning
regulation or this ordinance for number of signs, height of sign, setback of
sign or sign surface area may be altered so as to decrease the extent of
nonconformity authorized by such grant of variance;



         (c)   Except as provided for in Article 9.1J(2)(b)
above, the removal of a sign structure or a sign cabinet shall be deemed
conclusive evidence that such sign requires work beyond normal and routine
repair and maintenance, and such sign shall not be repaired, maintained or
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance;



         (d)   Should a legally established nonconforming sign be
moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, such legally established
nonconforming sign shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this
ordinance;



         (e)   Should a legally established nonconforming sign
remain unused by a business operating from an associated building for a
period of six months or greater, the owner of the premises upon which it is
located shall remove all poles, frames, supports and any other structural,
electrical, mechanical elements of said sign;



         (f)   If the cost of normal and routine repair and
maintenance of a legally established nonconforming sign exceeds 50% of the
sign’s replacement cost or current depreciated value, whichever is less,
determined pursuant to this Article 9.1K(2), said legally established
nonconforming sign shall not be repaired, maintained or reconstructed except
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance; and



         (g)   If a legally established nonconforming sign is
damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent that the repair or
reconstruction of the sign exceeds 50% of the sign’s replacement cost or
current depreciated value, whichever is less, determined pursuant to this
Article 9.1K(2), said legally established nonconforming sign shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance,
provided, however, in the case of a freestanding identification sign, if due
to the configuration of the property (i.e., location of building, interior
access drive or other permanent improvement) a new freestanding
identification sign cannot be located at the appropriate setback pursuant to
Article VII of this ordinance, the Director may issue an improvement location
permit for a new freestanding identification sign located at the same
location as the damaged or destroyed freestanding identification sign subject
to the following regulations:



            1.   The owner shall make application for an
improvement location permit within six months of such damage or destruction;



            2.   The Director shall determine that there are
no locations on the subject lot and oriented toward the same street, where a
new freestanding identification sign may be located without significant site
alterations;



            3.   No portion of such freestanding
identification sign shall encroach into any street right-of-way; and



            4.   The proposed sign shall, in the determination
of the Director, decrease the extent of nonconformity where possible and to
the maximum extent feasible given site constraints in relation to:



               a.   The type of sign (from pole sign to
pylon sign to ground sign, as permitted by this ordinance);



               b.   Illumination of sign (from external to
internal to no illumination, as permitted by this ordinance);



               c.   Height of sign (from taller to shorter,
to the maximum height permitted by this ordinance);



               d.   Setback of sign (from zero feet to the
minimum setback required by this ordinance); and



               e.   Sign surface area (from larger to
smaller, to the maximum sign surface area permitted by this ordinance), in
comparison to the sign which existed immediately prior to such damage or
destruction, provided however, in no case shall the extent of any
nonconformity be increased in any manner.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1K  DETERMINATION OF FAIR MARKET VALUE OR REPLACEMENT COST.



   In determining the fair market value of the building or structure
(excluding signs) or the replacement cost of a sign, immediately prior to the
damage or destruction, the Director may consider the following items:



      (1)   Building or structure. Documentation prepared by and
provided by the applicable insurance company responsible for adjusting the
loss;



      (2)   Building, structure or sign. Documentation prepared by
and provided by an appraiser licensed by the state to appraise the type of
property involved; or



      (3)   Other. Other documentary evidence deemed appropriate by
the Director.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1L  RECONSTRUCTION, REMODELING OR ENLARGEMENT OF A LEGALLY ESTABLISHED
NONCONFORMING SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLING.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this Article to the contrary, any
legally established nonconforming single-family dwelling or two-family
dwelling may be:



      (1)   Reconstructed if damaged or destroyed by fire, natural
disaster or for any other reasons; or



      (2)   Remodeled or enlarged, provided that such remodeling or
additions comply with the development standards related to maximum lot
coverage, minimum yards and building setbacks, maximum building height, and
off-street parking of the R-3 District for a single-family dwelling or the
R-5 District for a two-family dwelling.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1M  ADDITIONS ALONG A LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SETBACK FOR A
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING LOCATED IN THE TOWN CENTER NEIGHBORHOOD.



   Notwithstanding any provision of this Article to the contrary, the
minimum front yard, minimum side yard or minimum rear yard for any legally
established nonconforming building used as a single- family dwelling and
located in the “Town Center Neighborhood” as designated in the Town
Center Plan and having a setback which is less than that which is required by
this ordinance shall be allowed to expand one or more times along such
legally established nonconforming setback.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1N  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED BUILDING, STRUCTURE, FREESTANDING
IDENTIFICATION SIGN OR OUTDOOR OPERATIONS AFTER ACQUISITION BY A GOVERNMENTAL
AGENCY.



   The provisions of this Article shall apply to any lot affected by the
acquisition of land for right-of-way or other purposes by a governmental
agency.



      (1)   Setback. Notwithstanding any provisions of this Article
to the contrary, any legally established buildings, structures, freestanding
identification signs or outdoor operations, or portions thereof, which either
becomes nonconforming or increases the extent of nonconformity as to setback
a result of the acquisition of land for right-of-way or other purposes by a
governmental agency, shall be subject to the following provisions.



         (a)   Building or structure. Any building or structure
which becomes nonconforming or increases the extent of nonconformity as to
setback as a result of a governmental acquisition may continue to be used or
occupied provided the buildings or structures maintain compliance with all
applicable health, safety and building codes.



         (b)   Building or structure. Any building or structure
(excluding outdoor operations) which becomes nonconforming or increases the
extent of nonconformity as to setback as a result of a governmental
acquisition shall be permitted a one-time only exception to remodeled or
add-on to such building or structure subject to the following regulations:



            1.   The owner shall make application for an
improvement location permit within six months of the acquisition of land by a
governmental agency;



            2.   The gross floor area devoted of such building
or structure shall not be enlarged beyond that which existed prior to the
governmental acquisition:



            3.   Setbacks for all yards not affected by the
governmental acquisition shall comply with the applicable development
standards of this ordinance; and



            4.   If compliance with all applicable development
standards cannot be achieved for any yard which is affected by the
governmental acquisition, the Director may approve an improvement location
permit for a remodeling or addition that demonstrates compliance with a
development incentive applicable to the specific development standard which
cannot be met, if such a development incentive exists, as set forth in
Article 5.4 of this ordinance and subject to compliance with all applicable
requirements thereof.



         (c)   Freestanding identification signs. Any
freestanding identification sign which either becomes nonconforming or
increases the extent of nonconformity as to setback as a result of by a
governmental acquisition shall be subject to the following provisions:



            1.   Such freestanding identification sign may
continue to be maintained at the original location of such freestanding
identification sign provided that no portion of such freestanding
identification sign:



               a.   Encroaches into any public right-of-way;



               b.   Interferes with the stated purpose of
the governmental agencies acquisition; or



               c.   Interferes with the vision clearance
area set forth in Article 4.14 of this ordinance.



            2.   If any portion of such freestanding
identification sign would:



               a.   Encroach into any public right-of-way;



               b.   Interfere with the stated purpose of
the governmental agencies acquisition; or



               c.   Interfere with the vision clearance
area set forth in Article 4.14 of this ordinance, the Director may issue an
improvement location permit to provide for:



                  i.   The relocation of such
freestanding identification sign to a location on the subject site which is
in full compliance with all setback provisions of this ordinance; or



                  ii.   The relocation of such
freestanding identification sign to a location on the subject site that does
not comply with all setback provisions of this ordinance subject to the
following regulations:



                     A.   The owner shall make
application for an improvement location permit within six months of the
acquisition of land by a governmental agency;



                     B.   The Director shall
determine that due to the configuration of the remaining property (i.e.,
location of building, interior access drive or other permanent improvement)
the freestanding identification sign cannot be located at the appropriate
setback pursuant to Article VII of this ordinance;



                     C.   The Director shall
determine that there are no locations on the subject lot and oriented toward
the same street to which such freestanding identification sign may be
relocated at the appropriate setback without significant site alterations;



                     D.   No portion of such
freestanding identification sign shall encroach into any street right-of-way;



                     E.   No portion of such
freestanding identification sign shall interfere with the vision clearance
area set forth in Article 4.14 of this ordinance; and



                     F.   The relocated freestanding
identification sign shall not result in an increase in the extent of any
nonconformity, other than setback, than that which existed prior to the
governmental acquisition.



                  iii.   The issuance of an improvement
location permit for the relocation of a freestanding identification sign
under the special provisions of this division shall not be deemed or
construed to have removed the nonconforming status of any element of such
freestanding identification sign.



            3.   Outdoor operations: in the case of any
outdoor operations, including, but not limited to, off-street parking areas,
off-street loading areas, outdoor display, outdoor seating or outside
storage, which either becomes nonconforming or increases the extent of
nonconformity as to setback as a result of a governmental acquisition and
which cannot be reasonably redesigned to achieve compliance with all
applicable development standards, the Director may approve an improvement
location permit for such outdoor operations, which encroach into a required
yard, provided:



               a.   The owner shall make application for an
improvement location permit within six months of the acquisition of land by a
governmental agency;



               b.   The Director shall have determined that
such outdoor operations cannot reasonably redesigned to be brought into full
compliance with applicable development standards regarding setback; and



               c.   The Director shall have determined that
such outdoor operations have been redesigned, to the extent feasible, to
achieve maximum compliance with the applicable development standards of this
ordinance (including, but not limited to: setback; design and construction
standards; minimum number; and landscaping).



      (2)   Lot area for single-family dwellings or two-family
dwellings. In addition to the above provision, if a single-family dwelling
lot or two-family dwelling lot either becomes nonconforming or increases the
extent of nonconformity as to lot area as a result of a governmental
acquisition, a single- family dwelling or two-family dwelling located on such
lot may be reconstructed, remodeled or enlarged provided that such remodeling
or additions comply with the development standards related to maximum lot
coverage, minimum yards and building setbacks, maximum building height and
off-street parking of the R-5 District.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 9.1O  LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES WITHIN
600 FEET OF A GATEWAY CORRIDOR OR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   Where a legally established nonconforming building or structure located
within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor or residential district exists on the
effective date of this ordinance that was not constructed in compliance with
the terms of this ordinance with regards to development requirements of
Article V, the use of the building or structure may continue to exist so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to compliance with the following
provisions:



      (1)   The use was not discontinued or abandoned for a period
of six months or more; and



      (2)   In the event the building or structure has lost its
legally established nonconforming status based on the above provisions, prior
to the reuse of the building or structure, the owner shall make application
for an improvement location permit (ILP) for compliance with the development
requirements of Article V of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 11-2004,
passed 6-14-2004; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 09-2007, passed
4-23-2007; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



ARTICLE 10.1. ADMINISTRATION: TOWN COUNCIL



§ 10.1  TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Town Council shall have the following powers and duties in
connection with the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan and this
ordinance:



   (A)   Approve, reject or amend a Comprehensive Plan, or segment
thereof, certified to it by the Plan Commission;



   (B)   Initiate amendments to the text of this ordinance;



   (C)   Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal
the text of this ordinance;



   (D)   Initiate amendments to the text of the Subdivision Control
Ordinance;



   (E)   Adopt, reject or amend proposals to amend or partially repeal
the text of the Subdivision Control Ordinance;



   (F)   Adopt or reject proposals to amend zone maps;



   (G)   Adopt, reject or amend a PUD District ordinance; and



   (H)   Such additional powers and duties as may be set forth for the
Town Council elsewhere in this ordinance or state law.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 10.2. ADMINISTRATION: PLAN COMMISSION



§ 10.2A  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Advisory Planning Law is hereby re-adopted and the Town Plan
Commission, is hereby re-established in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-200 et
seq.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.2B  MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATION AND TERMS.



   The membership of the Plan Commission, the qualification of its members
and the terms of membership shall be in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-200 et
seq.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.2C  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Plan Commission is hereby vested with the duties and powers imposed
upon and granted to an Advisory Plan Commission under the Advisory Planning
Law, including, without limitation, the powers and duties listed below. To
effectuate the purposes of this ordinance, the Plan Commission may, to the
fullest extent permitted by applicable laws:



      (1)   Supervise and make rules for the administration of the
affairs of the Plan Commission;



      (2)   Prescribe uniform rules pertaining to investigations and
hearings, and other matters authorized by state planning and zoning laws;



      (3)   Keep a complete record of all departmental proceedings;



      (4)   Record and file all bonds and contracts and assume
responsibility for the custody and preservation of all papers and documents
of the Plan Commission;



      (5)   Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and
other material related to the Plan Commission activities authorized by state
law or this ordinance;



      (6)   Adopt a seal;



      (7)   Certify to all official acts;



      (8)   Supervise the fiscal affairs of the Plan Commission;



      (9)   Prepare and submit an annual budget and be limited in
all expenditures to the provisions made for expenditures by the Town Council;



      (10)   Prescribe the qualifications of, appoint, remove and
fix the compensation of the employees of the Plan Commission;



      (11)   Delegate authority to its employees to perform
ministerial acts in all cases except where final action of the Plan
Commission is necessary;



      (12)   Designate a hearing examiner or a committee of the
commission to conduct any public hearing required to be held by the Plan
Commission;



      (13)   Make recommendations to the Town Council concerning:



         (a)   The adoption of the Comprehensive Plan and
amendments to the Comprehensive Plan;



         (b)   The adoption or text amendment of this ordinance
or the Subdivision Control Ordinance;



         (c)   The adoption or amendment of a PUD District
ordinance; and



         (d)   Proposals to change the official zone maps;



      (14)   Render decisions concerning and approve plats or
replats of subdivisions;



      (15)   Render decisions concerning development plans and
amendments to development plans;



      (16)   Assign street numbers to lots and structures, renumber
lots and structures, and to name or rename streets;



      (17)   Establish advisory committees of citizens;



      (18)   Establish executive committees;



      (19)   Negotiate for grants-in-aid and agree to terms and
conditions attached to such grants-in-aid;



      (20)   Subject to final confirmation and approval by the Town
Council, establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray the administrative
costs connected with:



         (a)   Processing and hearing administrative appeals and
petitions for zone map change, special exceptions, variances, planned unit
development approvals, and development plan approvals;



         (b)   Issuing improvement location permits and special
exception permits; and



         (c)   Other official actions taken under this ordinance.



      (21)   Invoke any legal, equitable or special remedy available
under this ordinance or applicable law for the enforcement of the provisions
of this ordinance or actions taken hereunder;



      (22)   Establish an alternate procedure for the more expedient
disposition of variances of development standards, special exceptions,
variances of use and adopt rules governing the alternate procedure; and



      (23)   Exercise all powers conferred on it by state law, local
ordinance, or rule in the manner so prescribed. This Article shall not be
construed as a limitation on such powers.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 10.3. ADMINISTRATION: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS



§ 10.3A  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Town Advisory Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby re-established in
accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-900 et seq.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 10.3B  MEMBERSHIP, QUALIFICATION AND TERMS.



   The membership of the Board of Zoning Appeals, the qualification of its
members and the terms of membership shall be in accordance with I.C.
36-7-4-900 et seq.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 10.3C  DUTIES AND POWERS.



      (1)   Duties and powers generally. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall have the duty and power to:



         (a)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by staff, Hearing Officer
or administrative official under this ordinance;



         (b)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative board
or other body except the Plan Commission in relation to the enforcement of
this ordinance;



         (c)   Hear and determine appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative board
or other body except the Plan Commission in relation to the enforcement of
those provisions of this ordinance requiring the procurement of an
improvement location permit or a certificate of zoning compliance;



         (d)   Hear, and approve or deny, all special exceptions
in accordance with the provisions of Article 10.3C(5) below;



         (e)   Hear, and approve or deny, all variances from
development standards of this ordinance. A variance from development
standards may be approved only upon written determination that:



            1.   The approval will not be injurious to the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



            2.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner; and



            3.   The strict application of the terms of this
ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship in the use of the property.



         (f)   Hear, and approve or deny, all variances of use
from the terms of this ordinance. A variance of use may be approved only upon
written determination that:



            1.   The approval will not be injurious to the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community;



            2.   The use and value of the area adjacent to the
property included in the variance will not be affected in a substantially
adverse manner;



            3.   The need for the variance arises from some
condition peculiar to the property involved;



            4.   The strict application of the terms of the
Zoning Ordinance will constitute an unnecessary hardship if applied to the
property for which the variance is sought; and



            5.   The approval does not interfere substantially
with the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Conditions. The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose
reasonable conditions as a part of its approval of any special exception or
variance from the terms of this ordinance.



      (3)   Commitments.



         (a)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit or require
the owner of a parcel of property to make a written commitment concerning the
use or development of that parcel in the case of a petition for a special
exception, variance from the terms of this ordinance or a variance of
development standards. All such commitments shall be in recordable form and
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder and shall take effect
upon the granting of the special exception or variance. Unless modified by a
decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, a recorded commitment shall be
binding on the owner of the parcel, each subsequent owner, and each other
person acquiring an interest in the parcel.



         (b)   The commitments required by the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be in substantially the form set forth in Exhibit C of this
ordinance.



         (c)   A commitment may be modified or terminated only by
a decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals made at a public hearing after
notice.



         (d)   The modification or termination of commitments
shall be in substantially the form set forth in Exhibit D of this ordinance.



         (e)   By permitting or requiring commitments, the Board
of Zoning Appeals does not obligate itself to approve or deny any request.
This section does not affect the validity of any covenant, easement,
equitable servitude, or other land use restriction created in accordance with
law.



      (4)   Rules. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules
concerning: the filing of appeals; applications for special exceptions and
variances; the giving of notice; the determination of interested parties to
receive notice; the conduct of hearings; the determination between use
variances and development standards variances; the creation, form, recording,
modification, enforcement and termination of commitments; and the designation
of which specially affected persons and classes of specially affected persons
are entitled to enforce commitments.



      (5)   Special exceptions.



         (a)   Statement of purpose. Certain land uses have
characteristics and locational impacts which, if inappropriately located, may
have a detrimental effect upon other land uses within the town. It is
therefore recognized that such land uses should be regulated in order to
preserve property values, as well as promote the public health, safety,
comfort, community moral standards, convenience and general welfare of the
town.



         (b)   Uses permitted by special exception. Only those
uses identified in each individual zoning district as uses permitted by
special exception shall be permitted by special exception in each zoning
district.



         (c)   Grant of a special exception. The Board of Zoning
Appeals is hereby authorized to grant special exceptions to permit uses
designated as uses permitted by special exception in each zoning district
subject to the following requirements.



            1.   Form of filing. A petition for special
exception shall be filed with the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with
the requirements for the filing of a variance, except as such requirements
may be modified in this Article. Such petition shall include proposed
detailed findings of fact pursuant to Article 10.3C(5)(c)3. below, in support
of the determinations required to be made by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



            2.   Waiver of development standards. A petition
for special exception may contain a request to waive development standards of
the zoning district determined to be inappropriate for the individual special
exception use. The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve such a waiver only if
such waiver is specifically requested in said petition and specifically
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any development standards which are
waived in this manner shall require additional findings by the Board of
Zoning Appeals as specified in Article 10.3C(1)(e) above, for the grant of a
variance of development standards.



            3.   Findings of fact. The Board of Zoning Appeals
may grant a special exception only upon making a written determination and
adopting appropriate findings of fact, based upon the evidence presented at a
public hearing, that:



               a.   The proposed use will not be injurious
to the public health, safety, comfort, community moral standards, convenience
or general welfare;



               b.   The proposed use will not injure or
adversely affect the adjacent area or property values therein; and



               c.   The proposed use will be consistent
with the character of the district, land uses authorized therein and the Town
Comprehensive Plan.



         (d)   Conditions for the grant of a special exception.
The grant of a special exception shall be subject to the following conditions.



            1.   The proposed use shall conform to all
development standards of the applicable zoning district (unless a waiver of
such development standards is requested as part of the special exception
petition and approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth above).



            2.   The proposed use shall conform to all
conditions attached to the grant of the special exception by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. Such conditions may include any reasonable site, development,
operational standards, performance standards, requirements, and restrictions
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the findings of fact
determinations. The grant of a special exception may be for a limited period
of time, as specified by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



         (e)   Basis of Board of Zoning Appeals review. In
reviewing a special exception petition and making a determination as to
compliance with the required findings of fact, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall give consideration to the particular needs and circumstances of each
special exception application and shall examine the following items as they
relate to the proposed use:



            1.   Topography and other natural site features;



            2.   Zoning of the site and surrounding properties;



            3.   Driveway locations and street access;



            4.   On-site and off-site accommodations for
vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns;



            5.   Amount, location and design of off-street
parking areas and off-street loading areas;



            6.   Building character, including height,
intensity, materials and architecture;



            7.   Landscaping, screening and buffering of
adjacent properties;



            8.   Compatibility of the proposed use, site
design and architecture with the district in which the use is proposed to be
located;



            9.   Extent to which the proposed use, site design
and architecture comply with the regulations and development standards that
would be applicable if the site were zoned to a commercial district or
industrial district of this ordinance which would permit the proposed use as
a primary use;



            10.   Open space and other site amenities; and



            11.   Availability and adequacy of streets,
sanitary facilities, potable water, storm water management system and other
utilities.



         (f)   Amendments to approved special exceptions.



            1.   The Director is hereby authorized to approve
minor amendments or accessory buildings, structures or use additions to sites
which are the subject of a special exception grant through the improvement
location permit process and without a public hearing if, in the determination
of the Director, the requested minor amendments or accessory buildings,
structures or use additions:



               a.   Do not constitute an expansion of the
primary use authorized by the special exception grant;



               b.   Do not adversely impact or alter the
purpose or intent of the special exception use authorized by the Board of
Zoning Appeals;



               c.   Do not adversely impact the findings of
fact made by the Board of Zoning Appeals;



               d.   Do not include a substantial increase
in intensity of any special exception use;



               e.   Utilize site design and architectural
features which are consistent and compatible with the existing improvements
authorized for the special exception use; and



               f.   Comply with the development standards
of the district in which the special exception use is located or with the
terms and conditions of any waiver authorized by Article 10.3C(5)(c)2. and
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



            2.   If the Director determines that a request for
minor amendments or accessory buildings, structures or use additions to a
special exception use does not comply with the requirements set forth above,
the Director shall deny the request. In the event of a denial by the
Director, the petitioner shall have the right to appeal said denial to the
Board of Zoning Appeals under Article 10.3C(1)(a) above, or file a petition
for a special exception under Article 10.3C(1)(d) above.



            3.   Minor amendments or accessory buildings,
structures or use additions to a special exception use shall be reported, in
writing, to the Board of Zoning Appeals at the next regular meeting of the
Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (6)   Other powers. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall exercise
all powers conferred on it by state law, local ordinance or rule in the
manner so prescribed. This Article shall not be construed as a limitation on
such powers.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 10.4. ADMINISTRATION: STAFF AGENCIES



§ 10.4A  ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   The Department of Planning and Zoning for the town is
hereby established. The Department of Planning and Zoning shall consist of
the Plan Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and staff.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may, by resolution, establish a
Technical Advisory Committee. The purpose of the Technical Advisory Committee
shall be to provide technical support to staff as an aid in the review of
applications or petitions for public hearing, applications for improvement
location permits, and in the preparation of written or verbal comments by
staff to the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals, Design Review
Committee or Hearing Officer regarding all matters presented to such bodies
for public hearing.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 10.4B  ADMINISTRATION OF PLANNING AND ZONING AUTHORITY.



   The Department of Planning and Zoning shall administer the planning and
zoning functions of the town.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 10.4C  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Director to supervise the
general administration of the Department.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce and
administer this ordinance; receive and review all applications required by
this ordinance; issue improvement location permits; and number and file all
certificates of zoning compliance.



      (3)   The Director shall, when requested by the Plan
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals, or when the interests of the town so
require, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in this
ordinance and render written reports on the same.



      (4)   The Director shall keep the records of the Department,
including, without limitation, records of applications, permits issued,
certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered and notices or orders
issued. The Director shall maintain records of all final determinations and
decisions of the Plan Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (5)   The Director shall transmit to the Plan Commission or
Board of Zoning Appeals the recommendation of the Department on all
applications, petitions or matters requiring official action by the Plan
Commission or Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (6)   The Director shall maintain the official zone maps and
designate on the official zone maps all map amendments granted under the
terms of this ordinance.



      (7)   The Director shall provide and maintain information for
the public relative to all matters arising out of this ordinance.



      (8)   The Director may designate staff to assist in the daily
administration of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this ordinance.



      (9)   The Director shall perform such other duties as the Plan
Commission may direct in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 10.4D  STAFF.



   When designated by the Director, staff shall be charged with the
administration of this ordinance and, in particular, shall have the
jurisdiction, authority and duties described below:



      (1)   To conduct preliminary consultations with potential
applicants regarding development proposals regulated by this ordinance;



      (2)   To review all improvement location permit applications
for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance; and



      (3)   To issue improvement location permits upon a
determination that such permit application is in full compliance with all
terms and provisions of this ordinance, the Subdivision Control Ordinance,
and all other duly adopted applicable ordinances, rules or regulations of the
town.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 10.5. ADMINISTRATION: DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE



§ 10.5A  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



      (1)   The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to establish,
by resolution, a Design Review Committee as an advisory committee of citizens.



      (2)   The purpose of the Design Review Committee shall be to
study problems and issues identified by the Plan Commission in its resolution
establishing the Design Review Committee and to advise the Plan Commission
concerning such problems and issues. Such advise to the Plan Commission may
be provided by of way technical assistance to staff and the Plan Commission
in the exercise of their duties in connection with the administration of this
ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 06-2010,
passed - -2010)



§ 10.5B  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Design Review Committee shall study problems and issues identified
by the Plan Commission and advise the Plan Commission concerning such
problems and issues in sufficient detail to assist the Plan Commission in the
Plan Commission’s:



      (1)   Review and determination of all development plans,
including, but not limited to, those development plans related to:



         (a)   Development incentives in RR, R-1, R-2 and R-3
Districts;



         (b)   Development incentives for the R-6 District;



         (c)   Development incentives for all commercial and
industrial districts (except the TC: Town Center District);



         (d)   Development plans required for all development
located in the R-6, all commercial districts and all industrial districts
when located within 600 feet of a Gateway Corridor; and



         (e)   Development plans required for architectural
review in the TC: Town Center District and all other commercial and
industrial districts within 600 feet of a residential district.



      (2)   Review and recommendation of Planned Unit Developments
as to:



         (a)   Preliminary plan conceptual design review;



         (b)   Zone map change; and



         (c)   Final detailed plan secondary review.



      (3)   Site plan review for an improvement location permit
applied for in connection with an economic revitalization area resolution
adopted pursuant to Ord. 5-97;



      (4)   Site plan review in connection with a special exception
use application for wireless telecommunications facilities; and



      (5)   Other applications or petitions identified by the
Director as needing additional technical review, including, but not limited
to, the review of applications or petitions for improvement location permits,
zone map change, primary plat, secondary plat, variance of use, variance of
development standards and special exceptions.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 06-2010,
passed - -2010)



§ 10.5C  MEMBERSHIP, TERMS, VACANCIES AND REMOVAL.



      (1)   Membership. Membership of the Design Review Committee
shall consist of a total of six members. Such membership shall be determined
as follows:



         (a)   One ex officio, non-voting member appointed by the
Plan Commission from its membership; and



         (b)   Five voting citizen members whom shall be
appointed by the Plan Commission.



      (2)   Terms.



         (a)   Citizen members of the Design Review Committee
shall serve three-year terms.



         (b)   The term of ex officio, non-voting Plan Commission
members shall be for a period of one year.



         (c)   Initial terms of citizen members appointed
pursuant to this ordinance shall be: two members for a period of one year;
two members for a period of two years and one member for a period of three
years.



         (d)   The Plan Commission may appoint an alternate
member to participate with the Design Review Committee who may serve at any
meeting, hearing or procedure in which the regular member of that has a
conflict of interest or at any meeting, hearing or procedure for which a
regular member may be absent.



      (3)   Vacancy. In the case of a vacancy on the Design Review
Committee, the Plan Commission shall, as soon as practicable, appoint a new
member to the Design Review Committee to complete the term which was vacated.



      (4)   Removal. The Plan Commission shall have the power to
remove any member of the Design Review Committee at any time.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 06-2010,
passed - -2010)



§ 10.5D  MEETINGS, HEARINGS AND PROCEDURES.



   The Plan Commission shall adopt rules of procedure to govern:



      (1)   The scope of the Design Review Committee’s review
authority; and



      (2)   The conduct of all meetings, hearings and procedures of
the Design Review Committee.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 06-2010,
passed - -2010)



§ 10.5E  RECORDS.



      (1)   The Design Review Committee shall keep minutes of its
hearings of all petitions as well as any investigations and other official
actions taken; and shall record the vote on all actions taken. A shorthand,
steno type or electronic record shall be made of all hearings of the Design
Review Committee and shall remain on file with the staff for a period of six
months following hearing and determination. All minutes and records filed
with the staff shall be public records.



      (2)   A transcription of such verbatim record or any hearing
may be ordered by any party, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the party
ordering such copy or copies.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 06-2010,
passed - -2010)



ARTICLE 10.6. ADMINISTRATION: HEARING OFFICER



§ 10.6A  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Plan Commission is hereby authorized to establish a Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6B  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   If it is determined by the Plan Commission that the establishment of an
alternate procedure for the more expedient disposition of certain matters is
in the best interest of the town, the Plan Commission may establish such
alternate procedure. In the establishment of such alternate procedure, the
Plan Commission shall appoint one Hearing Officer (and may appoint an
alternate Hearing Officer to serve in the absence of the initial appointee).
The Hearing Officer shall have the power of the Board of Zoning Appeals to
approve or deny:



      (1)   A variance from the development standards of this
ordinance;



      (2)   A special exception use as provided for in this
ordinance;



      (3)   A variance of use from the terms of this ordinance only
if:



         (a)   The request is for the expansion of a use which
currently exists on the real estate; and



         (b)   The use is consistent with the provisions of the
Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6C  APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



      (1)   The term of the Hearing Officer, once established, shall
be for a period of one year (except for the initial appointment term which
shall terminate on December 31 of the year of appointment). Each subsequent
year’s appointments shall be made by the Plan Commission at its first
regular meeting in January of each calendar year with such appointment to
take effect on the date of appointment.



      (2)   The Plan Commission may appoint an Alternate Hearing
Officer at any time as, in the sole discretion of the Plan Commission, such
action is warranted. The term of an Alternate Hearing Officer shall be the
same as that for the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6D  REMOVAL.



   The Plan Commission shall have the power to remove a Hearing Officer or
Alternate Hearing Officer at any time.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6E  VACANCY.



      (1)   In the case of a vacancy in the position of Hearing
Officer, the Plan Commission shall, as soon as practicable, appoint a new
Hearing Officer to complete the term which was vacated.



      (2)   If an Alternate Hearing Officer has been appointed by
the Plan Commission, such Alternate Hearing Officer shall serve as the
Hearing Officer until the Plan Commission shall appoint a new Hearing Officer.



      (3)   If the Plan Commission has not appointed a Hearing
Officer or an Alternate Hearing Officer, all petitions which have been
scheduled for public hearing by the Hearing Officer shall be transferred to
the Board of Zoning Appeals and placed on the next available agenda.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6F  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   If the Plan Commission establishes an alternate procedure, the Plan
Commission may adopt rules of procedure to:



      (1)   Limit the kinds of variance or special exception
petitions or applications that may be filed under the alternate procedure;



      (2)   Permit the Hearing Officer to transfer a petition or an
application filed under the alternate procedure to the Board of Zoning
Appeals;



      (3)   Require the creation of minutes and records of
proceedings before the Hearing Officer and the filing of minutes and records
as public records; and



      (4)   Regulating conflicts of interest and communication with
the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6G  CONDITIONS AND COMMITMENTS.



      (1)   The Hearing Officer may impose conditions and may permit
or require the owner of a parcel of property to make a written commitment
concerning the use or development of that parcel. If the petitioner or
applicant for the variance of development standards, variance of use, or
special exception use does not accept these conditions or make the
commitment, the petition or application shall:



         (a)   Be considered withdrawn; or



         (b)   Be transferred to the Board of Zoning Appeals, if
requested by the petitioner or applicant.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer may not modify or terminate any
commitment, whether made under the alternate procedure or by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 10.6H  APPEALS.



   A decision of the Hearing Officer may not be a basis for judicial
review, but may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. An interested
person who wishes to appeal a decision of the Hearing Officer under the
alternate procedure must file an appeal with the Board of Zoning Appeals with
14 days after the decision is made.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 11.1. REVIEW: REQUIRED PERMITS



§ 11.1  REQUIRED PERMITS AND APPROVALS.



   The development review procedures for the town are intended to provide
for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the residential and business citizens of the town by providing for the
thorough review of all permit applications and development petitions so that
informed decisions regarding such permit applications and development
petitions may be rendered while balancing the needs of the development
community for the timely review of those permit applications and development
petitions.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 11.2. REVIEW: IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS



§ 11.2A  IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building, structure, improvement, sign or use of land may be
altered, changed, placed, erected or located, unless the building, structure,
improvement, sign or use and its location conform to the provisions of this
ordinance and an improvement location permit for the alteration, change,
placement, erection or location of such building, structure, improvement,
sign or use has been issued.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2B  DURATION OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



      (1)   An improvement location permit shall be valid for the
longer of:



         (a)   One year after date of issuance; or



         (b)   The length of any required building permit, if
such building permit is obtained for the building, structure, improvement or
sign covered by the improvement location permit within one year after the
date of issuance of the improvement location permit.



      (2)   The Director shall have the power to extend the period
of validity of any improvement location permit one or more times, provided,
however, the total time period of all extension(s) shall not exceed six
months.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2C  REVIEW OF IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT APPLICATION.



      (1)   Improvement location permits for single-family and
two-family dwellings and related accessory buildings or structures. The
Director may take up to five business days to study an application for an
improvement location permit. During such five-business day period, the
Director may consult with the Technical Advisory Committee or other
appropriate technical consultants. If, after such five-day period, the
Director has not requested any additional information or stated any
objections in writing to the applicant, and the proposed building, structure
or improvement, and the proposed use conform in all respects to the
provisions of this ordinance, the Director shall issue the improvement
location permit.



      (2)   Improvement location permits for all: multi-family,
commercial, industrial or special exception buildings, structures,
improvements or uses; signs; and accessory buildings, structures or
improvements related to multi-family, commercial, industrial or special
exception uses. The Director may take an additional ten business days, beyond
the review period specified above, in which to study the application, during
which time the Director may consult with the Technical Advisory Committee or
other appropriate technical consultants. If, after such additional ten-day
period, the Director has not requested any additional information or stated
any objections in writing to the applicant, and the proposed building,
structure, improvement or sign, and the proposed use conform in all respects
to the provisions of this ordinance, the Director shall issue the improvement
location permit.



      (3)   Improvement location permit for all multi-family,
commercial, industrial or special exception buildings, structures,
improvements or uses. An application for an improvement location permit for
any multi-family, commercial, industrial or special exception building,
structure, improvement or use shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect verifying that the building, structure, improvement or
use intended will be in compliance with all applicable use regulations,
development standards and performance standards of the district in which the
building, structure, improvement or use is to be located.



      (4)   Improvement location permits for buildings, structures,
improvements, signs or uses authorized by special exception or variance. In
addition to the requirements above, an improvement location permit for a
building, structure, improvement, sign or use authorized by special exception
or variance shall not be issued until:



         (a)   Receipt by the Director of written notice from the
Board that the application therefore has been approved by the Board; and



         (b)   A determination by the Director that said
improvement location permit application is in full compliance with the terms
of any conditions which may have been imposed by the Board and commitments
which may have been made by the owner.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2D  PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED.



   An application for an improvement location permit for any building,
structure, improvement or use shall not be approved until it has been
ascertained by the Director that:



      (1)   The proposed building, structure, improvement or use
will be served by a public or semi-public sanitary sewer system; or



      (2)   The proposed building, structure, improvement or use
will be served by a septic system or other method of sanitary waste disposal
approved by the County Health Department.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2E  APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.



   Any determination by the Director concerning the issuance of an
improvement location permit may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by
any party claiming to be adversely affected by that decision.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2F  RECORD OF PERMITS.



   A record of all improvement location permits shall be kept on file in
the office of the Director and copies shall be furnished upon request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land
affected and shall be available for public inspection and copying as provided
by applicable state law.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2G  AMENDED IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT.



   When a builder, developer or owner of any building, structure,
improvement or sign for which an improvement location permit has been
obtained, for any reason, proposes that the construction of said building,
structure, improvement or sign deviate from the plans filed with the
improvement location permit application and approved by the Director, the
builder, developer or owner shall make application for an amended improvement
location permit. The Director shall review the application for the amended
improvement location permit in accordance with the procedures set forth above
to determine compliance of the amended improvement location permit
application with the provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable
conditions, covenants or restrictions. If such amended improvement location
permit application is found to be in compliance, the Director shall issue an
amended improvement location permit. Any determination by the Director with
respect to an amended improvement location permit shall be subject to the
same appeal rights and procedures as set forth above for an initial
application for an improvement location permit.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2H  GENERAL EXEMPTIONS.



   Not withstanding anything contained in this Article to the contrary, no
improvement location permit shall be required for minor repairs or
alterations to buildings, structures, improvements or signs where:



      (1)   The cost of such repairs or alterations does not exceed
$500;



      (2)   No increase in finished floor area, useable space or any
dimension of any portion of a sign is created; and



      (3)   All required front, side and rear yard setback
requirements of the applicable zoning district are complied with.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



§ 11.2I  REVOCATION IN EVENT OF VIOLATION.



   If the Director determines that construction or development is
proceeding or has proceeded in violation of any applicable law, ordinance,
rule, regulation, site plan or condition of Board approval, or that the
improvement location permit has been issued in violation of any applicable
law, ordinance, rule, regulation, site plan, zoning commitment or condition
of Board approval, the Director may revoke said improvement location permit.
In the event that an improvement location permit is revoked, the Director
shall send written notice of the revocation to the permit applicant.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 11.3. REVIEW: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS



§ 11.3  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS, ORDINANCES, RULES OR REGULATIONS.



   The issuance of an improvement location permit does not substitute for
or supersede the requirement to obtain approvals specified in other laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, as the same may be amended from time to
time, before the construction of any building, structure, improvement or
sign, including, but not limited to:



   (A)   Town Building Code;



   (B)   Town Subdivision Control Ordinance;



   (C)   Any other applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance,
rule or regulation, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Erosion Control Regulations of the Hendricks County Soil
and Water Conservation District;



      (2)   Ord. 25-2009, “Management of the Floodplain and Other
Areas of Special Flood Hazard in the Town of Plainfield”;



      (3)   Ord. 18-97, “Access Permit Ordinance of the Town of
Plainfield”, as codified in §§ 93.15 through 93.27 of this code of
ordinances; and



      (4)   State or federal environmental permits.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 11.4. REVIEW: APPLICATION AND APPROVAL



§ 11.4A  APPLICATION AND SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   When an improvement location permit is required by this ordinance, an
application for an improvement location permit shall be filed with the
Director. Said application shall be on a form prescribed by the Department of
Planning and Zoning and accompanied by a site plan consistent with the
requirements set forth below.



      (1)   A site plan for a single-family dwelling or a two-family
dwelling on a platted lot shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet showing:



         (a)   North arrow;



         (b)   Address of the lot;



         (c)   Legal description of the lot;



         (d)   Names, centerlines and right-of-way widths of all
streets, alleys, thoroughfares, public ways, water ways, or railroad
right-of-ways abutting or within the lot;



         (e)   The location and dimensions of all buildings,
structures or improvements currently existing on the lot;



         (f)   Structures proposed for demolition should be
indicated as such;



         (g)   The location and dimensions of all proposed
buildings, structures or improvements, including fences, sheds, paved areas,
storage areas, parking areas (indicate if parking is hardsurfaced).
Cross-hatch or shade lightly all proposed buildings;



         (h)   Location of any proposed or existing driveway and
its width at the property line. (Any connection to an alley must also be
indicated);



         (i)   The distance from lot lines for all existing and
proposed buildings, structures, improvements or signs (this distance is
measured as a line from the point where the building, structure, improvement
or sign is closest to the property line; this measurement it taken
perpendicular to the property line);



         (j)   The height of the existing and proposed buildings,
structures or improvements; and



         (k)   All other information required by the Director for
the proper administration of this ordinance.



      (2)   (a)   A site plan for any commercial, industrial or
special exception use shall be drawn to scale of not more than one inch
equals 100 feet showing:



            1.   North arrow;



            2.   Address of the site;



            3.   The actual shape, size and dimensions of the
lot;



            4.   Area map or sketch to indicate the location
of the lot;



            5.   Names, centerlines and right-of-way widths of
all streets, alleys, thoroughfares, public ways, water ways or railroad
right-of-ways abutting or within the lot;



            6.   The location and dimensions of all buildings,
structures, improvements or signs currently existing on the lot;



            7.   Structures proposed for demolition should be
indicated as such;



            8.   The location and dimensions of all proposed
buildings, structures, improvements or signs, including fences, sheds, paved
areas, storage areas, parking areas (indicate if parking is hardsurfaced).
Cross-hatch or shade lightly all proposed buildings;



            9.   Location of any proposed or existing driveway
and its width at the property line. (Any connection to an alley must also be
indicated);



            10.   (If applicable) location, dimensions and
type (e.g. ground, pole, wall) of all signs on the site, existing and
proposed. Include separate elevations of proposed sign structures with all
dimensions drawn to scale;



            11.   The distance from lot lines for all existing
and proposed buildings, structures, improvements or signs (this distance is
measured as a line from the point where the building, structure, improvement
or sign is closest to the property line; this measurement is taken
perpendicular to the property line);



            12.   The height of the existing and proposed
buildings, structures, improvements or signs;



            13.   The number of dwelling units (if applicable)
of existing and proposed buildings or structures;



            14.   The current and proposed use to be made of
all buildings, structures, improvements or lands within the lot (e.g.,
parking, residence, office, storage);



            15.   Locational engineering information regarding
all utilities to provide service to the buildings or structures on the lot;



            16.   The location and dimensions of all
off-street parking and off-street loading facilities;



            17.   The location and dimensions of all fences,
walls or other screening and buffering devices;



            18.   Location, size and species of all proposed
and existing trees (six inches or larger at four and one-half feet above
grade) and landscaping;



            19.   Site data summary (a text summary in table
format describing: square footage of existing and proposed buildings;
existing, proposed and required parking; existing, proposed and required
loading; proposed and permitted maximum building height; accommodation of
drainage, sanitary sewer, water and other utility services; legal
description; lighting; and landscaping);



            20.   The seal of the registered professional
engineer or architect responsible for the site plan; and



            21.   All other information required by the
Director for the proper administration and enforcement of this ordinance.



         (b)   The Director may waive or relax any of the site
plan requirements listed above, as circumstances dictate.



      (3)   The site plan shall be attached to the application for
an improvement location permit when such application is submitted to the
Director and shall be retained in the office of the Director as a public
record.



      (4)   Each application for an improvement location permit for
a building, structure or use shall include an application for a certificate
of zoning compliance.



      (5)   The Director may promulgate rules, regulations and
procedures, in addition to those listed herein, as to the form and processing
of the applications, site plans and permits required by this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 11.5. REVIEW: CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE



§ 11.5A  CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   No building, structure, improvement (except signs) or use for which an
improvement location permit is required by the provisions of this ordinance
shall be used for the purpose contemplated by the improvement location permit
until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Director.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 11.5B  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.



      (1)   Within two days of notification of completion of work on
the proposed building, structure or use, the applicant for an improvement
location permit shall notify the Director of completion of work authorized by
the improvement location permit. The Director, or his or her designee, shall,
within 15 business days inspect the premises for compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance and the improvement location permit.



      (2)   A certificate of zoning compliance pursuant to this
ordinance shall be issued only upon a finding by the Director that the
proposed building, structure or use has been developed, located or to be used
in accordance with the provisions of:



         (a)   This ordinance;



         (b)   The improvement location permit; and



         (c)   For industrial buildings, structures and uses, the
certificate of compliance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



§ 11.5C  TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.



   A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the
Director if the proposed building, structure or use complies with the
provisions of Article 11.5B above, except that certain external site features
(e.g., finish coat for asphalt parking areas or landscaping) have not been
completed due to ground or weather conditions which are not immediately
suitable for permanent installation. The duration of the temporary
certificate of zoning compliance shall be specified on the temporary
certificate of zoning compliance, provided, however, in no case shall a
temporary certificate of zoning compliance exceed six months in duration. In
cases of extreme hardship or weather conditions, and for good cause shown,
the Director may grant a one time extension of not to exceed three months.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004)



ARTICLE 11.6. REVIEW: FEES



§ 11.6  FEES.



   In order to defray administrative costs associated with the processing
of development petitions and improvement location permits, the Plan
Commission shall establish a schedule of fees which are to be paid by the
applicant at the time of filing a development petition or application for an
improvement location permit. Said schedule of fees shall include fees for:
improvement location permits; petitions for zone map changes; applications
for development plan approvals; petitions for variance; and other
administrative matters as determined by the Plan Commission, at a public
hearing, which are in the best interest of providing required services at a
reasonable fee to the general public.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



ARTICLE 12. ENFORCEMENT



§ 12.1  AUTHORITY.



   The staff is hereby designated to enforce the terms and provisions of
this ordinance.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51- 2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.2  ALLEGED VIOLATIONS.



   Whenever the staff receives a complaint or has reason to suspect that
an alleged violation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance are
occurring, the staff shall investigate the complaint or suspicion and shall
take whatever action is warranted in accordance with the provisions of this
Article XII.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.3  RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who
participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any situation that
is in violation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance, may be held
responsible for the violation, suffer the penalties, and be subject to the
remedies herein provided.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.4  INSPECTION OF PROPERTY; RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   The staff may enter upon any premises at any reasonable time
for the purpose of inspecting all lands located within the jurisdiction of
the Plan Commission and carrying out their duties in the enforcement of this
ordinance. Prior to entering upon any premises, the staff shall furnish
sufficient identification and information to enable the owner, tenant or
occupant to determine the purpose of the inspection and that the person
conducting the inspection is an authorized representative of the town.



   (B)   In the event that entry is denied by the owner, tenant or
occupant of a premises, the staff may make application to any court of
competent jurisdiction for the issuance of a search warrant. Such application
shall identify the premises upon which entry is sought and the purpose for
which entry is desired. The application shall state the facts giving rise to
the belief that a condition which is in violation of this ordinance exists on
the premises, or that such a violation in fact exists and must be abated, and
that the condition or violation is not a lawful nonconforming use to the best
of the affiant’s belief. Any warrant issued pursuant to such application
shall order such owner, tenant or occupant to permit entry to the staff for
the purposes stated therein.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.5  STOP WORK ORDER.



   (A)   The staff is empowered to issue a stop-work order requiring
the suspension of land improvement of any kind when any of the following
circumstances exist:



      (1)   A site improvement is occurring without an improvement
location permit or any other permit required by this ordinance having first
been obtained; or



      (2)   A site improvement is occurring in violation of: the
terms, conditions or provisions of this ordinance; the terms, provisions,
conditions or commitments of a variance grant or special exception; the terms
of commitments made or conditions imposed in connection with the approval of
a development plan; commitments made in connection with a petition for zone
map amendment; or other approval grant authorized by this ordinance.



   (B)   The stop-work order shall be posted on the property in a
conspicuous place, or personally delivered to the owner, tenant or occupant,
or person in charge and state the conditions under which construction or
other activity may be resumed. Staff shall meet with the recipient of a
stop-work order upon request to explain the conditions under which
construction or other activity may be resumed.



   (C)   The Plan Commission may institute a lawsuit in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of a stop-work order.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.6  VIOLATIONS.



   Each of the following shall be deemed civil zoning violations which may
be enforced by the designated enforcement entity in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 12.7 below:



   (A)   The location, erection or maintenance of any sign not
specifically permitted by this ordinance;



   (B)   The failure to obtain an improvement location permit when one
is required by the terms and provisions of this ordinance;



   (C)   The outdoor storage of junk, trash or debris in any zoning
district the provisions of which do not specifically permit such a use;



   (D)   The storage of inoperable motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts in any zoning district the provisions of which do not specifically
permit such a use;



   (E)   (1)   The parking or storage, in any zoning district the
provisions of which do no specifically permit such a use, of any motor
vehicle used or designed:



         (a)   For use in pulling, towing, hauling, transporting;
or



         (b)   As a temporary or permanent base, platform or
support for equipment, machinery, materials or other goods (including, but
not limited to, stake body trucks, dump trucks, trucks or tractors having
dual real wheels or more than two axles, semi-trailer tractors, semi-trailers
and trailers having dual rear wheels or more than one axle or having an
overall length of more than 12 feet).



      (2)   However, this provision does not apply to motor vehicles
which do not exceed three-quarter ton load classification in size and which
are the primary source of transportation for an individual whose primary
place of residence is the particular dwelling at which the commercial motor
vehicle is parked on a regular basis.



   (F)   The outdoor storage or display of merchandise or goods in any
zoning district the provisions of which do not specifically permit such a use
or in violation of the zoning district development standards regulating such
a use;



   (G)   The conduct of any activity in a residential zoning district
that is not specifically enumerated as a permitted primary or accessory use
in that zoning district, and which activity has not been legally established
by a currently valid variance, special exception or other approval grant;



   (H)   Failure to comply with zoning district development standards,
including, but not limited to, landscaping, paving of parking areas, minimum
parking space requirements, trash dumpster enclosure, fencing or screening
requirements;



   (I)   The failure to comply with: the terms, provisions, conditions
or commitments of a variance grant or special exception; the terms of
commitments made in connection with the approval of a development plan;
commitments made in connection with a petition for zone map amendment; or
other approval grant authorized by this ordinance;



   (J)   The violation of a stop-work order issued pursuant to this
Article XII; and



   (K)   Failure to comply with any other provisions of this ordinance,
including, but not limited to, Article 1.20: General Regulations for
Residential Districts.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



§ 12.7  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any person who commits a civil zoning violation as defined in
Article 12.6 above may be issued a citation by the staff.



   (B)   Subject to the provisions of Article 12.7(B)(1) and Article
12.7(B)(2) below, each day a civil zoning violation remains uncorrected is a
distinct and separate civil zoning violation subject to an additional
citation and fine in the amount prescribed in this ordinance.



      (1)   Procedures.



         (a)   Staff may issue a citation to a person who commits
a civil zoning violation or allows a civil zoning violation to be committed
on real estate in which the person has a possessory interest. The citation
may be served by personal service, by certified mail, by first class U.S.
mail or by placement in a conspicuous place on the property where the
violation occurs and shall serve as notice that a civil zoning violation has
been committed.



         (b)   1.   No citation shall be issued unless the
person who commits a civil zoning violation or allows a civil zoning
violation to be committed on real estate in which the person has a possessory
interest has been served with a notice to correct the civil zoning violation
at least ten days before the issuance of a citation to allow said person an
opportunity to correct the violation and to come into compliance with the
prescribed Zoning Ordinance or regulation.



            2.   However, the service of a notice to correct
the civil zoning violation is not required before issuing a citation for
violation of a stop-work order issued pursuant to this Article XII.



         (c)   If a person who is served with a notice of civil
zoning violation or receives a citation elects to file a petition for zone
map change, variance, special exception or development plan approval to
correct such violation, then the person must indicate the intent to file such
a petition on the served notice or citation and return a copy to the Plan
Commission. A person shall have ten days from service of a notice of civil
zoning violation or receipt of citation to file the petition. During the
pendency of said petition the issuance of additional citations and additional
monetary fines as prescribed in Article 12.7(B)(2) shall be stayed. A person
who files the petition within said time period shall pursue the petition in
an expeditious and diligent manner. If the petition is denied, withdrawn or
dismissed and the civil zoning violation continues, the Plan Commission,
Board of Zoning Appeals or other appropriate enforcement official (as
provided by applicable laws) may seek judicial relief in the Town Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the terms and provisions
of this ordinance.



      (2)   Fines. Monetary fines for civil zoning violations shall
be assessed as follows:



         (a)   RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-U, M-U, P, S
and REL Districts. The monetary fine for the first citation for a civil
zoning violation shall be $50. The following monetary fines shall apply for
each subsequent citation:



 


Second citation

 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $100


Third citation
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $150


Fourth citation
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $200


Each additional
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed a $300 increase in the previously assessed
monetary fine, to a maximum monetary fine for each citation not to exceed
$2,500


Provided, however, in no event shall a subsequent citation be issued within
ten days of the issuance of a previous citation



 



         (b)   All Commercial (TC, NR, OD and GC) Districts, all
Industrial (I-2, I-3 and I-4) Districts, the C-I District and the
Agricultural (AG) District. The monetary fine for the first citation for a
civil zoning violation shall be $50. The following monetary fines shall apply
for each subsequent citation:



 


Second citation

 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $100 per day that the civil zoning violation
remains uncorrected


Third citation
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $150 per day that the civil zoning violation
remains uncorrected


Fourth citation
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed $200 per day that the civil zoning violation
remains uncorrected


Additional citations
 
Minimum $50, not to exceed a $300 increase in the previously assessed
monetary fine for each day that the civil zoning violation remains
uncorrected, to a maximum monetary fine for each civil zoning violation not
to exceed $2,500 per day that the civil zoning violation remains uncorrected


Provided, however, in no event shall a subsequent citation be issued within
five days of the issuance of a previous citation



 



         (c)   Payment. All fines prescribed by this Article XII
for civil zoning violations shall be paid to the Clerk-Treasurer of the town,
who shall render to the person making the payment a receipt stating the
amount and purpose for which the fine has been paid, a duplicate of which
shall be made a part of the records of the town. All fines thus received
shall be deposited with the General Fund of the town.



      (3)   Trial for civil zoning violations.



         (a)   A person who receives a citation for a civil
zoning violation may elect to stand trial for the violation by indicating on
the citation his or her intent to stand trial and returning a copy of the
citation to the Plan Commission. The returned copy of the citation shall
serve as notice of the person’s intent to stand trial, and the issuance of
additional citations and additional monetary fines as prescribed in Article
12.7(B)(2) shall be stayed upon receipt of the notice. The notice shall be
given at least five days before the date that payment of the citation is due
as set forth in Article 12.7(B)(3)(b) below. On receipt of the notice of
intention to stand trial, the Plan Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or
other appropriate enforcement official (as provided by applicable laws) may
seek judicial relief in the Town Court or any other court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the terms and provisions of this ordinance.



         (b)   If a person who receives a citation fails to:



            1.   Pay the assessed fine within 45 days after
the issuance of a citation;



            2.   File a petition as prescribed in Article
12.7(B)(1)(c) above; or



            3.   Give notice of his or her intention to stand
trial as prescribed in Article 12.7(B)(3)(a) above, the Plan Commission,
Board of Zoning Appeals or other appropriate enforcement official (as
provided by applicable laws) may seek judicial relief in the Town Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the terms and provisions
of this ordinance.



         (c)   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this
Article does not preclude the designated enforcement entity from seeking
alternative and additional relief from the Court in the same action, or from
seeking injunctive relief or any other remedy in a separate action for the
enforcement of I.C. 36-74 or any ordinance adopted or action taken under I.C.
36-7-4.



         (d)   In the event that a violation of the Town Zoning
Ordinance is determined to exist by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
owner shall be liable to the town for all costs associated with filing and
prosecuting the enforcement action, including but not necessarily limited to
all reasonable attorneys’ fees.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 3-2000, passed - -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed
6-25-2001; Ord. 51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 02-2009, passed 1-26-2009)



ARTICLE 13. DEFINITIONS



§ 13.1  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS OR WORDS.



   The language of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following regulations:



   (A)   The word “person” includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, limited liability company, corporation, or
other legal entity, as well as an individual;



   (B)   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular, in
each case, if the context so requires;



   (C)   The word “shall” is mandatory, the word “may” is
permissive;



   (D)   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words
“intended”, “designed”, “constructed”, “altered”, or
“arranged” to be used or occupied;



   (E)   The word “lot” includes the words “plot”, “tract”
or “parcel”;



   (F)   Where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions,
provisions or events connected by the conjunction “and”, “or” or
“either ... or”, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply;



      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination; and



      (3)   “Either ... or” indicates that all the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in
combination.



   (G)   The terms “more intense” and “less intense” are terms
used herein to describe relationships between particular zoning districts.
This relationship is based upon the uses permitted within each district. A
“more intense” district permits more uses or a greater density of uses
than a “less intense” district. District intensity groupings progress
from agricultural, to residential, to commercial, to industrial districts, in
the sequence listed within each group of districts from least intense to the
most intense.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 9-1999, passed - -1999; Ord. 3-2000, passed
- -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord.
51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007,
passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord.
12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013; Ord. 22-2013, passed
8-12-2013)



§ 13.2  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms or words used in the text of this ordinance shall
have the following meanings, unless a contrary meaning is:



   (A)   Required by the context of a particular sentence or phrase; or



   (B)   Specifically prescribed in a particular sentence or phrase.



      ACCESS. The way in which vehicles ingress and egress a lot from a
street fronting along said lot.



      ACCESS DRIVE. That area within the right-of-way between the
pavement edge or curb and the right-of-way line to provide ingress and egress
to and from a lot.



      ACCESSORY (STRUCTURE, BUILDING OR USE). A subordinate structure,
building or use that is customarily associated with, and is appropriately and
clearly incidental and subordinate in use, size, bulk, area and height to the
primary structure, building, or use, and is located on the same lot as the
primary building, structure or use.



      ADVERTISING SIGN. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.



      AGRICULTURAL USE. An operation which consists of the following
uses, individually or in combination: the production of grain or livestock;
stables; forest or tree production; pasture; setting aside land in a
government set-aside reserve program; a farmstead; uses accessory to
agricultural operations on the site; or uses accessory to agricultural
operations in the area.



      ALLEY, PRIVATE. A privately held right-of-way for public use as a
secondary means of public access to a lot otherwise abutting upon a public or
private street and not intended for traffic other than public services and
circulation to and from said lot.



      ALLEY, PUBLIC. Any public right-of-way which has been dedicated
or deeded to and accepted by the public for public use as a secondary means
of public access to a lot otherwise abutting upon a public street and not
intended for traffic other than public services and circulation to and from
said lot.



      ANTENNA. A device that is designed to receive:



         (a)   Direct broadcast satellite service, including
direct-to-home satellite services;



         (b)   Video programming services via multipoint
distribution services, including multichannel multipoint distribution
services, instructional television fixed services and local multipoint
distribution services; or



         (c)   Television broadcast signals.



      ANTENNA, RADIO/TELEVISION. A wire or combination of wires and
support structures designed for directly transmitting electric waves
(broadcast radio or television) into space, or receiving them therefrom.



      ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH. A dish shaped device which may be free
standing or mounted on a building or structure and is designed to receive
direct broadcast satellite service.



      ANTIQUE MALL. A place where individual antique dealers congregate
within one building with a gross floor area of at least 50,000 square feet
each having a separate sales space to conduct the sell or purchase of
antiques or previously owned goods or items.



      ARTIFICIAL LAKE. Either:



         (a)   An artificially created body of water which is not
required in connection with a storm water management system; or



         (b)   That portion of an artificially created body of
water developed in connection with a storm water management system which
exceeds the capacity required to manage the 100-year storm event.



      ASSEMBLY. The fitting together of previously manufactured parts
or sub-assemblies, that do not require additional manufacturing or machining,
into a finished item or unit.



      ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility that provides services such
as room and board, meals, laundry, activities, housekeeping, limited
assistance in activities of daily living, and simple medication
administration with a physician’s order.



      AUTHORIZED AGENT. Any party duly authorized in writing by the
owner of a subject parcel to act on the owner’s behalf with respect to a
petition for zone map change, subdivision plat, development plan approval or
vacation of land.



      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MAJOR. Servicing and repairs which include
muffler repair or installation, brake repair or installation, shock
replacement, transmission repair, tire recapping, motor overhaul, or body or
fender repair work (not including the dismantling or wrecking of motor
vehicles, or the storage of inoperable, damaged or wrecked vehicles, other
than those awaiting immediate repair).



      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MINOR. Servicing and repairs limited to
tune-ups, oil changes, sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries
and other minor maintenance operations.



      AWNING. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, plastic,
fiberglass or glass designed and intended for protection from the weather or
as a decorative embellishment, and which is supported by and projects from a
wall or roof of a structure over a window, door, walk or the like.



      BANNER. A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar
material mounted to a pole or building at one or more edges. Flags of any
governmental or political unit shall not be considered BANNERS.



      BASEMENT. That portion of a building with an interior vertical
height clearance of not less than 78 inches and having one-half or more of
its interior vertical height clearance below grade level.



      BED AND BREAKFAST. The commercial leasing of bedroom(s) for
guest(s) within a private, owner-occupied, one- or two-family dwelling unit.
Such leasing provides temporary accommodations, typically including a morning
meal, to overnight guests for a fee. Such leasing may also provide for the
temporary accommodation of daytime meetings or receptions for guests for a
fee. Such leasing caters largely to tourists and the traveling public.



      BICYCLE PARKING AREA. An area designated for the sole purpose of
parking bicycles by means of a bicycle rack, bicycle loops or other device as
approved by the Director. This area can be either indoor or outdoor, but
shall not be placed so that it obstructs or impedes a pedestrian way.



      BILLBOARD. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.



      BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines or
municipal boundary lines.







 



   Block and Block Face



      BLOCK FACE. The frontage of a block, which may contain one or
more lots, along one side of a public or private street between intersections.



      BOARD (OF ZONING APPEALS). The Town of Plainfield Advisory Board
of Zoning Appeals.



      BOARDING HOUSE. A building or part of a building, other than
hotels, motels, restaurants, bed and breakfast, or multi-family dwellings,
containing accommodation facilities in common where lodging, typically with
meals reserved solely for the occupants thereof, is provided for a fee.



      BUFFERYARD. A front, side or rear yard of a nonresidential land
use on a lot which faces or abuts a residential use that is not legal
nonconforming. A BUFFERYARD may include landscape plantings, fences, walls or
berms to provide screening or buffering for adjacent residential properties.



      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual,
animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature.



      BUILDING HEIGHT, MAXIMUM. See MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT.



      BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to any front, side or rear lot
line which passes through the nearest point of any building or structure.



      BUILDING LINE, FRONT. A line parallel to any front lot line which
passes through the nearest point of any building or structure and terminates
at the point of contact with any side lot line.



      BUILDING LINE, REAR. A line parallel to any rear lot line which
passes through the nearest point of any building or structure and terminates
at the point of contact with any side lot line.



      BUILDING LINE, SIDE. A line parallel to any side lot line which
passes through the nearest point of any building or structure and terminates
at the point of contact with any front or rear lot line.



      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the town in compliance with
the terms and provisions of the Town Building Code.



      BUSINESS DAY. A day when the offices of the Department of
Planning and Zoning of the town are open to the public for the transaction of
business for the entire period of its normal operating hours.



      CANOPY. A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, plastic,
fiberglass or glass on a support, which is supported in total or in part,
from the ground and providing shelter over, for example, a doorway, outside
walk, interior access drive or parking area.



      CARPORT. A roofed structure designed and intended to shelter the
automotive vehicle of occupant or owner of the premises, with at least one
side open to the weather.



      CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE. A certificate signed by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning stating that the occupancy
and use of land or building or structure referred to in the certificate
complies with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Control
Ordinance, variance, special exception or development plan approval.



      CHECKPOINT AGENCY. An agency or department of local, state or
federal government, or other public or semi-public agency determined by the
Director to have an interest in development within the town.



      CHILD CARE. A service that provides for the care, health, safety,
and supervision of a child’s social, emotional, and educational growth.
(For reference, see I.C. 12-7-2.)



      CHILD CARE CENTER.



         (a)   A building where at least 17 children receive
child care from a provider:



            1.   While unattended by a parent, legal guardian
or custodian;



            2.   For regular compensation; and



            3.   For more than four hours but less than 24
hours in each of ten consecutive days per year, excluding intervening
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.



         (b)   This term also applies to a building where child
care is provided to less than 17 children if the provider has applied for a
license under I.C. 12-17.2-4 and meets the requirements under I.C. 12-17.2-4.
(For reference, see I.C. 12-7-2.)



      CHILD CARE HOME.



         (a)   A residential structure in which at least six
children (not including the children for whom the provider is a parent,
stepparent, guardian, custodian or other relative) at any time receive child
care from a provider:



            1.   While unattended by a parent, legal guardian
or custodian;



            2.   For regular compensation; and



            3.   For more than four hours but less than 24
hours in each of ten consecutive days per year, excluding intervening
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.



         (b)   This term includes a CLASS I CHILD CARE HOME (that
serves any combination of full-time and part-time children, not to exceed 12
at any one time) and a CLASS II CHILD CARE HOME (that serves more than 12
children but no more than any combination of 16 full-time and part-time
children at any one time). (For reference, see I.C. 12-7-2.)



      CHILD CARE MINISTRY. A child care operated by a church or
religious ministry that is a religious organization exempt from federal
income taxation under § 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. (For reference,
see I.C. 12-7-2.)



      CHILD CARING INSTITUTION.



         (a)   A residential facility:



            1.   That provides child care on a 24 hour basis
for more than ten children; or



            2.   With a capacity of not more than ten children
that does not meet the residential structure requirements of a group home.



         (b)   An institution that:



            1.   Operates under a license issued under I.C.
12-17.4;



            2.   Provides for delivery of mental health
services that are appropriate to the needs of the individual; and



            3.   Complies with the rules adopted under I.C.
4-22-2 by the Division of Family and Children. (For reference, see I.C.
12-7-2.)



      COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Plainfield Comprehensive Plan approved by
the Plan Commission and the Town Council pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-500 et seq.



      CONCEPT PLAN. An informal plan, which may include site,
landscape, building elevations and material, sign or lighting information,
intended to convey the scope, content and nature of a proposed development,
but lacking sufficient detail to determine compliance with the provisions of
this ordinance.



      CONCEPTUAL PLAT REVIEW. A cursory review of a sketch plan for a
proposed subdivision in which staff provides initial review comments to a
prospective petitioner on the design and layout of a proposed subdivision.



      CONDOMINIUM. A building, group of buildings, or portion thereof,
in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas or
facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.



      CONVENIENCE STORE. A small retail establishment that offers for
sale a limited line of groceries, convenience goods, tobacco products,
periodicals and other household items, which may or may not sell gasoline.



      DECK. A ground-supported, unenclosed, platform accessory
structure, usually constructed of wood, of which any permanent horizontal
area(s) of the platform is raised above grade level and is designed and
intended for the recreational enjoyment of the occupant(s) and guest(s) of
the primary use or structure.



      DENSITY, GROSS. A unit of measurement which represents the number
of units per acre of land on the aggregate total land to be developed,
excluding any portion of the total land:



         (a)   Located in the right-of-way of a perimeter street;



         (b)   Located within a floodway; or



         (c)   Required for storm water management.



      DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE. An advisory committee of citizens duly
created and authorized by the Plan Commission.



      DEVELOPED RECREATIONAL OPEN SPACE. The total horizontal area of
those portions of a lot which are located outside of any required yard and
which are set aside and developed for the recreational use and enjoyment of
all residents of a project.



      DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE. The manner and extent to which development
requirements or development standards may be modified or waived in connection
with the approval of a development plan.



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Specific plans for residential, commercial or
industrial development of property setting forth certain information and data
as required by this ordinance.



      DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Development standards plus any
additional requirements specified in this ordinance which must be satisfied
in connection with the approval of a development plan.



      DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Area, bulk, height and other applicable
regulations of a zoning district contained in the ordinance which govern the
physical development of real estate.



      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning
for the Town of Plainfield.



      DISCOUNT RETAILER. A retailer that specializes in the sell of
closeout or overstocked merchandise in a building having a gross floor area
of at least 50,000 square feet.



      DISPLAY, OUTDOOR. The display of merchandise for sale by a
retailer outdoor in the open air, which may be permanent or temporary
seasonal sales.



      DISTRICT. A section of the territory within the jurisdiction of
Plan Commission for which uniform regulations governing the use, height,
area, size and intensity of use of buildings and land, and open spaces about
buildings, are established by this ordinance.



      DRAINAGE POND. An artificially created body of water which is
required in connection with a storm water management system.



      DRIVE, INTERIOR ACCESS. A way for internal vehicular movement in
and around an individual lot or integrated center.



      DRIVEWAY. Access for vehicular ingress/egress between the
right-of-way of a public or private street and the minimum required setback
line on a lot.



      DRIVEWAY, INTERIOR ACCESS. A minor, private street providing for
vehicular egress/ingress between the minimum required setback lines of
separate lots or between lots within the boundaries of an integrated center.







 



      DWELLING. Any building, or portion of a building, which is
designed or used primarily for residential purposes, including single-family,
two-family and multi-family dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding
houses, lodging houses and tourist dwellings.



      DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. A dwelling unit which is fabricated
in one or more modules at a location other than the home site, by
assembly-line type production techniques or by other construction methods
unique to an off-site manufacturing process; provided, that each module must
bear a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards; and provided further,
that each unit must have been built after January 1, 1981, and must have at
least 900 square feet of main floor area (exclusive of garages, carports and
open porches).



      DWELLING, MOBILE. A movable or portable dwelling unit that:



         (a)   Is fabricated in one or more modules at a location
other than the home site, by assembly-line type production techniques or by
other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process;



         (b)   Is designed for occupancy by one family;



         (c)   Is erected or located as specified by the Town
Building Code; and



         (d) Was either:



            1.   Constructed prior to June 15, 1976 and bears
a seal attached under Indiana Pub. L. No. 135, 1971, certifying that it was
built in compliance with the standards established by the Indiana
Administrative Building Council; or



            2.   Constructed subsequent to or on June 15, 1976
and bears a seal, certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal
Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards law.



      DWELLING, MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit which is fabricated in
one or more modules at a location other than the home site, by assembly-line
type production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an
off-site manufacturing process, designed for residential occupancy; provided,
that each module must bear the seal certified that it was built in compliance
with Indiana Pub. L. No. 360; and provided further, that the unit must have
been built in compliance with the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.



      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building consisting of three or more
dwelling units, including condominiums, with varying arrangements of
entrances and party walls.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. An individual, detached building
containing one dwelling unit which is either:



         (a)   Built in compliance with the CABO One- and
Two-Family Code and the Town Building Code;



         (b)   A modular dwelling; or



         (c)   A manufactured dwelling.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building consisting of two dwelling units
which may be either attached side by side or one above the other, and each
dwelling unit having a separate or combined entrance.



      DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as living quarters for only one family and its household
employees, including provisions for sleeping, lawful cooking and sanitary
facilities. The term shall include mobile dwellings, modular dwellings and
manufactured dwellings but shall not include recreational vehicles.



      FACADE PLANE. A flat portion of a facade of a building that does
not modulate either in depth or in height.



      FAMILY. One or more human beings related by blood, marriage,
adoption, foster care or guardianship, together with incidental domestic
servants and temporary, non-compensating guests; or not more than four human
beings not so related, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit.



      FARMERS MARKET. The temporary seasonal selling at retail of
home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area as
approved by the Town Council, where the vendors are the same individuals who
have raised the products for sale.



      FLEA MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or structure where goods are offered for sale to the general public by
individual sellers from open or semi-open facilities or temporary structures.
FLEA MARKET shall not include informal garage or yard sales.



      FLEX-SPACE. A light industrial use which includes a combination
of office space and either warehouse or light assembly operations, provided
that a minimum of 15% of the gross floor area of each tenant space shall be
devoted to office use.



      FLOOR AREA.



         (a)   For single-family dwellings and two-family
dwellings, the sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of all
roofed portions of a building enclosed by and within the surrounding exterior
walls or roofs, or the centerline(s) of party walls separating such buildings
or portions thereof. The FLOOR AREA of a building shall exclude all areas
with a vertical height clearance less than 78 inches, exterior open balconies
and open porches.



         (b)   For multi-family dwellings, the sum of all
horizontal surface areas of all floors of all roofed portions of all
buildings enclosed by and within the surrounding exterior walls or roofs, or
the centerline(s) of party walls separating such buildings or portions
thereof.



         (c)   However, this shall not include the following:



            1.   All areas with a vertical height clearance
less than 78 inches;



            2.   All exterior open balconies, and open porches;



            3.   Floor area or basement floor area devoted to
off-street parking or off-street loading, including aisles, ramps and
maneuvering space;



            4.   Floor area or basement floor area provided
for recreational uses, available to occupants of two or more dwelling units
within a project; or



            5.   Basement floor area provided for storage
facilities, allocated to serve individual dwelling units with a project.



      FLOOR AREA, FINISHED. That portion of floor area constructed,
completed and usable for living purposes with normal living facilities which
includes sleeping, dining, cooking, sanitary or combination thereof. A floor
area or portion thereof used only for storage purposes and not equipped with
the facilities mentioned above shall not be considered FINISHED FLOOR AREA.



      FLOOR AREA, GROSS.



         (a)   For dwelling units, the total area, computed on a
horizontal plane inclusive of finished basements, attached garages,
entrances, hallways, stairways and other enclosed areas, but exclusive of
unfinished basements, cellars and attics.



         (b)   For commercial or industrial buildings or
structures, the sum of all horizontal surface areas of all floors of a
building or structure measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating abutting buildings or structures.



      FLOOR AREA, GROSS LEASABLE. That portion of the gross floor area
which is designated for the exclusive use and occupancy of a tenant.



      FLOOR AREA, MAIN. That portion of the finished floor area located
on the first floor of the dwelling unit.



      FRONTAGE. The line of contact of an abutting property with the
street right-of-way along a front lot line which allows unobstructed, direct
access to the property.



      GAME COURT. In residential districts, a type of recreation
facility which consists of an unpaved or paved, accessory, surface area of
ground open and essentially unobstructed to the sky, on the same lot as the
primary structure, designed and intended for the playing of a recognized
sport as an accessory, recreational activity by the occupants and guests of
the primary structure, which may include fencing, screening, nets, goals or
other necessary appurtenances required for recreational use.



      GARAGE. An accessory building to a residential use, or an
enclosed area attached to or integrated into a residential building, which is
primarily designed and intended to be used for the storage of the private
vehicle(s) for the occupant(s) of said residence and is not a separate
commercial enterprise available to the general public.



      GARAGE, PARKING. Any building or structure designed and intended
for the storage of motor vehicles for compensation.



      GARAGE SALE. A public or private sale conducted by the owner or
occupier of a premises of six or more items of personal property owned by the
owner or occupier of the premises, which personal property was not acquired
by the owner or occupier for the purpose of resale.



      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. Any building, land area or other
premises or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels, which may include as an accessory
use: minor automotive repairs; the sale and installation of lubricants, tires
or batteries; car washes; and similar uses. Such establishments shall provide
a facility where gasoline and other motor fuels are stored and subsequently
dispensed by means of fixed, approved dispensing equipment by customers or
employees.



      GATEWAY CORRIDOR. All land areas lying within the corporate
limits of the town which are within 600 feet of the right-of-way of the
following street segments:



         (a)   SR 267, from the south right-of-way of U.S. 40 to
the southern corporate limits of the town;



         (b)   I-70, from the eastern corporate limits of the
town to the western corporate limits of the town;



         (c)   U.S. 40, from the eastern corporate limits of the
town to the western corporate limits of the town;



         (d)   Stafford Road, from the eastern right-of-way line
of new SR 267 to the eastern corporate limits of the town;



         (e)   North-South Corridor (a/k/a Ronald Reagan
Parkway), from the northern corporate limits of the town to the southern
corporate limits of the town;



         (f)   Perimeter Parkway (as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan), entire length; and



         (g)   Metropolis Parkway, from the eastern right-of-way
of new SR 267 to the western right-of-way of Ronald Reagan Parkway.



      GOLF COURSE MASTER PLAN. A concept plan that provides general
guidelines for the development of a golf course, including but not limited
to: a listing of the types of recreational uses proposed; the overall golf
course layout and design of the clubhouse, outdoor or indoor swimming pool,
pro shop, maintenance structures, cart sheds, driving range, practice area,
putting greens and the like (i.e., location of activity areas or structures,
including off-street parking areas, cart paths and signs); conceptual
building elevations for major buildings or structures; and the approximate
size or scope of proposed recreational facilities.



      GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground
five feet from the building, structure or proposed building pad; provided,
however, for the purposes of the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, the term
GRADE, when referring to STREET GRADE shall mean the slope of a street
specified in percentage (%) terms.



      GROUP HOME. A residential facility licensed by the Community
Residential Facilities Council, or its successor in authority, and authorized
by I.C. 12-17.4-5 in which care is provided on a 24 hour basis for not more
than ten children in need of services or who have committed a delinquent act.



      HEDGE PLANT. A woody plant of relatively low height (not
exceeding ten to 12 feet in height), branching from the base.



      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or business activity carried on
within a legally established dwelling unit by a resident of said dwelling,
where the occupation or business activity:



         (a)   Is clearly incidental and subordinate to the
residential use;



         (b)   Does not alter the interior or exterior
residential character of the dwelling unit;



         (c)   Is carried on within the principal building and
only by members of the family occupying the premises; and



         (d)   Does not include any outdoor storage or activities
other than receipt or delivery associated with the business activity.



      HOTEL. Any building or group of buildings containing five or more
rooms without direct entrance to or from the outside, designed or intended to
be occupied for sleeping purposes by guests for a fee, often with general
kitchen and dining room facilities provided within the building or an
accessory building, and which caters to the traveling public.



      IMPROVEMENT. Any human-made, immovable item which becomes part
of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.



      IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMIT. A permit stating that the proposed
erection, construction, enlargement or moving of a building or structure, and
uses thereof, complies with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Subdivision Control Ordinance.



      INCIDENTAL. A minor occurrence or condition which is customarily
associated with a permitted use and is likely to ensue from normal operations.



      INCREMENTAL LOT. A lot of record created through the incremental
plat process.



      INCREMENTAL PLAT. A phased method of obtaining secondary plat
approval for a nonresidential subdivision and which contains only a portion
of the real estate included in the primary plat for the proposed
nonresidential subdivision.



      INTEGRATED CENTER. An area of development (commercial, industrial
or any combination of commercial, industrial and residential uses) of one or
more lots, comprised of:



         (a)   Two or more individual, non-related and separately
operated uses in one building that is at least 10,000 square feet in gross
floor area sharing common site facilities;



         (b)   One or more buildings containing non-related and
separately operated uses occupying a common site, which utilizes one or a
combination of common site facilities, such as driveways, parking areas,
interior access drives, maintenance and similar common services; or



         (c)   One or more buildings containing non-related and
separately operated uses occupying individual sites, which are interrelated
by the utilization of one or a combination of common facilities, such as
driveways, internal public or private street network developed in accordance
with an approved subdivision, parking areas, maintenance or other services.



      INDUSTRIAL PARK. See INTEGRATED CENTER.



      JUNK YARD. Any place at which personal property is or may be
salvaged for reuse, resale or reduction or similar disposition and is owned,
possessed, collected, accumulated, dismantled or assorted, including, but not
limited to, used or salvaged base metal or metals, their compounds or
combinations, used or salvaged rope, bags, paper, rags, glass, rubber,
lumber, millwork, brick and similar property except animal matter; and used
motor vehicles, machinery or equipment which does not carry a current, valid
license, and is used, owned or possessed for the purpose of wrecking or
salvaging parts therefrom.



      LAND BANKED AREA. An area of land to be preserved with no
structures that can be used for required off-street parking for a primary use
if additional parking is needed in the future. Required landscaping may be
planted in the LAND BANKED AREA with the understanding that if additional
parking is needed in the future, the landscaping will have to be moved or
replaced.



      LAWFUL COOKING. A room or area in which food may be prepared and
cooked and which contains the following:



         (a)   A kitchen sink in good working condition and
properly connected to an approved water supply and approved sewer/septic
system. The sink must provide an adequate amount of water under pressure,
both unheated and heated to no more than 120°F;



         (b)   Cabinets, shelves, counters or tables used for
storage of food, eating, drinking or cooking equipment and utensils shall be
of sound condition furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that
will not impart any harmful effect to food; and



         (c)   A stove, oven or microwave oven for cooking food
and a refrigerator for safe storage of food at temperatures less than 45°F.
These appliances shall be properly installed with all necessary connections
for safe, sanitary and efficient operation and shall be maintained in good
working condition.



      LOADING AREA. A hard-surfaced, off-street area maintained and
intended for the maneuvering and temporary parking of vehicles while
transferring goods or materials to and from a facility. A LOADING AREA
includes loading space and maneuvering area required to enter the loading
space.



      LOADING, OFF-STREET. A loading area located completely on a lot
and accessed via interior access drives, interior access driveways, access
drives or driveways in which no individual loading spaces gain direct access
to a public or private street.



      LOADING SPACE. A hard-surfaced, off-street area used for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while transferring goods or
materials to and from a facility.



      LOT.



         (a)   A piece, parcel, plot or tract of land designated
by its owner or developer to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under
single ownership or control and may consist of:



            1.   A single lot of record;



            2.   A portion of a lot of record; or



            3.   A combination of complete lots of record, or
complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of
lots of record.



         (b)   A LOT may or may not coincide with a lot of
record. For purpose of this definition, the ownership of a LOT is further
defined to include:



            1.   The person(s) who holds either fee simple
title to the property or is a life tenant as disclosed in the records of the
Township Assessor; or



            1.   A long-term lessee (but only if the lease is
recorded among the records of the County Recorder and has a term (exclusive
of non-exercised extensions and renewals) of at least 25 years remaining
before its expiration at the time of applying for a permit).



         (c)   Provided, however, for the purposes of the Town
Subdivision Control Ordinance, the term LOT shall mean that portion of a
subdivision which is proposed to be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder as a lot of record.



      LOT AREA. The area bounded on all sides by the front, rear and
side lot lines that is available for use or development and does not include
any area lying within the right-of-way of any public or private street or
easement for surface access into the subject lot or adjoining lots.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersections, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle
of less than 135 degrees.



      LOT COVERAGE. The total ground area within the lot or project
covered by the primary structure plus any accessory structures (including
decks, patios, above-ground pools, in-ground pools, garages, carports and
storage sheds), excluding driveways, sidewalks, fences and walls not attached
in any way to a roof.







 



   Types of Lots



      LOT DEPTH. The distance from the midpoint of the front lot line
to the midpoint of the rear lot line.



      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot abutting two parallel streets, or
abutting two streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.



      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot which is not a corner lot or a double
frontage lot.



      LOT LINE. The line of separation of a lot from any abutting
street or adjoining lot, provided, however, for the purposes of the Town
Subdivision Control Ordinance, the term LOT LINE shall mean the line of
separation between a lot of record and any abutting street or adjoining lot
of record.



      LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from any abutting
street.



      LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line, or in the case of a triangularly shaped lot, a line
ten feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance
from the front lot line. However, in the case of a corner lot, any lot line
which intersects with a front lot depth and lot width lot line shall not be
considered a REAR LOT LINE.



      LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line not designated as a front or rear
lot line.







   Lot Depth and Lot Width







 



   Lot Lines



      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



      LOT WIDTH. The full width of a lot measured along the minimum
front yard and minimum building setback line required by this ordinance.



      MAINTENANCE BOND. A legally binding agreement whereby the
subdivider posts a surety in a form acceptable to the Plan Commission for the
maintenance of improvements, installations and lot improvements required by
the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, any other applicable ordinances of
the town, and any requirements, covenants, conditions or commitments which
may be imposed by the Plan Commission.



      MAJOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION, MAJOR RESIDENTIAL.



      MANUFACTURE. The mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into new products or into a useable form. MANUFACTURE
may include the creation of products (including subsequent assembly of
previously manufactured parts), or the blending of materials such as
lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors.



      MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from
finished grade to the highest point of the roof.







 



      MINOR RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION, MINOR RESIDENTIAL.



      MOTEL. Any building or group of buildings containing five or more
rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having direct entrance to and from the
outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building(s), designed and intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by
guests for a fee, where general kitchen and dining room facilities may be
provided within the building or an accessory building, and which caters to
the traveling public.



      NEIGHBORHOOD RECYCLING COLLECTION POINT. A site where individuals
bring household recyclable materials to either drop off without compensation,
or, to redeem the materials for monetary compensation. Beyond any limited
sorting, no other processing of the materials takes place at the site. All
materials are stored completely within the structure while awaiting periodic
shipment to the processing facilities. While these collection points may be
developed as freestanding sites, they typically are accessory uses sharing
the site of a larger primary use. Possible structures for this type of
operation include such recycling containers as “igloos”, reverse vending
machines, trailers or similar structures.



      NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE, LEGALLY ESTABLISHED. Any
continuous, lawfully established building or structure erected or constructed:



         (a)   Prior to the time of adoption, revision or
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but which fails by reason of such adoption,
revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district; or



         (b)   Pursuant to a granted variance of the Zoning
Ordinance.



      NONCONFORMING USE, LEGALLY ESTABLISHED. Any continuous, lawful
land use having commenced:



         (a)   Prior to the time of adoption, revision or
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but which fails by reason of such adoption,
revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning
district; or



         (b)   Pursuant to a granted variance.



      NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION, NONRESIDENTIAL.



      NONRESIDENTIAL INCREMENTAL SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION,
NONRESIDENTIAL, INCREMENTAL.



      OFFICE PARK. See INTEGRATED CENTER.



      OUT LOT.



         (a)   That portion of land in a subdivision, integrated
center, industrial park or planned development which does not contain the
central or primary building of the development and is:



            1.   Usually located adjacent to a street or
frontage street; and



            2.   Is intended for the development of a smaller,
additional and separate building or buildings.



         (b)   In a subdivision, integrated center or industrial
park where there is no central or primary building of the development and
individual lots are developed independently of each other, each lot shall be
considered an out lot.



      PARK MASTER PLAN. A concept plan that provides general guidelines
for the improvement of a park, including, but not limited to: a listing the
types of recreational uses proposed; the overall park layout and design of
the park (i.e., location of activity areas or structures, including
off-street parking areas and signs); conceptual building elevations for major
buildings or structures; and the approximate size or scope of proposed
recreational facilities.



      PARKING AREA. Any area of paving other than an open exhibition or
display area, not inclusive of interior access drives, driveways, interior
access driveways and access drives, intended for the temporary storage of
automotive vehicles including parking spaces and the area allocated to the
egress/ingress of automotive vehicles to and from the actual parking space.



      PARKING GARAGE. See GARAGE, PARKING.



      PARKING, OFF-STREET. A parking area located completely on a lot
and accessed via interior access drives, interior access driveways, access
drives or driveways in which no individual parking spaces gain direct access
to a public or private street.



      PARKING, ON-STREET. A parking area located partially or
completely within the right- of-way of a public street or private street.



      PARKING LOT. The primary or accessory use of a lot or a portion
of a lot for the parking of automotive vehicles.



      PARKING SPACE. An off-street portion of the parking area, which
shall be used only for the temporary placement of an operable motor vehicle.



      PATIO. A hardsurfaced area accessory structure to a primary use
or structure of which the horizontal area is at grade level with at least one
side open to the weather and essentially unobstructed to the sky. This area
is specifically designed and intended for the recreational enjoyment of the
occupant(s) and guest(s) of the primary use or structure and is not designed
or intended for use by automotive vehicles.



      PENNANT. A sign of lightweight plastic, fabric or other similar
material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, which is suspended
from a rope, wire or string, usually in a series, and which is designed to
move in the wind. Flags of any government or political unit shall not be
considered PENNANTS.



      PERFORMANCE BOND. A legally binding agreement whereby the
subdivider posts a surety in a form acceptable to the Plan Commission for the
construction of improvements, installations and lot improvements required by
the Town Subdivision Control Ordinance, any other applicable ordinances of
the town, and any requirements, covenants, conditions or commitments which
may be imposed by the Plan Commission.



      PERMITTED USE. The use of land or the use of a building or
structure on land which is allowed, either as a matter of right or under
limited conditions (i.e., as a special exception use, an accessory use, a
home occupation or a temporary use) in the zoning district applicable to the
land.



      PLAN COMMISSION. The Town of Plainfield Plan Commission
established pursuant to the advisory planning law of the state.



      PLANT CATEGORIES. The grouping of plants based upon the nature,
size and species of the plants.



      PLANT UNIT VALUE. A numeric value assigned to plants within the
various plant categories.



      PLAT. A drawing, map, plan or other graphic representation of a
subdivision of a tract of land or a replat of such a tract of land into lots
of record.



      PLAT, INCREMENTAL. See INCREMENTAL PLAT.



      PLAZA. An open space that may be improved and landscaped, usually
surrounded by streets or buildings.



      PORCH. A roofed structure with at least one side exposed to the
weather, supported from the ground and attached to or part of a building at
the area of entrance or exit to said building.



      PRIMARY BUILDING. The building in which the primary permitted use
of the lot is conducted.



      PRIMARY PLAT. Any initial request for the subdivision of real
estate filed before the Plan Commission pursuant to I.C. 36-7-4-700 et seq.



      PRIMARY USE. A permitted use of land or a permitted use of a
building or structure on land which is allowed as a matter of right in the
zoning district applicable to the land, subject only to compliance with the
development standards applicable to that zoning district.



      RECYCLING CONTAINER. A receptacle designed and intended for the
collection of cleaned, sorted, solid household waste products, including, but
not limited to, glass, plastic, metal and paper.



      RECYCLING FACILITY. A recycling operation involving further
processing (relative to a neighborhood recycling collection point) of
materials to improve the efficiency of subsequent hauling. Such a facility
typically features sorting, the use of a crushing apparatus and the storage
of the material until it is shipped out.



      RELIGIOUS USE. A land use and all buildings and structures
associated therewith devoted primarily to the purpose of divine worship
together with reasonably related accessory uses, which are subordinate to and
commonly associated with the primary use, which may include, but are not
limited to, educational, instructional, social, residential or child care
ministry uses.



      RESEARCH PARK. See INTEGRATED CENTER.



      RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED. A
residential facility established under a program authorized by I.C. 12-11-1
which provides residential services for not more than eight developmentally
disabled individuals.



      RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR THE MENTALLY ILL. A residential facility
established under a program authorized by I.C. 12-22-1-1 which provides
residential services for mentally ill individuals.



      RESOURCE RECOVERY. The processing of solid waste into
commercially valuable materials or energy.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Specific and particularly described land, property
or interest therein devoted to and subject to the lawful use, typically as a
thoroughfare for passage of pedestrians, vehicles or utilities, as set forth
in a written grant, declaration or conveyance that is recorded in the office
of the County Recorder.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING. The total right-of-way width of a street
as created or expanded by the most recent grant, declaration or conveyance
for that is recorded by the office of the County Recorder.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE. Specific and particularly described strip
of privately-held land devoted to and subject to use for general
transportation purposes or conveyance of utilities whether or not in actual
fact improved or actually used for such purposes, as set forth in a written
grant, declaration or conveyance that is recorded by the office of the County
Recorder.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY, PROPOSED. The recommended right-of-way width for a
street based upon that street’s classification in the Thoroughfare Plan
portion of the Comprehensive Plan.



      RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. Specific and particularly described strip
of land, property or interest therein dedicated to and accepted by the
municipality, county or state to be devoted to and subject to use by the
general public for general transportation purposes or conveyance of utilities
whether or not in actual fact improved or actually used for such purposes, as
set forth in a written grant, declaration or conveyance that is recorded by
the office of the County Recorder.



      SEASONAL RETAIL SALES. A temporary use established for a fixed
period of time, for the retail sale of seasonal products, including, but not
limited to, such items as food, Christmas trees and live plants. This use may
or may not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building
or structure.



      SEATING/DINING, OUTDOOR. An area designated for the sole purpose
of outdoor seating to allow for outdoor dining, which may or may not be
roofed as an accessory use to any restaurant, bar or tavern.



      SECONDARY PLAT. Any plat approved by the Plan Commission and
authorized for filing with the County Auditor and for recording by the County
Recorder’s office in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-710.



      SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Plan Commission as duly appointed
by the Plan Commission in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-304.



      SETBACK. That distance measured perpendicularly from the property
line to the closest point of the building, structure, sign structure, parking
area or any other permanent improvement.



      SETBACK LINE. A line that establishes the minimum distance that a
building, structure or portion thereof, can be located from a lot line or
right-of-way line.



      SETBACK, MAXIMUM. The largest distance allowed by this ordinance
from a front lot line for the location of a building, structure or any other
permanent improvement (excluding parking areas).



      SETBACK, MINIMUM. The smallest distance required by this
ordinance from a lot line to the closest point of a building, structure, sign
structure, parking area, loading area, storage area or any other permanent
improvement. A MINIMUM SETBACK may be a minimum front setback, minimum side
setback or minimum rear setback. Said distance shall be measured
perpendicularly from the lot line.



      SETBACK, MINIMUM FRONT. The minimum distance required by this
ordinance from a front lot line to the closest point of the building,
structure, sign structure, parking area, loading area, storage area or any
other permanent improvement. Said distance shall be measured perpendicularly
from the front lot line.



      SETBACK, MINIMUM REAR. The minimum distance required by this
ordinance from a rear lot line to the closest point of the building,
structure, sign structure, parking area, loading area, storage area or any
other permanent improvement. Said distance shall be measured perpendicularly
from the rear lot line.



      SETBACK, MINIMUM SIDE. The minimum distance required by this
ordinance from a side lot line to the closest point of the building,
structure, sign structure, parking area or any other permanent improvement.
Said distance shall be measured perpendicularly from the side lot line.



      SIGN. Any structure, fixture, placard, announcement, declaration,
device, demonstration or insignia used for direction, information,
identification or to advertise or promote any business, product, goods,
activity, services or interests.



      SIGN, A-FRAME. A portable sign containing two sign faces and
whose framing is hinged at the apex at an angle less than 45 degrees.



      SIGN, ADVERTISING. An off-premises sign which directs attention
to any business, profession, product, activity, commodity or service, that is
offered, sold or manufactured on property or premises other than that upon
which the sign is located. Also known as an OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN.



      SIGN, AWNING. A building identification sign or graphic printed
on or in some fashion attached directly to the material of an awning.



      SIGN, BALLOON. A temporary sign consisting of a bag made of
light-weight material which is either:



         (a)   Filled with a gas lighter than air; or



         (b)   Continuously filled with blown air, and designed
to rise or float in the atmosphere or is attached to the ground or a building.



      SIGN, BANNER. A sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
mounted at one or more corners or edges by a permanent frame or fixture.
Flags of any governmental or political subdivision shall not be considered
BANNERS.



      SIGN, BUSINESS. See SIGN, IDENTIFICATION.



      SIGN CABINET. The frame or skeletal structure of an internally
illuminated sign which supports the sign face (including, by way of example,
but not limited to, an individual channel letter wall sign, a raceway mounted
channel letter wall sign, a box wall sign, a ground sign, a pylon sign or a
pole sign).



      SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy
over a door, entrance or window.



      SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. See READER BOARD SIGN or ELECTRONIC
VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN.



      SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A temporary sign which identifies the
construction activity on a property and announces the project, owner or
developer, contractor, subcontractor, architect, engineer, funding sources or
related information.



      SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. Any incidental sign which serves solely to
designate the location of or direction to any place or area located on the
same lot.



      SIGN, DIRECTORY. An on-premises sign on which the name, title,
street number or use of building is displayed.



      SIGN, ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE (EVMS). A sign, or portion
thereof, where the message copy includes characters, letters or illustrations
that can be changed or rearranged electronically without touching or
physically altering the primary surface of the sign. Message copy may be
changed in the field or from a remote location.



      SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign that is attached to, erected on or
supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast or frame) that is not
itself an integral part of or attached to a building or structure whose
principal function is something other than the support of a sign.



      SIGN, FUEL PRICE. A freestanding or wall sign that is either a
reader board sign or electronic variable message sign that lists the price of
various fuel types at a gasoline service station or convenience store that
sells fuel.



      SIGN, GROUND. Any freestanding sign constructed in or on the
ground surface with a maximum height not exceeding six feet above grade.







      SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. Any sign which is limited to the name,
address and number of a building, institution or person and to the activity
carried on in the building or institution (not including the price or cost of
such activity), or the occupancy of the person.



      SIGN, INCIDENTAL. A sign relating to the lot or use thereof and
designated accessory uses, direction, identification, information,
construction or real estate for sale, lease or rent.



      SIGN, MARQUEE. Any building identification sign painted, mounted,
constructed or attached in any manner on a marquee.



      SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL OPINION. A sign which does not advertise
products, goods, businesses or services and which expresses an opinion or
point of view.



      SIGN, NONCONFORMING. A sign which qualifies as a legally
established nonconforming structure.



      SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. See SIGN, ADVERTISING.



      SIGN, ON-PREMISES. A sign which directs attention to a building,
business, product, activity or service offered on the property on which the
sign is located.



      SIGN, PARKING AND LOADING. Any incidental sign which serves to
designate the location of any parking or loading area on a lot and may
include the name of the owner or the establishment for which such parking or
loading area it is provided.



      SIGN, POLE. Any freestanding sign which has its supportive
structure(s) anchored in the ground and which has the lowest portion of its
sign display surface elevated a minimum of ten feet above the grade.







 



      SIGN, PORTABLE. Any sign or sign structure not securely attached
to the ground or other permanent structure, or: a sign designed to be
transported from place to place, including, but not limited to, signs
transported by means of wheels; a sign attached to A- or T-frames; a menu and
sandwich board sign; a balloon used as a sign, umbrella used for advertising;
and a sign attached to or painted on a vehicle parked and visible from the
public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day
operation of the business.



      SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall
in such a manner that the leading edge extends more than 18 inches beyond the
surface of such building or wall face.









      SIGN, PYLON. Any freestanding sign anchored in the ground with
its sign display surface extending upward from the ground surface and which
has a height exceeding six feet above grade.







 



      SIGN, READER BOARD.



         (a)   A sign, or portion thereof, where the message copy
includes characters, letters or illustrations that can be physically altered
without altering the primary surface of the sign.



         (b)    The message copy of a reader board sign can be
changed manually in the field or through remote electronic or electric
techniques.



         (c)   Methods of changing the message copy include the
use of:



            1.   Changeable letters, numbers, symbols and
similar characters;



            2.   Changeable pictorial panels; or



            3.   Rotating panels or other similar devices.



      SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A temporary sign which announces the sale,
rent or lease, together with information identifying the owner or agent, of
the lot on which the sign is located.



      SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected on or wholly constructed upon a roof
of any building and supported solely on the roof structure.







 







 



   Examples of Roof Signs







 



   Examples of Signs Which Are Not Roof Signs



      SIGN, SIDEWALK. A movable sign which is intended to convey
information to pedestrians, such as an A-frame sign containing menus or
specials. A SIDEWALK SIGN is not considered to be a portable sign.



      SIGN, SPANDREL. Any sign that is a part of or attached to the
spandrel.



      SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure including supports, uprights,
bracing and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.



      SIGN SURFACE. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through
which the message of the sign is exhibited.



      SIGN SURFACE AREA. The area of a sign surface (which is also the
SIGN SURFACE AREA of a wall sign or other sign with only one face). SIGN
SURFACE AREA shall be computed by using the smallest square, rectangle or
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including, any supporting framework, bracing or decorative
fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets the applicable
regulations of this ordinance and is clearly incidental to the display itself.







      SIGN, SUSPENDED. Any sign that is suspended from the underside of
a horizontal plane surface and is connected to the horizontal plane surface.







   Suspended Sign



      SIGN, T-FRAME. A portable sign utilizing an inverted “T”
style of framing to support the sign.



      SIGN, TALL. Any sign with an overall height in excess of the
maximum height of freestanding identification signs in the zoning district in
which the sign is located.



      SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign or sign structure which is not
permanently affixed or installed, and is intended to be displayed for limited
periods only. Examples of such signs include, but are not limited to, the
following: real estate, construction, special event, political, garage sale,
home improvement/remodeling, model home and seasonal/holiday signs.



      SIGN, WALL. Any sign attached to or erected on a wall of a
building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel
to the plane of said wall, within 18 inches of said wall, and containing only
one sign display surface.







 



      SIGN, WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL. A sign relating to: real estate open
houses; residential development under construction; or real or personal
property auctions.



      SIGN, WIND. A sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
attached at one end to a pole or similar apparatus so as to swing freely,
inflate and flutter by movement of the wind.



      SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign placed:



         (a)   Inside of and within two feet of a window; or



         (b)   Upon a window, and is intended to be seen from the
exterior of the window.



      SINGLE USE SITE. A lot which is developed and intended for use by
one permitted use.



      SKETCH PLAN. A graphic representation of a site or subdivision,
drawn to an appropriate scale by hand or other drawing method, capable of
depicting the general pattern proposed for a development or subdivision
layout in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance
or the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



      SPANDREL. A roof-like structure that covers the gasoline pump
dispenser, serves as a second-tier canopy, is a lighting source for the
dispensing area, serves to identify the gasoline pumps by numerical
designation, and may display signs.



      SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE. The use of land or the use of a building
or structure on land which is allowed in the zoning district applicable to
the land only through the grant of a special exception by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.



      STAFF. The Secretary of the Plan Commission, the Director of the
Department of Planning and Zoning, any employee of the Plan Commission, or
any attorney or agent of the Secretary of the Plan Commission or the Director
of the Planning and Zoning Department.



      STORAGE AND TRANSFER ESTABLISHMENT. A facility at which products,
goods or materials are received from various locations and temporarily
warehoused while awaiting distribution or shipment via a subsequent carrier,
possibly along with other products, goods or materials to another destination.



      STORAGE, OUTSIDE. The storage of any product, goods, equipment,
machinery, vehicles, boats, supplies, building materials or commodities,
including raw, semi-finished and finished materials for a period of time in
excess of three days, the storage of which is not accessory to a residential
use, provided, however, that vehicular parking and the display of
automobiles, boats, trucks or farm equipment associated with a legally
established dealership shall not be deemed outside storage.



      STORY. That part of a building, with an open height of no less
than 78 inches, except a mezzanine, included between the upper surface of one
floor and the lower surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above,
then the ceiling next above. A basement shall constitute a STORY only if it
provides finished floor area.



      STREET. Any public or private right-of-way, with the exception of
alleys, essentially open to the sky and open and dedicated to the general
public for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian travel affording access
to abutting property, whether referred to as a street, lane, road, drive,
expressway, arterial, thoroughfare, highway or any other term commonly
applied to a right-of-way for said purposes. A STREET may be comprised of
pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking space and similar
features.



      STREET, COLLECTOR. A street designated on the Thoroughfare Plan
as a collector.



      STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having one open end and being
permanently terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.



      STREET, FRONTAGE. A street located along side and generally
parallel with a more heavily traveled street and which provides access to
abutting property(ies).



      STREET, INTERSTATE. A street designated on the Thoroughfare Plan
as an interstate.



      STREET, LIMITED ACCESS. A street along which access is restricted
due to the acquisition of access rights from adjoining properties by the
appropriate governmental agency having jurisdiction over such street.



      STREET, LOCAL. A street primarily designed and intended to carry
low volumes of vehicular traffic movement at low speeds within the immediate
geographic area with direct access to abutting properties.



      STREET, LOCAL COLLECTOR. That portion of a local street which
serves as the main entrance into a major residential subdivision, from the
right-of-way line of the street from which the major residential subdivision
gains access, to the right-of-way line of the first intersecting street
within the major residential subdivision.



      STREET, PRIMARY ARTERIAL. A street designated on the Thoroughfare
Plan as a primary arterial.







 



      STREET, PRIVATE. A privately-held right-of-way, with the
exception of alleys, essentially open to the sky and open to the general
public for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian travel affording access
to abutting property, whether referred to as a street, easement, road,
expressway, arterial, thoroughfare, highway or any other term commonly
applied to a right-of-way for said purposes. A PRIVATE STREET may be
comprised of pavement, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, parking space and similar
features.



      STREET, PUBLIC. A publicly dedicated, accepted and maintained
right-of-way, with the exception of alleys, essentially open to the sky and
open to the general public for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian
travel affording access to abutting property, whether referred to as a
street, lane, road, drive, expressway, arterial, thoroughfare, highway or any
other term commonly applied to a public right-of-way for said purposes. A
PUBLIC STREET may be comprised of pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking space and similar features.



      STREET, SECONDARY ARTERIAL. A street designated on the
Thoroughfare Plan as a secondary arterial.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed
location on the ground. Among other things, STRUCTURES include buildings,
mobile homes, walls, parking areas, signs and billboards.



      SUBDIVIDER. The owner, developer or authorized agent of the owner
or developer of real estate, who is responsible for all designs, reservations
and improvements related to the petition for primary or secondary plat
approval or the development of a subdivision.



      SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots, parcels, sites, units, plats or interests for the purpose of offer,
sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and
all other plans, terms and conditions, including resubdivision. SUBDIVISION
includes the division or development of land opened for residential and
nonresidential uses, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise,
intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument. The following kinds
of division of existing parcels of land are exempt:



         (a)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of
tracts by adjoining landowners to correct errors in an existing legal
description, provided that no additional building sites other than for
accessory buildings are created by the division;



         (b)   A division of land for the acquisition of street
or utility right-of-way or easement;



         (c)   A division of land for the sale or exchange of
tracts between adjoining land owners, provided that no additional development
sites other than for accessory buildings are created by the division;



         (d)   A division of land into cemetery plots for the
purpose of burial; and



         (e)   A division of a lot of record, which is or may be
legally developed with a two-family dwelling or a multi-family dwelling, into
sub-lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership of the individual dwelling
units and their associated portion of the lot of record, provided that no
additional development sites are created by the division and that no sub-lots
are created which do not contain a dwelling unit.



      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR RESIDENTIAL.



         (a)   A subdivision of a tract of land into four or more
parcels or lots, including any remainder of the original tract, for
single-family or two-family dwelling purposes;



         (b)   Any single-family or two-family dwelling
subdivision which involves the creation of new streets, extension of water
lines or sewer lines, or the creation of public improvements; or



         (c)   A subdivision for a multi-family dwelling
development.



      SUBDIVISION, MINOR RESIDENTIAL. A subdivision of a tract of land
into less than four parcels or lots, including any remainder of the original
tract, for single-family or two-family dwelling purposes, which does not
involve the creation of new streets, extension of water lines or sewer lines,
or the creation of public improvements.



      SUBDIVISION, NONRESIDENTIAL. A subdivision of a tract of land,
including any remainder of the original tract, for any commercial, industrial
or special exception use.



      SUBDIVISION, NONRESIDENTIAL INCREMENTAL. A subdivision of a tract
of land, including any remainder of the original tract, for any commercial,
industrial or special exception use which is submitted for primary and
secondary plat approval through the incremental plat approval process.



      SUB-LOTS. Portions of a lot of record created in connection with
the transfer of ownership of individual dwelling units in a two-family or
multi-family dwelling.







 



      TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE (TAC). A committee of technical
consultants established to provide the Director with technical assistance in
the review of plans for compliance the provisions of this ordinance, the
Subdivision Control Ordinance and other applicable rules and regulations of
federal, state or local agencies.



      TEMPORARY SEASONAL RETAIL SALES. A temporary use established for
a fixed period of time, for the retail sale of seasonal products, including,
but not limited to, such items as Christmas trees, pumpkins and fireworks.
This use may or may not involve the construction or alteration of any
permanent building or structure.



      TEMPORARY USE. A land use established for a limited and fixed
period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of
the time period.



      THOROUGHFARE PLAN. That portion of the Comprehensive Plan which
sets forth recommendations for major street alignments and street
classifications.



      TOURIST HOME. See BED AND BREAKFAST.



      TOWN ENGINEER. The licensed engineer designated by the town to
furnish engineering assistance and advice in the administration of the Zoning
Ordinance and the Subdivision Control Ordinance.



      TOWN STANDARDS. Those drawings, memorandum and specifications
established by the Town Engineer, under the authority of the Town Council,
for the sole purpose of identifying the minimum quality and performance
standards for facilities, or components thereof, which, in the opinion of the
Town Engineer, may impact the integrity of the public works system, thereby
impacting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare
of the town.



      TRANSFER STATION.



         (a)   A facility where solid waste is transferred from a
vehicle or container to another vehicle or container for transportation.



         (b)   The term does not include the following:



            1.   A facility where the solid waste that is
transferred has been generated by the facility; or



            2.   A recycling facility. (For reference, see
I.C. 13-7-1.)



      UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. An accessory structure which is at least
75% subterranean, utilized for storage of personal property or as a temporary
shelter for people, such as a storm cellar or fallout shelter.



      WALKWAY. A defined pedestrian way, typically improved with
concrete or asphalt, which provides for pedestrian movement on private
property. A WALKWAY may or may not be located in an pedestrian easement.



      WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION CENTER. A building or structure for
the storage of goods, materials or products awaiting shipment to another
location for wholesale or retail trade.



      WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL SIGN. See SIGN, WEEKEND DIRECTIONAL.



      YARD. An open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending fully
across the lot while situated between the front, side or rear lot line and
the established front, side or rear building line.



      YARD, AGGREGATE SIDE. The total combined distance of both side
yards on an individual interior lot or double frontage lot.







 



      YARD, FRONT. An open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending
fully across the lot while situated between the front lot line and the
established front building line.



      YARD, INTERIOR. An open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending
out from the wall of a multi-family dwelling.



      YARD, MINIMUM. An open space unobstructed to the sky, extended
fully across the lot situated between a lot line and a setback line. MINIMUM
YARDS may be a front yard, a side yard or a rear yard depending on which lot
line the required yard abuts.







 



      YARD, PERIMETER. An open space, unobstructed to the sky,
extending fully across the lot while situated between any front, side and
rear lot line and the minimum required front, side and rear setback.



      YARD, REAR. An open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending
fully across the lot while situated between the rear lot line and the
established rear building line.



      YARD SALE. See GARAGE SALE.



      YARD, SIDE. An open space, unobstructed to the sky, extending
fully across the lot while situated between a side lot line and the
established side building line.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997; Ord. 9-1999, passed - -1999; Ord. 3-2000, passed
- -2000; Ord. 6-2001, passed 6-25-2001; Ord. 11-2004, passed 6-14-2004; Ord.
51-2005, passed 10-10-2005; Ord. 39-2006, passed 10-9-2006; Ord. 09-2007,
passed 4-23-2007; Ord. 13-2007, passed 6-11-2007; Ord. 27-2007, passed -
-2007; Ord. 28-2008, passed 11-24-2008; Ord. 24-2009, passed 1-26-2009; Ord.
12-2011, passed - -2011; Ord. 04-2013, passed 2-25-2013; Ord. 22-2013, passed
8-12-2013; Ord. 02-2015, passed 3-9-2015)



EXHIBIT A



NOTE:   The Town of Plainfield Zoning Ordinance, requires the use of this
form in recording commitments made with respect to development plan
approvals, zone map changes or Planned Unit Developments in accordance with
I.C. 36-7-4-613 or I.C. 36-7-4-615.



COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE USE OR DEVELOPMENT OF REAL ESTATE MADE IN
CONNECTION WITH A DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL, ZONE MAP CHANGE OR PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED BY THE TOWN OF PLAINFIELD ZONING ORDINANCE



In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-613 or I.C. 36-7-4-615, the Owner of the real
estate located in the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana, which is
described below, makes the following COMMITMENTS concerning the use and
development of the following described parcel of real estate:



LEGAL DESCRIPTION:



STATEMENT OF COMMITMENTS:



1.



2.



3.



4.



These COMMITMENTS shall run with the land, be binding on the Owner of the
above-described real estate, subsequent owners of the above-described real
estate and other persons acquiring an interest therein. These COMMITMENTS may
be modified or terminated by a decision of the Town Plan Commission made at a
public hearing after proper notice has been given.



COMMITMENTS contained in this instrument shall be effective upon the approval
of petition #______ pursuant to the Town of Plainfield Zoning Ordinance, and
shall continue in effect until modified or terminated by the Town of
Plainfield Plan Commission.



These COMMITMENTS may be enforced jointly or severally by:



      1.   The Town of Plainfield Plan Commission;



      2.   Owners of all parcels of ground adjoining the real estate
to a depth of two (2) ownerships, but not exceeding six-hundred (600) feet
from the perimeter of the real estate, and all owners of real estate within
the area included in the petition who were not petitioners for approval,
however; and



      3.   
_______________________________________________________________________



         _____________________________________________________________
__________



The undersigned hereby authorizes the Secretary of the town Plan Commission
to record this Commitment in the Office of the Recorder of Hendricks County,
Indiana, upon final approval of petition #______.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Owner has executed this instrument this ___________
day of ________, ________.



   (Individual Owner)



Signature
___________________________(Seal)   Signature___________________________(Sea
l)



Printed _________________________________   Printed
_________________________________



   (Organization Owner)



_______________________________________



By ____________________________________



Printed ________________________________



Title __________________________________



   (Individual Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared ______________, Owner(s) of the real estate described above who
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been
duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



   (Organization Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the_______________ of ______________________, a(n) ________________,
Owner(s) of the real estate described above who acknowledged the execution of
the foregoing instrument in such capacity and who, having been duly sworn,
stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



This instrument was prepared by _______________.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)



EXHIBIT B



NOTE:   The Town of Plainfield Zoning Ordinance requires the use of this
form in recording commitment modification(s) or termination(s) with respect
to a Development Plan Approval, Zone Map Change or Planned Unit Development
in accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-613 or I.C. 36-7-4-615.



COMMITMENTS MODIFYING OR TERMINATING EXISTING COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE USE
OR DEVELOPMENT OF REAL ESTATE MADE IN CONNECTION WITH A DEVELOPMENT PLAN
APPROVAL, ZONE MAP CHANGE OR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-613 or I.C. 36-7-4-615, the Owner of the real
estate located in Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana, which is
described below, makes the following modification(s) or termination(s) of
commitment(s) concerning the use and development of the following described
parcel of real estate:



LEGAL DESCRIPTION:



STATEMENT OF MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF COMMITMENTS:



1.



2.



3.



4.



These MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF COMMITMENTS shall run with the land, be
binding on the Owner of the above-referenced real estate, subsequent owners
of the above-referenced real estate and other persons acquiring an interest
therein. These COMMITMENTS may be modified or terminated by a decision of the
town Plan Commission made at a public hearing after proper notice has been
given.



MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF COMMITMENTS contained in this instrument shall
be effective upon adoption of modification or termination approved by the
Town of Plainfield Plan Commission in petition #______.



These COMMITMENTS may be enforced jointly or severally by:



      1.   The Town of Plainfield Plan Commission;



      2.   Owners of all parcels of ground adjoining the real estate
to a depth of two (2) ownerships, but not exceeding six-hundred (600) feet
from the perimeter of the real estate, and all owners of real estate within
the area included in the petition who were not petitioners for approval,
however; and



      3.   
_______________________________________________________________________



         _____________________________________________________________
__________



The undersigned hereby authorizes the Secretary of the town Plan Commission
to record this MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF COMMITMENTS in the Office of
the Recorder of Hendricks County, Indiana, upon final approval petition
#______ by the Town of Plainfield Plan Commission.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Owner has executed this instrument this ___________
day of ________, ________.



   (Individual Owner)



Signature
___________________________(Seal)   Signature___________________________(Sea
l)



Printed _________________________________   Printed
_________________________________



   (Organization Owner)



_______________________________________



By ____________________________________



Printed ________________________________



Title __________________________________



   (Individual Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared ______________, Owner(s) of the real estate described above who
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been
duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



   (Organization Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the_______________ of ______________________, a(n) ________________,
Owner(s) of the real estate described above who acknowledged the execution of
the foregoing instrument in such capacity and who, having been duly sworn,
stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



This instrument was prepared by _______________.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)





EXHIBIT C



COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE USE OR DEVELOPMENT OF REAL ESTATE MADE IN
CONNECTION WITH A SPECIAL EXCEPTION OR A VARIANCE GRANT FROM THE TERMS OF THE
ZONING ORDINANCE.



In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-921, the Owner of the real estate located in
the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana, which is described below,
makes the following COMMITMENTS concerning the use and development of the
following described parcel of real estate:



LEGAL DESCRIPTION:



STATEMENT OF COMMITMENTS:



1.



2.



3.



4.



These COMMITMENTS shall be binding on the Owner, subsequent owners of the
above-described real estate, and other persons acquiring an interest in the
above-described real estate. These COMMITMENTS may be modified or terminated
by a decision of the town Board of Zoning Appeals made at a public hearing
after proper notice has been given.



COMMITMENTS contained in this instrument shall be effective upon the grant of
petition #______ by the Town of Plainfield Board of Zoning Appeals.



These COMMITMENTS may be enforced jointly or severally by:



      1.   The Town of Plainfield Plan Commission;



      2.   Owners of all parcels of ground adjoining the real estate
to a depth of two (2) ownerships, but not exceeding six-hundred (600) feet
from the perimeter of the real estate, and all owners of real estate within
the area included in the petition who were not petitioners. Owners of real
estate entirely located outside the Town of Plainfield are not included,
however; and



      3.   
_______________________________________________________________________



         _____________________________________________________________
__________



The undersigned hereby authorizes the Secretary of the town Plan Commission
to record this Commitment in the office of the Recorder of Hendricks County,
Indiana, upon final approval by the Town of Plainfield Board of Zoning
Appeals of petition #______.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Owner has executed this instrument this ___________
day of ________, ________.



   (Individual Owner)



Signature
___________________________(Seal)   Signature___________________________(Sea
l)



Printed _________________________________   Printed
_________________________________



   (Organization Owner)



_______________________________________



By ____________________________________



Printed ________________________________



Title __________________________________



   (Individual Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared ______________, Owner(s) of the real estate described above who
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been
duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



   (Organization Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the_______________ of ______________________, a(n) ________________,
Owner(s) of the real estate described above who acknowledged the execution of
the foregoing instrument in such capacity and who, having been duly sworn,
stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



This instrument was prepared by _______________.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)





EXHIBIT D



COMMITMENTS MODIFYING OR TERMINATING EXISTING COMMITMENTS CONCERNING THE USE
OR DEVELOPMENT OF REAL ESTATE MADE IN CONNECTION WITH A SPECIAL EXCEPTION OR
A VARIANCE FROM THE TERMS OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE.



In accordance with I.C. 36-7-4-921, the Owner of the real estate located in
the Town of Plainfield, Hendricks County, Indiana, which is described below,
makes the following COMMITMENTS concerning the use and development of the
following described parcel of real estate:



LEGAL DESCRIPTION:



STATEMENT OF MODIFICATION OR TERMINATION OF COMMITMENTS existing in
Instrument Number  _____________ as recorded in the Office of the Recorder
of Hendricks County, Indiana, as made in connection with petition #______:



1.



2.



3.



4.



These modified COMMITMENTS shall be binding on the Owner of the
above-described real estate, subsequent owners of the above-described real
estate, and other persons acquiring an interest in the above-described real
estate. These modified COMMITMENTS may be further modified or terminated by a
decision of the town Board of Zoning Appeals made at a public hearing after
proper notice has been given.



Modified COMMITMENTS contained in this instrument shall be effective upon the
adoption of modification or termination approved by the Town of Plainfield
Board of Zoning Appeals in petition #______.



These COMMITMENTS may be enforced jointly or severally by:



      1.   The Town of Plainfield Plan Commission;



      2.   Owners of all parcels of ground adjoining the real estate
to a depth of two (2) ownerships, but not exceeding 600 feet from the
perimeter of the real estate, and all owners of real estate within the area
included in the petition who were not petitioners. Owners of real estate
entirely located outside of the town are not included, however; and



      3.   
_______________________________________________________________________



         _____________________________________________________________
__________



The undersigned hereby authorizes the Secretary of the Town Plan Commission
to record this Commitment in the office of the Recorder of Hendricks County,
Indiana, upon final approval of modification and/or termination of
commitment(s) by the Town of Plainfield Board of Zoning Appeals of petition
#______.



   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Owner has executed this instrument this ___________
day of ________, ________.



   (Individual Owner)



Signature
___________________________(Seal)   Signature___________________________(Sea
l)



Printed _________________________________   Printed
_________________________________



   (Organization Owner)



_______________________________________



By ____________________________________



Printed ________________________________



Title __________________________________



   (Individual Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared ______________, Owner(s) of the real estate described above who
acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument and who, having been
duly sworn, stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



   (Organization Acknowledgment)



STATE OF _______________)



            ) SS:



COUNTY OF _____________)



   Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the_______________ of ______________________, a(n) ________________,
Owner(s) of the real estate described above who acknowledged the execution of
the foregoing instrument in such capacity and who, having been duly sworn,
stated that any representations therein contained are true.



   Witness my hand and Notarial Seal this ___________ day of ________,
________.



                                    Signatu
re ____________________________



                                    Printed
 ______________________________



County of Residence _________________________



My Commission expires: _____________________



This instrument was prepared by _______________.



(Ord. 21-97, passed - -1997)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.



