CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS 
____________ 
Published in 2014 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
[MUNICIPALITY_]OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Jerry Wiley 
Mayor 
____________ 
Melanie Hepperly (Councilmember Ward 1) 
Jim Poplinger (Councilmember Ward 1) 
Michael Staley (Councilmember Ward 2) 
Gail Gregory (Councilmember Ward 2) 
David Watkins (Councilmember Ward 3) 
Anthony Liu (Councilmember Ward 3) 
Tanya Keys (Councilmember Ward 4) 
J.D. Fair (Councilmember Ward 4) 
City Council 
____________ 
Stephen P. Chinn 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathy Axelson 
City Administrator/City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Prior Code as amended through April 14, 2014. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the Prior Code, as amended, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers or by using the decimal system. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Andrea Gill, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the City staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fairway, Kansas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fairway, Kansas. 2014. 
(Published in the Legal Record on November 11, 2014) 
CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS 
ORDINANCE NO. 1581 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING THE CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS CODE AND ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Fairway, Kansas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 15, each inclusive, is adopted. The codification was authorized by ordinance, and was made in conformity with K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015, and amendments thereto. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 10, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a later passed ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7 of this Code. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not that penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in a form as to indicate an intention to make it a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 14, 2014, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect upon its publication in an official City newspaper. 
Passed by the City Council on November 10, 2014. Approved by the Mayor. 
Attest: 
___________ 
Jerry Wiley, Mayor 
___________ 
Kathy A. Axelson, City Clerk 
SEAL 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 1580 11-10-2014 Omitted 1581 11-10-2014 Included 1582 12- 8-2014 Included 1583 11-10-2014 Included 1584 11-10-2014 Included 1598  7-13-2015 Omitted 1605 12-14-2015 Included 1606 12-14-2015 Included 1607 12-14-2015 Included 1608 12-14-2015 Included 1609 12-14-2015 Included 1610 12-14-2015 Included 1611 12-14-2015 Included 1612 12-14-2015 Included 1613 12-14-2015 Included 1614 12-14-2015 Included 1615 12-14-2015 Included 1616 12-14-2015 Included Supp. No. 2 1562 11-20-2013 Included Char. Ord. No. 23  4-12-2016 Included Char. Ord. No. 24  9-12-2016 Included 1629  9-12-2016 Included 1630  9-12-2016 Included 1634 10-10-2016 Included 1635 10-10-2016 Included 1636 10-10-2016 Included Char. Ord. No. 25 10-18-2016 Included 1638 11-14-2016 Included 1639 11-14-2016 Included 1641 12-12-2016 Included Supp. No. 3 1620  3-14-2016 Included 1645  2-13-2017 Included 1651  7-10-2017 Included 1657 12-11-2017 Included 1658 12-11-2017 Included 1659 11-13-2017 Included 1661 12-11-2017 Included Supp. No. 4 1673  8-13-2018 Omitted 1675  9-10-2018 Included 1676  9-10-2018 Included Char. Ord. No. 26 11-13-2018 Included 1679 11-13-2018 Included 1681 12-10-2018 Included 1683  1-30-2019 Included 1684  1-30-2019 Included 1685  1-30-2019 Included 1686  1-30-2019 Included  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The chapters and sections herein shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Fairway, Kansas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Fairway City Code." 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, K.S.A. 12-3014 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the City Council may be effectuated. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms, technical phrases and terms and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Chief of Police. The term "Chief of Police" means the City-Marshal-Chief of Police. 
    City . The term "City" means the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
    City Council. The term "City Council" means that body consisting of eight (8) members, two (2) from each of the City's four (4) wards. 
    Code . The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Fairway, Kansas, as designated in Section 1-1. 
    Computation of time . In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event, or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than eleven (11) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. The term "legal holiday" includes any day designated as a holiday by the Congress of the United States, by the legislature of this State, or by the City. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 60-206. 
    Conjunctions . In a provision involving two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that when appropriate from the context, the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County . The term "County" means Johnson County, Kansas. 
    Delegation of authority . A provision that authorizes or requires a City officer or City employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Following . The term "following" means next after. 
    Gender . Terms of one (1) gender include all other genders. 
    Governing Body . The term "Governing Body" means that body consisting of the Mayor and City Council. 
    In the City. The term "in the City" means and includes all territory over which the City now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    Includes . The term "includes" does not limit a term to a specified example. 
    Joint authority . Terms giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons give such authority to a majority of such persons. 
    K.S.A. The abbreviation "K.S.A." means the Kansas Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
    May . The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not . The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month . The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must . The term "must" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number . Terms in the singular include the plural. Terms in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath . A solemn affirmation is the equivalent to an oath, and a person shall be deemed to have sworn if such person makes such an affirmation. 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to City officers, City departments, City boards, City commissions and City employees. 
    Owner . The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person . The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Preceding . The term "preceding" means next before. 
    Premises . The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property . The term "property" includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
    Real property, real estate, land, lands . The terms "real property," "real estate" and "land" include lands, buildings, tenements and hereditaments and all rights and interests therein except chattel interests. 
    Right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation for public use and intended to be occupied by a street, bike path, alley, walkway, crosswalk, electric transmission line, cable/fiber, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses. It normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment), such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges. The interest acquired may be a full fee interest or an easement interest. 
    Roadway . The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall . The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Signature and subscription by mark. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write. In such situations, such person's name shall be written near the mark by a witness who writes his own name near such person's name. 
    State . The term "State" means the State of Kansas. 
    Street . The term "street" means any alley, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approach thereto, and any other public thoroughfare in the City. The term "street" also means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines and includes a sidewalk or footpath. 
    Tenant, occupant . The terms "tenant" and "occupant," as applied to a building or land, include: 
(1)  Any person holding, either alone or with others, a written or oral lease of such building or land. 
(2)  Any person, who either alone or with others, occupies such building or land. 
    Tense . The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
    Writing . The term "writing" includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is authorized or required, it shall be made in writing in the English language. 
    Year . The term "year" means a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references and State law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of an ordinance does not revive any previously repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (Chapter, Article, Division or Subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Fairway, Kansas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (Chapter, Article, Division or Subdivision, as appropriate) _____ of the of Ordinances, City of Fairway, Kansas, is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the terms "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "Sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive provisions of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(4)  Counseling, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as set forth in Subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section. 
(b)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of sentencing, unless otherwise specified in this Code, the following classes of violations of this Code and the punishment and terms of confinement authorized for each class are established: 
(1)  Class A violation, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the County jail which shall be fixed by the Court and shall not exceed one (1) year; 
(2)  Class B violation, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the County jail which shall be fixed by the Court and shall not exceed six (6) months; 
(3)  Class C violation, the sentence for which shall be a definite term of confinement in the County jail which shall be fixed by the Court and shall not exceed one (1) month; and 
(4)  Unclassified violations, which shall include all offenses declared to be violations without specification as to class, the sentence for which shall be in accordance with the sentence specified in the section that defines the offense; if no penalty is provided, the sentence shall be the same penalty as provided in this section for a Class C violation. 
(d)  Fine in lieu of confinement. 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code may, in addition to, or instead of, the confinement authorized by law, be sentenced to pay a fine which shall be fixed by the Court, unless otherwise specified in this Code, as follows: 
a.  Class A violation, a sum not exceeding two thousand and five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
b.  Class B violation, a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
c.  Class C violation, a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
d.  Unclassified violation, any sum authorized by the section that defines the offense. If no penalty is provided for same, the fine shall not exceed the fine provided in this section for a Class C violation. 
(2)  As an alternative to Subsection (d)(1) of this section, the fine imposed may be fixed at any greater sum not exceeding double the pecuniary gain derived from the offense by the offender. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to all other violations of this Code, each act constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty hereunder does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license or a permit, or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    The sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code are severable so that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase of this Code or of any provision adopted by reference in this Code, for the City Council declares that it is its intent that it would have enacted this Code and all provisions adopted by reference in this Code without such invalid or unconstitutional provisions. If any provision of this Code is declared to be inapplicable to specific property by a valid judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not restrict the applicability of such provision to other property. 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the City relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any Charter ordinance or any of the following ordinances or portions of ordinances not found in this Code. Such ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Any ordinance annexing property into the City, deannexing property or excluding property from the City or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(3)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Any ordinance granting any right or franchise. 
(7)  Any ordinance vacating any easement or park land. 
(8)  Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(11)  Any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(13)  Any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(14)  Any ordinance rezoning specific property. 
(15)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  Any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Compliance with statute. 
    Business of the City shall be conducted by State statute except as may be altered by Charter ordinance or augmented by this Code. 
Editor's note- Issues of administration are covered in K.S.A. chs. 12 and 14 and in Charter ordinances. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY GOVERNING BODY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Adoption of ordinances, K.S.A. 12-3001 et seq.; quorum, K.S.A. 14-111; Mayor generally, K.S.A. 13-301 et seq.; president of council and other officers, K.S.A. 11-204. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Resolutions and motions, passage. 
(a)  A motion regarding a Charter ordinance may be acted upon at a duly noticed meeting at which a majority of the Governing Body is in attendance. The Mayor and each Councilmember shall each have one (1) vote when in attendance at such meeting and the affirmative vote of two-thirds (?) of the full membership of the Governing Body is required for passage. 
(b)  A motion regarding any other ordinance may be acted upon at a duly noticed meeting at which a majority of the members of the City Council is in attendance. Each Councilmember shall have one (1) vote when in attendance at such meeting and the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the City Council is required for passage. If the favorable vote is one (1) less than the number required for passage, the Mayor shall have the power to cast the deciding vote in favor of the ordinance. Any ordinance that is vetoed by the Mayor may be passed over the veto by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the full membership of the City Council. 
(c)  Any other resolution or motion requiring the approval of the City Council or the Governing Body may be considered at a duly noticed meeting of the City Council at which a majority of the members of the City Council is in attendance. When passage requires the affirmative vote of a simple majority of the Councilmembers in attendance, the Mayor shall vote only in the event of a tie. It the affirmative vote of a greater number of the Councilmembers in attendance is required, the Mayor may cast the deciding vote when the number of favorable votes is one (1) less than the required number. 
(d)  Attendance at a meeting may be in person or it may be by telephone or other means that allows the person so attending to hear and be heard by all other persons in attendance at the meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 1-104; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1679 , § 1, 11-13-2018; Ord. No. 1683 , § 1, 1-30-2019) 
Sec. 2-22. - Time of regular meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the second Monday of each month at 7:30 p.m.; provided that, when a regular meeting day shall fall on any legal holiday, that regular meeting shall be held on the succeeding day not observed as a holiday. 
(Prior Code, § 1-105; Ord. No. 125, § 1; Ord. No. 1218; Ord. No. 1440) 
Sec. 2-23. - Conduct of meeting. 
    The Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor, the President of the City Council shall preside over any meeting of the City Council. In the event that neither the Mayor nor the President of the City Council is present at any regular or special meeting of the City Council, the members of the City Council that are in attendance shall select from their number a person to preside over the meeting until the arrival of either the Mayor or the President of the City Council. Any member of the City Council shall retain the voting status of a member of the City Council while presiding over any regular or special meeting of the City Council. 
(Prior Code, § 1-105; Ord. No. 125, § 1; Ord. No. 1218; Ord. No. 1440) 
State Law reference- Presiding officer, K.S.A. 14-204, 14-301. 
Sec. 2-24. - Emergency government. 
    In the event of a catastrophe in which all, or a majority of the members of the City Council are fatally injured, the interim City Council shall be composed of the surviving members, the City Attorney, the City Clerk, and a sufficient number of the appointed officials selected in order of the greatest seniority in office to make up a City Council of the prescribed number. 
(Prior Code, § 1-106; Ord. No. 611) 
Secs. 2-25-2-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Wards, K.S.A. 14-103; hours of voting, K.S.A. 25-106. 

Sec. 2-54. - Wards; division of City. 
    The City is hereby divided into four (4) wards designated as the first, second, third, and fourth wards, respectively. 
(Prior Code, § 4-201) 
Sec. 2-55. - First ward. 
    The first ward shall include all of that portion of the City lying north of the centerline of State Park Road and east of the centerline of Falmouth Road. 
(Prior Code, § 4-202; Ord. No. 893) 
Sec. 2-56. - Second ward. 
    The second ward shall include all of that portion of the City lying within the following described boundaries, to wit: 
    Beginning at the center of the intersection of 59th Street and Roe Avenue; 
    Thence east along the centerline of 59th Street to the centerline of Mission Road; 
    Thence north along the centerline of Mission Road to the centerline of Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
    Thence east along the centerline of Shawnee Mission Parkway to its intersection with the centerline of State Park Road; 
    Thence southeast along the centerline of State Park Road to its intersection with the centerline of Falmouth Road; 
    Thence north along the centerline of Falmouth Road to the City limits; 
    Thence west, southwest, and south along the City limits to the center of the intersection of 59th Street and Roe Avenue. 
(Prior Code, § 4-203) 
Sec. 2-57. - Third ward. 
    The third ward shall include all of that portion of the City lying within the following described boundaries, to wit: 
    Beginning at the center of the intersection of Mission Road and Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
    Thence south along the centerline of Mission Road to the centerline of 63rd Street; 
    Thence east along the centerline of 63rd Street to the City limits; 
    Thence north following the City limits to the centerline of State Park Road; 
    Thence northwest along the centerline of State Park Road to the centerline of Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
    Thence west along the centerline of Shawnee Mission Parkway to the center of the intersection of Mission Road and Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(Prior Code, § 4-204; Ord. No. 895) 
Sec. 2-58. - Fourth ward. 
    The fourth ward shall include all that portion of the City lying south of the centerline of 59th Street and west of the centerline of Mission Road. 
(Prior Code, § 4-205; Ord. No. 229) 
Secs. 2-59-2-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Oaths of office, K.S.A. 154-106, 25-2120. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-90. - Appointment of officers. 
    At the first regular meeting of the City Council in February of each year the Mayor shall appoint the following officers: 
    City Administrator to perform the duties set forth in Code Section 2-93. 
    Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court to perform the duties set forth in KSA 12-4106 as it may be amended from time to time or replaced. 
    City Attorney to perform the duties set forth in Code Section 2-92. 
    City Treasurer to perform the duties set forth in Code Sections 2-145 through 2-177. 
    At that same time, the Mayor may also appoint one (1) or more of the following: 
    Special Zoning Counsel to assist the City Attorney with matters relating to zoning and planning including attending all meetings of the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    City Prosecutor to assist the City Attorney by prosecuting all matters that are brought before the Municipal Court. 
    City Prosecutor Pro-Tem to assume the duties of the City Prosecutor when he or she is incapacitated or otherwise unable to perform the duties. 
    Municipal Court Judge Pro-Tem to assume the duties of the Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court when he or she is incapacitated or otherwise unable to perform the duties. 
    City Engineer to consult with the Public Works Director as necessary regarding public works projects and matters effecting City property. 
    Each of the forgoing appointments shall specify whether the appointee is to be a City employee, an independent contractor, or an unpaid volunteer. The consent of the City Council shall be as provided in Charter Ordinance 26. 
(Ord. No. 1686 , § 1, 1-30-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1686 , §§ 1, 2, adopted January 30, 2019, repealed the former § 2-90, and enacted a new § 2-90 as set out herein. The former § 2-90 pertained to failure to approve an appointment and derived from Prior Code § 1-202 and Ord. No. 611. 
Sec. 2-91. - Failure to act or to approve. 
    If the City Council fails to act within thirty (30) days of an appointment, the appointment shall be deemed approved. The City Council shall approve any such appointment unless it makes a specific finding by the passage of a resolution that the appointee is either unqualified or unfit to hold the office. If the City Council disapproves of a required appointment, the Mayor shall appoint another to the position. 
(Ord. No. 1686 , § 3, 1-30-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1686 , §§ 3, 4, adopted January 30, 2019, repealed the former § 2-91, and enacted a new § 2-91 as set out herein. The former § 2-91 pertained to failure to removal of officers and derived from Prior Code § 1-203; Ord. No. 677 and Ord. No. 1365. 
Sec. 2-92. - City Attorney; duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to attend, so far as reasonably possible, all meetings of the City Council, during his term to furnish advice on legal points to the Mayor, City Council, City officers and employees concerning City business; to aid in drawing ordinances; to draw contracts and such other instruments as may be necessary for City business; to attend hearings before the County Commissioners and the State boards when directed by the Mayor and City Council and to represent the City generally in legal matters. 
(Prior Code, § 1-220; Ord. No. 4; Ord. No. 611) 
Sec. 2-93. - City Administrator. 
(a)  Office of City Administrator established. There is hereby created and established the office of City Administrator for the City. 
(b)  Qualifications. The person appointed to the office of City Administrator shall be a graduate of an accredited university or college, majoring in public administration or shall have the equivalent qualifications and experience. 
(c)  Duties. 
(1)  Administrative office. The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative assistant to the Mayor and City Council. Except as otherwise specified by ordinance or by the law of the State of Kansas, the City Administrator shall coordinate and generally supervise the operation of all departments of the City. 
(2)  Purchasing. The City Administrator shall be the purchasing agent for the City and all purchases shall be made under the direction and supervision of the City Administrator, and all purchases shall be made in accordance with purchasing rules and procedures approved by the City Council. 
(3)  Budget. The City Administrator shall be the budget officer of the City in accordance with Kansas statutes and shall assemble estimates of the financial needs and resources of the City for each ensuing year and shall prepare a program of activities within the financial power of the City, embodying in it a budget document with proper supporting schedules and an analysis to be proposed to the Mayor and the City Council for their final approval. 
(4)  Financial reports. The City Administrator shall make monthly reports to the Mayor and City Council relative to the financial condition of the City. The reports shall show the financial conditions of the City in relation to the budget. 
(5)  Annual report. The City Administrator shall prepare and present to the Mayor and the City Council an annual report of the City's affairs, including in the report a summary of reports of department heads and all other reports as the Mayor and City Council may require. 
(6)  Personnel system. The City Administrator shall act as the personnel officer of the City and shall recommend an appropriate employee compensation plan to the Mayor and City Council and administer an appropriate employee compensation plan, as approved by the Mayor and City Council. The City Administrator shall consult with department heads regarding advancements, pay adjustments, and the appointment or removal (in accordance with personnel polices approved by the City Council) of all subordinate employees of the City. No action listed above shall be taken without the approval of the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the appointment and removal of all appointive officials of the City. For purpose of this section, the term "department heads" shall mean the Director of Public Works, Chief of Police, and Director of Parks and Recreation, and shall further include any additional employee or officer that the Governing Body may designate in the future as a "department head." 
(7)  Policy formulation. The City Administrator shall recommend to the Mayor and City Council adoption of all measures as the City Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety, or welfare of the City or for the improvement of administrative services for the City. 
(8)  City Council agenda. The City Administrator shall submit a proposed agenda for each council meeting to the Mayor. 
(9)  Boards and committees. The City Administrator shall work with all City boards and committees to help coordinate the work of each. 
(10)  Attend council meetings. The City Administrator shall attend all meetings of the City Council. 
(11)  Bid specifications. All bid specifications for service and equipment shall be coordinated through the City Administrator in accordance with City Council policy. 
(12)  State and Federal aid program. The City Administrator shall coordinate Federal and State programs that may have application to the City. 
(13)  Conference attendance. The City Administrator shall attend State and regional conferences and programs applicable to his or her office, and the business of the City, whenever the attendance is directed and approved by the City Council and the Mayor. 
(14)  Press release. The City Administrator, in conjunction with the Mayor, shall be responsible for keeping the public informed on the purposes and methods of City government through all available news media. 
(15)  Record keeping. The City Administrator shall keep full and accurate records of administrative actions, and shall safely and properly keep all those records and papers. Such records and papers shall be and remain the property of the City and be open to inspection by the Mayor and City Council at all times. 
(16)  Other duties. The City Administrator shall perform all other duties as may be described or amended in any City Administrator job description or employment contract. 
(d)  Powers. 
(1)  City property. The City Administrator shall have responsibility for all real and personal property of the City and all inventories of that property and upkeep of that property. Personal property may be sold only with approval of the City Council. Real property may be sold only with the approval of the City Council, by resolution or ordinance. 
(2)  Implement administrative policies. The City Administrator shall have the power to prescribe such procedures as are necessary or expedient for the implementation of administrative policies as set forth by the governing body. 
(3)  Coordinate departments. The City Administrator shall have responsibility for coordinating the work of all departments of the City, and at times of an emergency, shall have authority to assign the employees of the City to any department where they are needed for the most effective discharge of the functions of City government. 
(4)  Investigate and report. The City Administrator shall have the power to investigate and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any department of the City under the City Administrator's jurisdiction, and shall report on any condition or fact concerning the City government requested by the Mayor or City Council. 
(5)  Appear before the City Council. The City Administrator shall have the power to appear before and address the City Council at any meeting. 
(6)  City Administrator not to supersede lawful action of the Mayor and/or City Council. At no time shall the duties or powers of the City Administrator supersede the lawful action of the Mayor and/or City Council. 
( Ord. No. 1630 , § 2, 9-12-2016; Ord. No. 1684 , § 1, 1-30-2019) 
Sec. 2-94. - Apppointment or employment in more than one position. 
    The same person may be appointed to more than one (1) appointive office, or employed in more than one (1) department, except that the same person shall not be appointed to incompatible offices. Salaries or wages of that person shall be prorated between the proper funds of the several offices or departments. 
( Ord. No. 1630 , § 3, 9-12-2016) 
Secs. 2-95-2-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-113. - Office hours; records; correspondence; files. 
    The City Clerk shall keep an office open in the City Hall, which office shall be open at the usual business hours observed in the City. He/she shall be custodian of all the City records, books, files, papers, documents and other personal effects belonging to the City not properly pertaining to any other office. He/she shall keep suitable files and records of all the documents, papers, and other effects pertaining to the business of the City, including all correspondence, deeds, contract bids, petitions and similar official documents, as engineering plans and specifications and an official map of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 1-204; Ord. No. 1645 , § 1, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-114. - Meetings; journal; ordinance duties. 
    The City Clerk or his/her designee shall attend all meetings of the Governing Body and the City Council. The City Clerk shall make and keep a record of the proceedings and meetings of the Governing Body and the City Council pertaining to the City's affairs transacted at any such meeting. He/she shall also cause to be published such resolutions, notices and proclamations as may be required by law or by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1-205; Ord. No. 1645 , § 3, 2-13-2017) 
State Law reference- Clerk to keep record of ordinances, K.S.A. 12-3007; publication of ordinances, K.S.A. 12-3008. 
Sec. 2-115. - Seal; records. 
    The City Clerk shall have charge of the Corporate Seal of the City and shall affix the same to the official copy of all ordinances, deeds, contracts, and similar documents required to be authenticated, and he/she shall keep suitable files of all oaths required to be deposited in his office. 
(Prior Code, § 1-206; Ord. No. 1645 , § 5, 2-13-2017) 
State Law reference- Power of clerk to administer oaths, K.S.A. 54-110. 
Sec. 2-116. - Accounting records; funds; levies. 
    The City Clerk or his/her designee shall prepare and keep suitable fiscal accounting records in the form and manner which shall have been approved for minimum accounting standards by the State Municipal Accounting Board. He/she shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, all orders for the purchase of goods and services required by the City and shall make the suitable entries in his books of all such orders and contracts entered into by the City which shall obligate the funds or credit of the City. He/she shall keep a separate account of each of the several funds of the City, whether it be derived from tax money coming to the City or from whatever source derived, and credit all income to the proper fund of the City. The money belonging to one (1) fund shall not be placed to the credit of any other fund or be transferred to another fund unless there is lawful authority for the same and then only in accordance with the directions of the City Council. Each separate tax levy shall constitute a separate fund as provided by law authorizing such levy. 
(Prior Code, § 1-207; Ord. No. 1645 , § 7, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-117. - Budget duties. 
    The City Clerk shall render such assistance as may be required in preparing the annual City budget, any ordinance for the levying of taxes, and shall certify the same to the County Clerk in the form and manner required by law together with a copy of the budget. In addition, a copy of the annual City budget shall be filed in the office of the State Department of Post Audits. At the beginning of the budget year, the City Clerk shall open and keep an account of each fund thereof, showing the total amount appropriated for that fund in the budget, the date, number and amount of each warrant and check drawn thereon. He/she shall keep such fiscal records as may be required to show the outstanding contracts or other obligations against any fund of the budget. 
(Prior Code, § 1-208; Ord. No. 1645 , § 9, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-118. - Claims; financial reports; warrants. 
    The City Clerk shall receive at his/her office all claims against the City for goods or services rendered, and he shall prepare them in suitable form for the consideration of the City Council at its next succeeding meeting. He/she shall prepare appropriation ordinances for the payment of all claims to be allowed. He shall draw warrants or warrant checks only when appropriation to pay the same has been made by ordinance. His/her accounts shall properly show the amounts paid from any fund of the City and the cash balance existing in each fund. He/she shall prepare a report showing the financial condition of the City each month and present the same to the City Council at its first regular meeting of the succeeding month, the amount paid out of any fund and the outstanding claim authorized to be paid out of all funds of the City so that the Governing Body may not create any debts nor authorize the issuance of warrants in violation of the budget law (K.S.A. 79-2925-79-2937). In no event shall the City Clerk draw any warrant or warrant check which shall call for the payment of funds not represented by cash in the City Treasury nor for which the total amount shall be in excess of the amount authorized for the expenses of any such fund by the annual City budget. 
(Prior Code, § 1-209; Ord. No. 1645 , § 11, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-119. - Records appointments; file oaths; bonds. 
    The City Clerk shall record every appointment of office and the date thereof. He/she shall also record the appointment of boards, commissions and committees which the Mayor, the City Council or the Governing Body are authorized to appoint. He/she shall receive, file and preserve all oaths of office, other oaths required and bonds of the City officers required to be given by law or ordinance. He/she shall preserve the same in a suitable file and keep the Governing Body fully advised thereon. 
(Prior Code, § 1-210; Ord. No. 1645 , § 13, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-120. - Bond record. 
    The City Clerk or his/her designee shall keep a fully accurate account of all bonds issued by the City by date, number, amount thereof, rate of interest, number of each coupon, amount of each, where payable, date of maturity, and when canceled upon the return of same to the City. 
(Prior Code, § 1-211; Ord. No. 1645 , § 15, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-121. - Special assessments. 
    The City Clerk or his/her designee shall keep a record of all special assessments whenever the same shall have been made and he/she shall certify said assessments to the County Clerk in the manner provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 1-212; Ord. No. 1645 , § 17, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-122. - Settlement with Treasurer. 
    The City Clerk shall enter in a suitable record under appropriate heading the amounts received by the City Treasurer, as shown by his receipt. The amounts so received, said records and vouchers shall be for reference in the settlements between the City Treasurer and the County Treasurer. 
(Prior Code, § 1-213; Ord. No. 1645 , § 19, 2-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-123. - Federal income tax withholding; other withholding. 
    The City Clerk is hereby designated as the withholding agent of the City for the purposes of the Federal income tax, and the City Clerk shall perform the duties required of withholding agents by the act or any other act requiring withholding from the compensation of any City officer or employee. 
(Prior Code, § 1-214; Ord. No. 1645 , § 20, 2-13-2017) 
Secs. 2-124-2-144. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY TREASURER 

Sec. 2-145. - Receives money belonging to City; taxes. 
    The City Treasurer shall receive from the County Treasurer all monies and evidences of indebtedness collected for and payable to the City as provided by law. He shall keep proper record by funds of all monies received from any source as provided by law and keep a full and accurate record of all monies received and disbursed by him in behalf of the City specifying the time of receipt or disbursement, and from whom received and to whom disbursed on account. He shall publish or cause to be published a quarterly financial statement of the City in the manner and style provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 1-215) 
Sec. 2-146. - Deposits. 
    The City Treasurer shall deposit all public monies coming into his hands in his official capacity or responsibility in any financial institution authorized by existing State statutes as designated from time to time by the City Council and after the depository bank shall have given a bond as provided by law in those instances where a depository of public monies must give security. 
(Prior Code, § 1-216) 
Sec. 2-147. - Disbursements. 
    The City Treasurer shall pay out of the funds of the City upon warrant checks properly signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk and countersigned by him. He shall not knowingly pay any order, warrant or warrant check or other evidence of indebtedness out of the treasury of the City in excess of the funds actually on hand in the treasury at the time for such purpose. No warrant, warrant check or certificate of indebtedness shall be registered or paid by him for any other purpose than for that for which the tax levy is made (where one is made) and no part of any fund shall be diverted in any manner to the payment of claims against the City other than for the purpose which any such fund shall have been created. 
(Prior Code, § 1-217) 
Secs. 2-148-2-177. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-178. - Employee handbook. 
    Employee benefits shall be provided for in the employee handbook as adopted by the City Council. 
Secs. 2-179-2-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-210-2-223. - Reserved. 
Secs. 2-224, 2-225. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1630, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2016, repealed §§ 2-224 and 2-225, which pertained to "City administrator" and Appointment or employment in more than one position", and derived from Ord. No. 1562, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. Similar provisions are codified in §§ 2-93 and 2-94. 
Secs. 2-226, 2-227. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Powers of police, K.S.A. 12-4212, 12-4111, 22-4191. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-228. - Composition. 
    The Police Department of the City shall consist of the Chief of Police and such number of regular police officers and civilian staff as shall be approved by the Police Committee and provided for in the City budget. 
(Prior Code, § 9-101; Ord. No. 1685 , § 1, 1-30-2019) 
Sec. 2-229. - Duties of the Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police shall have supervisory responsibility for the operation of the Department including the power to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of law enforcement within the City. The Chief of Police shall perform such duties and functions as are assigned elsewhere in the Code. 
(Prior Code, § 9-103; Ord. No. 1685 , § 3, 1-30-2019) 
Secs. 2-230-2-251. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Lost and Unclaimed Property 

Sec. 2-252. - Lost and unclaimed property. 
    All personal property of any nature which shall remain unclaimed in the possession of the Police Department for a period of six (6) months, except weapons confiscated pursuant to K.S.A. 21-6307, is hereby determined to be lost and unclaimed property, provided that the City has no knowledge or information as to the identity of the rightful owner, or having received at least thirty (30) days' written notice, the rightful owner neglects and fails to claim same from the City. 
(Prior Code, § 9-201; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 1476) 
Sec. 2-253. - Rights of finder. 
    A finder of lost and unclaimed property that has delivered possession thereof to the City shall be notified by the Police Department that the property is lost and unclaimed and that said finder is entitled to possession thereof. Upon giving of proper receipt, the finder is entitled to be given possession of such lost and unclaimed property. Nothing in this subdivision shall imply that said finder is bound to accept possession of such lost and unclaimed property if he declines to do so. 
(Prior Code, § 9-202; Ord. No. 725) 
Sec. 2-254. - Disposal of lost and unclaimed property. 
    The Police Department may dispose of all lost and unclaimed property, subject to the rights of any finder as provided in this subdivision, by selling same at public auction after first advertising the date and location of such public auction as the City Council may direct. If there is no bid on any item of lost or unclaimed property at the public auction, this shall constitute conclusive evidence that the property is of no value, and the City may dispose of same by donating said property to a recognized public charity. If the City Council determines that the value of the unclaimed property does not justify the expense of a public auction, it may direct donation of said property to a recognized public charity. 
(Prior Code, § 9-203; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 1065) 
Sec. 2-255. - Proceeds. 
    All proceeds received from the sale of lost and unclaimed property, other than firearms, shall be placed in the general fund. 
(Prior Code, § 9-204; Ord. No. 72) 
Sec. 2-256. - Confiscated property. 
    All property confiscated by the Police Department for which the rightful owner cannot be found within six (6) months, except weapons confiscated pursuant to K.S.A. 21-6307, is included within the above definition of unclaimed property. However, nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to give the perpetrator of a crime the status of "finder." 
(Prior Code, § 9-205; Ord. No. 725; Ord. No. 1476) 
Sec. 2-257. - Disposition of weapons. 
(a)  Any stolen weapon that has been seized and detained, when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession, if known. All other weapons confiscated pursuant to K.S.A. 21-6307 or otherwise held by the Police Department, when no longer needed for evidentiary purposes, shall, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be: 
(1)  Destroyed; 
(2)  Forfeited to the Police Department for its use, for sale to a properly licensed Federal firearms dealer, for trading to a properly licensed Federal firearms dealer for other new or used firearms or accessories for use, or for trading to another law enforcement agency for that agency's use; or 
(3)  Forfeited to the State Bureau of Investigation for law enforcement, testing, comparison or destruction by the State Bureau of Investigation Forensic Laboratory. 
(b)  If weapons are sold as authorized by Subsection (a)(2) of this section, the proceeds of the sales shall be credited to the asset seizure and forfeiture fund of the seizing agency. 
(Prior Code, § 9-206; Ord. No. 1476) 
Secs. 2-258-2-277. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Canine Corps 

Sec. 2-278. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions defined in this subdivision shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 9-304; Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 2-279. - Canine Corps. 
    Any dog used, whether owned, leased, rented or borrowed for the purpose of performing duties with the Police Department, shall be commissioned as a member of the Canine Corps and shall perform such duties as may be designated by the Chief of Police or the officer in charge of such unit and who has been designated the responsibility for handling and supervision of such animal. 
(Prior Code, § 9-301; Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 2-280. - Abuse prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to strike, hit, beat, abuse, tease, harass, pet or assault any dog being used for the purpose of performing the duties of a police dog regardless of whether the dog is on duty or off duty. 
(Prior Code, § 9-302; Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 2-281. - Interference prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a dog being used by the Police Department or attempt to interfere with the handler of said dog in such a manner as to inhibit, restrict or deprive said handler of his control of the dog. 
(Prior Code, § 9-303; Ord. No. 752) 
Secs. 2-282-2-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-290. - Composition. 
    The Public Works Department shall consist of the Director of Public Works and such additional staff as shall be approved by the Public Works Committee and provided for in the City budget. 
(Ord. No. 1685 , § 5, 1-30-2019) 
Sec. 2-291. - Duties of the Director of Public Works. 
    The Director of Public Works shall have supervisory responsibility for the operation of the Public Works Department including the power to establish such policies and procedures as are necessary and appropriate for the efficient operation of the Department. The Director of Public Works shall perform such duties and functions as are assigned elsewhere in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1685 , § 5, 1-30-2019) 
Secs. 2-292-2-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-300. - Composition. 
    The Parks and Recreation Department shall consist of the Parks and Recreation Director and such additional staff as shall be approved by the Parks and Recreation Committee and provided for in the City budget. 
(Ord. No. 1685 , § 6, 1-30-2019) 
Sec. 2-301. - Duties of the Parks and Recreation Director. 
    The Parks and Recreation Director shall have supervisory responsibility for the operation of the Parks and Recreation Department including the power to establish such policies and procedures as are necessary and appropriate for the efficient operation of the Department. The Director of Parks and Recreation shall perform such duties and functions as are assigned elsewhere in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 1685 , § 6, 1-30-2019) 
Secs. 2-302-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL COURT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Kansas Code of Procedure for Municipal Courts, K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq.; jurisdiction of Municipal Courts, K.S.A. 12-4103; judge generally, K.S.A. 12-4105; powers and duties of judge, K.S.A. 12-4106; docket, K.S.A. 12-4106; vacancy in office of municipal judge and municipal judge pro temp, K.S.A. 12-4107; bond of Clerk of Municipal Court, K.S.A. 12-4108; supplies, etc., for Municipal Court, K.S.A. 12-4109; City Attorney to prosecute in Municipal Court, K.S.A. 12-4110; powers of law enforcement officers, K.S.A. 12-4111; sentencing, K.S.A. 12-4509. 

Sec. 2-311. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accused person means a person, corporation or other legal entity accused by a complaint of the violation of a City ordinance. 
    Appearance bond means an undertaking, with or without security, entered into by a person in custody by which he binds himself to comply with such conditions as are set forth thereon. 
    Arraignment means the formal act of calling the person accused of violating an ordinance before the Municipal Court to inform him of the offense with which he is charged, to ask him whether he is guilty or not guilty, and, if guilty, to impose sentence. 
    Arrest means the taking of a person into custody in order that he may be forthcoming to answer for the violation of an ordinance. The giving of a notice to appear is not an arrest. 
    Bail means the security given for the purpose of insuring compliance with the terms of an appearance bond. 
    City Attorney means any attorney who represents the City in the prosecution of an accused person for the violation of a City ordinance. 
    Complaint means a sworn written statement of the essential facts constituting a violation of an ordinance. 
    Custody means the restraint of a person pursuant to an arrest. 
    Detention means the temporary restraint of a person by a law enforcement officer. 
    Law enforcement officer means any person who by virtue of his office or public employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order and to make arrests for violation of the State laws or ordinances of any municipality thereof. 
    Notice to appear means a written notice to a person accused by complaint of having violated a City ordinance to appear at a stated time and place to answer to the charge of the complaint. 
    Subpoena means a process issued by the Court to cause a witness to appear and give testimony at a time and place therein specified. 
    Warrant means a written order made by a Municipal Judge directed to any law enforcement officer commanding such officer to arrest the person named or described thereon (K.S.A. 12-4113). 
(Prior Code, § 8-112) 
Sec. 2-312. - Statutes incorporated by reference. 
    The "Kansas Code of Procedure for Municipal Courts," being K.S.A. ch. 12, arts. 41 to 47, inclusive, (K.S.A. 12-4101 et seq.), is by reference incorporated in this article and together with the other provisions of this article shall be known as "Fairway Municipal Court Code." 
(Prior Code, § 8-113; Ord. No. 1464) 
Sec. 2-313. - Schedule of costs and fees. 
(a)  There is hereby established the following fee schedule for the administration of justice in the Municipal Court of the City: 
(1)  Costs may be assessed against each accused person in any case in which the accused person has failed to appear in court or to satisfy the financial or other requirements of the Court's order. These costs shall be in addition to the reinstatement fee collected by the Court pursuant to K.S.A. 8-2110(c) and amendments thereto. The court may assess these costs for each case in which the person failed to appear or to make satisfaction regardless of the disposition of the case for which the complaint was originally issued; 
(2)  If, upon application of a defendant, the Municipal Court Judge appoints counsel for the defendant, a fee shall be assessed against the defendant equal to the actual cost of such defense or such lesser amount as the Court determines, based upon the evidence before it, that the defendant is financially able to pay; provided that, if it is later found that the defendant intentionally provided untrue information in or in support of the application for a appointment of counsel, said fee shall be increased to the actual cost of defense regardless of the outcome of the case; 
(3)  A fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be assessed against a defendant upon conviction or diversion in each case in which said defendant is incarcerated pursuant to an order of the Municipal Court Judge; 
(4)  A fingerprinting fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be assessed against a defendant in each case in which the defendant has been convicted of violating municipal ordinance provisions that prohibit conduct comparable to a Class A or B misdemeanor or assault as defined in K.S.A. 21-3408 and amendments thereto under the State Criminal Statutes; 
(5)  Costs and fees shall be assessed as may be required by State statutes; 
(6)  Additional court costs and fees may be assessed by the Municipal Court for service of process, for transcripts and depositions, and for expenses incurred in serving a warrant. 
(b)  These costs and fees shall be assessed as part of the judgment and shall be collected by the Municipal Court Clerk/Municipal Court Administrator. 
(c)  The costs and fees assessed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the fine imposed. 
(Prior Code, § 8-111; Ord. No. 1464) 
Sec. 2-314. - Contempt of court. 
    Contempts of court are divided into two (2) classes, direct and indirect, and shall be proceeded against only as prescribed in this section. 
(1)  Generally. Contempts committed during the sitting of the Court or of a Judge at chambers, in its or his presence, are direct contempts. All others are indirect contempts. 
(2)  Direct contempts . A direct contempt may be punished summarily, without written accusation against the person arraigned, but if the Court for Judge in chambers shall adjudge guilty thereof, a judgment shall be entered of record, in which shall be specified the conduct constituting such contempt, with a statement of whatever defense or extenuation of the excused offered thereto, and the sentence of the Court thereon. 
(3)  Indirect contempts. 
a.  Upon the return of an officer on process or an affidavit duly filed showing any person guilty of indirect contempt, lawful process may issue, and such person be arrested and brought before the Court or Judge in chambers; and thereupon a written accusation setting forth succinctly and clearly the facts alleged to constitute such contempt shall be filed, and the accused required to answer the same, by an order which shall fix the time therefore and also the time and place for hearing the matter; and the Court or Judge in chambers shall, on proper showing, extend the time so as to give the accused a reasonable opportunity to purge himself of such contempt. 
b.  After the answer of the accused, or if he refuses or fails to answer, the Court or Judge may proceed at the time so fixed to hear and determine such accusation upon such testimony as shall be produced. If the accused answers, the trial shall proceed upon testimony produced as in criminal cases, and the accused shall be entitled to be confronted with the witnesses against him; but such trial shall be by the Court or Judge. If the accused is found guilty, judgment shall be entered accordingly, prescribing the punishment. 
(4)  Penalty . Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior Code, § 8-114; Ord. No. 700) 
Sec. 2-315. - Failure to appear. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to appear before the Municipal Court of the City for trial or other proceedings prior to and/or after a conviction of a public offense by a person who has been released on an appearance bond by said Court; said offense will be known as failure to appear. 
(1)  Failure to appear. Incurring forfeiture of an appearance bond and failing to surrender oneself within thirty (30) days following the date of such forfeiture by one who is charged with a public offense, who has been released on bond for appearance before the Municipal Court of the City for trial or other proceedings prior to conviction, or who incurs a forfeiture of an appearance bond and fails to surrender oneself within thirty (30) days after one's conviction of a public offense has become final. 
(2)  Release on bond. Any person, who is released upon his own recognizance, without surety, who fails to appear in response to a summons or traffic citation, or who fails to appear on his promise to appear, is a person released on bond for appearance within the meaning of this section. 
(3)  Penalty . Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior Code, § 8-115; Ord. No. 722) 
Sec. 2-316. - Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
    The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall make reports to the Judicial Administrator and furnish the information when requested by him or a Departmental Justice on such forms furnished by the Judicial Administrator and approved by the Supreme Court. 
(Prior Code, § 8-106) 
State Law reference- Duties of clerk of court, K.S.A. 12-4108. 
Secs. 2-317-2-335. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-336. - Fees and charges. 
    Whenever in this Code it is provided that fees or charges are as established or provided by resolution, or by ordinance or by a fee schedule, or when language substantially similar to foregoing is used in this Code, such language shall mean that the fees or charges may be established by resolution, ordinance or any other method not prohibited by law. 
Secs. 2-337-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Investment of idle funds, K.S.A. 12-1675. 

Sec. 2-361. - Authority to invest. 
    Temporarily idle monies not currently needed may be invested in accordance with the procedure provided for in K.S.A. 12-1675, which is incorporated by reference in this division as if set out in full. 
(Prior Code, § 1-501) 
Sec. 2-362. - Procedure and restrictions. 
    The City Treasurer shall periodically report to the Governing Body as to the amount of monies available for investment and the period of time such amounts will be available for investment, and shall submit such recommendations as deemed necessary for the efficient and safe management of the City finances. The recommendations of the City Treasurer shall provide for an investment program which shall so limit the amounts invested and schedule the maturities of investments so that the City will at all times have sufficient monies available on demand deposit to ensure prompt payment of all City obligations. 
(Prior Code, § 1-502; Ord. No. 373, § 2) 
Sec. 2-363. - Sale or transfer. 
    If, in order to maintain sufficient monies on demand deposit in any fund, as provided in Section 2-362, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds, the City Clerk and City Treasurer may transfer said securities to any other fund in which there are temporarily idle monies, or shall sell any such securities and for such purpose they shall have authority to make any necessary written directions, endorsements or assignments for and on behalf of the City. Any such transfers or sales shall be reported in writing to the Governing Body at the next regular meeting of the City Council. 
(Prior Code, § 1-503; Ord. No. 373, § 5) 
Sec. 2-364. - Earnings and records. 
    The interest or other earnings from investments made pursuant to this division shall be credited pro rata to the fund from which the investments were made and shall be used, insofar as possible, to relieve the ad valorem tax levies of the City. The City Treasurer shall maintain a complete and detailed record at all times of all investments made pursuant to this division. 
(Prior Code, § 1-504; Ord. No. 373, § 5) 
Secs. 2-365-2-386. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIENS ON PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE PROCEEDS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal claims on fire insurance police proceeds, K.S.A. 12-3901 et seq. 

Sec. 2-387. - Insurance proceeds. 
    If fire, explosion or windstorm causes damage to a structure that is covered by fire, explosion or windstorm insurance and the covered claim payment is in excess of seventy-five percent (75%) of the face value of the policy covering the structure, then the insurance provider shall be required to pay to the City fifteen percent (15%) of the claim payment. The insurer shall first pay all amounts due to the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the structure pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto and then shall withhold from the covered claim payment the sums required to be paid to the City. Such payments shall be made to the City on or before the date any monies are released by the insurer to any party or within thirty (30) days of the incident resulting in the claim, whichever is earlier in time; the payment shall be made by check or money order made payable to the City, no post-dating of the check will be allowed, and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the City Clerk 4210 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Suite 100, Fairway, Kansas 66205, along with a statement explaining the reason for payment and giving the address of the property involved. All such funds received by the City Clerk shall be placed in an interest-bearing account of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 6-601) 
Sec. 2-388. - Proof of repairing or rebuilding. 
    In lieu of the payment of proceeds required in Section 2-387, the insured may present satisfactory proof to the City Building Inspector that the insured has or will remove debris and repair, rebuild or otherwise make the premises safe and secure. Upon presentation of such sufficient evidence, the City Building Inspector along with the City Clerk shall certify that adequate proof of repairing or rebuilding has been given and that the payment of insurance proceeds to the City shall not be paid, subject to any lien created by the City should the insured fail to rebuild, repair or secure the property as presented. The insured shall be responsible for presenting such certificate to the insurer. The insured, in seeking such certificate, shall present a timetable showing when repairs or rebuilding will be completed; render architectural or engineer plans subject to approval by the City Building Inspector, showing the method, manner and materials to be used in repairing or rebuilding, and any other evidence deemed necessary by the City Building Inspector to demonstrate that the repairs or rebuilding will be completed in a timely and lawful manner. Failure of the insured to comply with the certificate shall result in institution of proceedings for abatement. 
(Prior Code, § 6-602) 
Sec. 2-389. - Failure to pay insurance proceeds or to obtain a certificate. 
    It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, agency or entity to fail to provide the payment of insurance proceeds as required by this division, unless a certificate in lieu of payment proceeds has been obtained through the City. 
(Prior Code, § 6-604; Ord. No. 1044) 
Secs. 2-390-2-406. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC RECORDS ACCESS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Open Records Act, K.S.A. 45-215 et seq. 

Sec. 2-407. - Statement of purpose; review. 
    It is the purpose of this article to establish reasonable fees and charges for the provisions of access to or copies of open public records in the possession of the City to avoid the necessity of using general public funds of the City to subsidize special services and benefits to a record requestor. The Official Record Custodian shall periodically recommend to the Governing Body such changes in this article as may be necessary to secure this purpose. 
(Prior Code, § 1-601; Ord. No. 810) 
Sec. 2-408. - Inspection fee. 
    Inspection fees for open public records shall be as follows: 
(1)  Where a request has been made for inspection of any open public record which is readily available to the Record Custodian, there shall be no inspection fee charged to the requestor. 
(2)  In all cases not covered by Subsection (1) of this section, a record inspection fee shall be charged at the rate established by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 1-602; Ord. No. 810) 
State Law reference- Inspection fees, K.S.A. 45-218. 
Sec. 2-409. - Copying fee. 
    The fee for photocopying open public records shall be as follows: 
(1)  In the amount established by ordinance, for such fee to cover the costs of labor, materials and equipment. 
(2)  The fees provided in this section shall not apply to photocopying ordinances to permit applications, in that such fees are included in the permit fee. 
(3)  For photocopying any public record which cannot be reproduced by the City's photocopying equipment, the requestor shall be charged the actual cost to the City, including staff time, in reproducing such records. 
(Prior Code, § 1-603; Ord. No. 810; Ord. No. 1085) 
State Law reference- Fees for copies of records, K.S.A. 45-219. 
Sec. 2-410. - Prepayment of fees. 
    Prepayment of fees may be required as follows: 
(1)  A Record Custodian may demand prepayment of the fees established by ordinance whenever he believes this to be in the best interest of the City. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any overage or underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies. 
(2)  Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required whenever, in the best estimate of the Record Custodian, such fees are estimated to exceed five dollars ($5.00). 
(3)  Where prepayment has been demanded by the Record Custodian, no record shall be made available to the requestor until such prepayment has been made. 
(Prior Code, § 1-604; Ord. No. 810) 
Sec. 2-411. - Payment. 
    All fees charged under this article shall be paid to the Record Custodian. 
(Prior Code, § 1-605; Ord. No. 810) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Intoxicating liquor and beverages, K.S.A. ch. 41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but shall not include any cereal malt beverage. 
    Caterer means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public, but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
    Cereal malt beverage means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute or any flavored malt beverage, but does not include any such liquor which is more than three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) alcohol by weight. 
    Class A club means a premises which is owned or leased by a corporation, partnership, business trust or association and which is operated thereby as a bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans' club, as determined by the State, for the exclusive use of the corporate stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (referred to as members), and their families and guests accompanying them. 
    Class B club means a premises operated for profit by a corporation, partnership or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment. 
    Club means a Class A or Class B club. 
    Drinking establishment means premises which may be open to the general public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold. 
    Temporary permit means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws of the State, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell or serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on unlicensed premises, open to the public. 
(Prior Code, § 3-101; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 41-102. 
Sec. 3-2. - Restriction on location. 
    Restriction on location as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold or served by a person holding a license or permit from the City whose place of business or other premises are located within five hundred feet (500') of any church, public school or public park (said distance to be measured from the nearest property line of such church, public school or public park), to the nearest property line of such business or other premises. 
(2)  The distance location of Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to a club, drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license or permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from the City Council. The City Council shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing and a finding by the City Council that the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety. 
(3)  No license or permit shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic liquor if the building or use does not meet the zoning ordinance requirements of the City or conflicts with other City laws, including building and health codes. 
(Prior Code, § 3-102; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Location restrictions, K.S.A. 31-710. 
Sec. 3-3. - Minors on premises. 
    Regulations relating to minors on premises are as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain on any premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed for on-premises consumption, or where a caterer or temporary permit holder is serving alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the operator, person in charge or licensee of any premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor or a caterer or temporary permit holder who is serving alcoholic liquor to permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to remain on the premises. 
(3)  This section shall not apply if the person under the age of twenty-one (21) years is accompanied by his parent or guardian, or if the licensed or permitted premises derives not more than fifty percent (50%) of its gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(Prior Code, § 3-103; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Sales of alcohol to minors, K.S.A. 21-5607; allowing consumption of possession of alcohol by minors, K.S.A. 41-2615. 
Sec. 3-4. - Consumption on public property. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to sell, serve, dispense or consume any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage in or upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, parkway, right-of-way, parking lot or other such similar public place open to use by the public or where the public may congregate, whether owned publicly or privately, or within any vehicle in or upon such place. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Peterson Park, including but not limited to the large shelter, multi-purpose rooms and the Shawnee Indian Mission State Historic Site, when managed by the City, which are located in the City, provided that the sale, serving, dispensing and consumption is in accordance with terms and conditions outlined in the temporary alcohol beverage permit application, and further provided the Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee does not conclude the activity would be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. 
b.  City-sponsored or other City approved events, provided that the sale, serving, dispensing and consumption are in accordance with written standards designed for each specific event approved by the Parks and Recreation Director or his designee. 
(2)  Any other exceptions to the prohibitions of this section must be presented to the Parks and Recreation Director or his designee and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior Code, § 3-104; Ord. No. 860; Ord. No. 1558, § 1, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1629 , § 1, 9-12-2016) 
State Law reference- Consumption of alcoholic liquor in public, K.S.A. 41-719. 
Sec. 3-5. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00); 
(2)  Imprisonment of not more than one hundred seventy-nine (179) days; 
(3)  Both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Additionally, if a licensee or permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this article, the City Council, upon five (5) days' written notice to the person holding such license or permit to sell cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended, for a period of not more than thirty (30) days, such license or permit. 
(Prior Code, § 3-107; Ord. No. 967) 
Secs. 3-6-3-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Drinking establishments, K.S.A. 21-2601 et seq.; local ordinances regulating drinking establishments, K.S.A. 41-2631. 

Sec. 3-29. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person granted a drinking establishment license by the State to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the City without first obtaining a City license from the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 3-201; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-30. - License fee. 
    Regulations relating to the license fee are as follows: 
(1)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount as established by ordinance on each drinking establishment located in the City which has a drinking establishment license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original State license and within five (5) days after any renewal of a State license. 
(2)  All applications for new or renewal City licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a State license, payment of the City license fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a City license for the period covered by the State license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the City. 
(3)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(4)  Every licensee shall cause the City drinking establishment license to be placed in plain view next to or below the State license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3-202; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, K.S.A. 41-2622. 
Sec. 3-31. - Business regulations. 
    Regulations pertaining to this article are as follows: 
(1)  A drinking establishment licensed under the provisions of this article shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day. 
(2)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3-203; Ord. No. 860; Ord. No. 1288) 
State Law reference- Hours of operation, K.S.A. 41-2614. 
Sec. 3-32. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private club license by the State to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the City without first obtaining a local license from the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 3-301; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-33. - Penalty. 
    If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, the City Council, upon five (5) days' written notice to the person holding such license to sell alcoholic liquor, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than thirty (30) days such license and the individual holding the license may be charged in Municipal Court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City and upon conviction shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00); 
(2)  Imprisonment in jail for not more than one hundred seventy-nine (179) days; or 
(3)  Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed Subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 3-304; Ord. No. 860) 
Secs. 3-34-3-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE CLUBS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Drinking establishments, K.S.A. 21-2601 et seq.; local ordinances regulating drinking establishments, K.S.A. 41-2631. 

Sec. 3-53. - License fee. 
    Provisions relating to license fees as used in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee on each private club located in the City which has a private club license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original State license and within five (5) days after any renewal of a State license. The City license fee for a Class A or Class B club shall be as established by ordinance. 
(2)  All applications for new or renewal City licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a State license, payment of the City license fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a City license for the period covered by the State license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the City. 
(3)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the State license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(4)  Every licensee shall cause the City club license to be placed in plain view next to or below the State license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3-302; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, K.S.A. 41-2622. 
Sec. 3-54. - Business regulations. 
    Provisions as relate to business regulations as used in this article are as follows: 
(1)  A club licensed under the provisions of this article shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day. 
(2)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises. 
(3)  No club membership shall be sold to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Prior Code, § 3-303; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-55. - Penalty. 
    If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, the City Council, upon five (5) days' written notice to the person holding such caterer's license to sell alcoholic liquor, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended for a period of not more than thirty (30) days and the individual holding the license may be charged in Municipal Court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor laws of the City and upon conviction shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00); 
(2)  Imprisonment in jail for not more than one hundred seventy-nine (179) days; or 
(3)  Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed Subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 3-405; Ord. No. 860) 
Secs. 3-56-3-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CATERERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Sales by the drink, K.S.A. 41-2601 et seq.; caterers, K.S.A. 41-2643, 41-2644. 

Sec. 3-83. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the state as a caterer to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink, to sell or serve any liquor by the drink within the City without obtaining a local caterer's license from the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 3-401; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Caterer's license, K.S.A. 41-2643. 
Sec. 3-84. - License fees. 
    Provisions relating to license fees as used in this article are as follows: 
(1)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount as established by ordinance on each caterer doing business in the City who has a caterer's license issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original State license and within five (5) days after any renewal of a State license. 
(2)  All applications for new or renewal City licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. Upon presentation of a State license, payment of the City license fee and the license application, the City Clerk shall issue a City license for the period covered by the State license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the City. 
(3)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the State license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(4)  Every licensee shall cause the caterer license to be placed in plain view on any premises within the City where the caterer is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3-402; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- License fees, K.S.A. 41-2622. 
Sec. 3-85. - Business regulations. 
    Provisions relating to business regulations as used in this article are as follows: a caterer licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to the following 2:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Prior Code, § 3-403; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-86. - Notice to Chief of Police. 
    Prior to any event at which a caterer will sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, the caterer shall provide written notice to the Chief of Police at least ten (10) days prior to the event if the event will take place within the City. The notice shall contain the exact location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the exact date and times the caterer will be serving. 
(Prior Code, § 3-404; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-87. - Penalty. 
    If the permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this article, the City Council may revoke such temporary permit, and the individual holding the permit may be charged in Municipal Court with a violation of the alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage laws of the City and upon conviction shall be punished by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00); 
(2)  Imprisonment in jail for not more than one hundred seventy-nine (179) days; or 
(3)  Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed Subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 3-505; Ord. No. 860) 
Secs. 3-88-3-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TEMPORARY PERMITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Temporary permits, K.S.A. 41-2645. 

Sec. 3-117. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person granted a temporary permit by the State to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage within the City without first obtaining a local temporary permit from the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 3-501; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-118. - Permit fee. 
    Provisions relating to permit fees as used in this article are as follows: 
(1)  There is hereby levied a temporary permit fee in the amount established by ordinance on each group or individual holding a temporary permit issued by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control authorizing sales within the City, which fee shall be paid before the event is begun under the State permit. 
(2)  Every temporary permit holder shall cause the temporary permit receipt to be placed in plain view on any premises within the City where the holder of the temporary permit is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage for consumption on the premises. 
(Prior Code, § 3-502; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-119. - City temporary permit. 
    Provisions relating to City temporary permits are as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an event under a State-issued temporary permit without first applying for a local temporary permit at least two (2) days before the event. Written application for the local temporary permit shall be made to the City Clerk two (2) days before the event and shall clearly state: 
a.  The name of the applicant; 
b.  The group for which the event is planned; 
c.  The location of the event; 
d.  The date and time of the event; and 
e.  Any anticipated need for police, fire or other municipal services. 
(2)  Upon presentation of a State temporary permit, payment of the City's temporary permit fee and the written application as provided for in Subsection (1) of this section, the City Clerk shall issue a local temporary permit to the applicant if there are no conflicts with the zoning ordinance or any other ordinances of the City. 
(3)  The City Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police whenever a temporary permit has been issued and forward a copy of the permit and application to the Chief of Police. 
(Prior Code, § 3-503; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-120. - Permit regulations. 
    Provisions relating to permit regulations as used in this article are as follows: a temporary permit holder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. at any event for which a temporary permit has been issued. 
(Prior Code, § 3-504; Ord. No. 860) 
Secs. 3-121-3-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Cereal malt beverages, K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq.; local regulation of cereal malt beverages, K.S.A. 41-2728. 

Sec. 3-139. - License required of retailers. 
    Provisions regarding licenses required of retailers are as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any cereal malt beverage at retail without a license for each place of business where cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, having a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, to sell any cereal malt beverage in any other manner. 
(Prior Code, § 3-601; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-140. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license shall make an application to the City Council and accompany the application with the required license fee for each place of business for which the person desires the license. The application shall be verified upon a form prepared by the Attorney General of the State, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and residence of the applicant and how long he has resided within the State; 
(2)  The particular place for which a license is desired; 
(3)  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is located; 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and is not less than twenty-one (21) years of age and that he has not within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or has been adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States. 
(b)  Each application for a general retailer's license shall be accompanied by a certificate from the City or County Health Officer certifying that he has inspected the premises to be licensed and that the same comply with the health code and/or ordinances of the City. 
(c)  Each application for a general retailer's license must be accompanied by a certificate from the City Fire Chief certifying that he has inspected the premises to be licensed and that the same comply with the fire code and/or ordinances of the City. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by a statement, signed by the applicant, authorizing any governmental agency to provide the City with any information pertinent to the application. One (1) copy of such application shall immediately be transmitted to the Chief of Police for investigation of the applicant. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to investigate such applicant to determine whether he is qualified as a licensee under the provisions of this article. The Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk not later than five (5) working days subsequent to the receipt of such application. The application shall be scheduled for consideration by the City Council at the earliest meeting consistent with current notification requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 3-602; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 41-2702. 
Sec. 3-141. - License application procedures. 
    Provisions regarding procedures for making license application are as follows: 
(1)  All applications for a new or renewed cereal malt beverage licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk at least ten (10) days in advance of the City Council meeting at which they will be considered; 
(2)  The City Clerk shall notify the holder of an existing license thirty (30) days in advance of its expiration; 
(3)  The City Clerk shall provide copies of all applications to the Police Department, to the Fire Department, and to the Health Department, when they are received. The Police Department shall run a records check on all applicants and the Fire Department and Health Department will inspect the premises in accordance with City fire codes and/or ordinances. The Departments will then recommend approval, or disapproval, of applications within five (5) working days of the Departments' receipt of the application; 
(4)  The Governing Body will not consider any application for a new or renewed license that has not been submitted ten (10) days in advance and been reviewed by the City departments in Subsection (3) of this section; 
(5)  An applicant who does not hold a cereal malt beverage license in the City shall attend the Governing Body meeting when the application for a new license will be considered. 
(Prior Code, § 3-603; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-142. - License granted. 
    Provisions regarding the granting or denial of a license are as follows: 
(1)  The journal of the City Council meeting shall show the action taken on the application; 
(2)  If the license is granted, the City Clerk shall issue the license which shall show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued; 
(3)  No license shall be transferred to another licensee; 
(4)  If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately returned to the person who has made application. 
(Prior Code, § 3-604; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-143. - License to be posted. 
    Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 3-605; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-144. - License, disqualification. 
    No license shall be issued to the following: 
(1)  A person who has not been a resident in good faith of the State for at least one (1) year immediately preceding application and a resident of the County for at least six (6) months prior to filing of such application; 
(2)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States; 
(3)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides; 
(4)  A person who, within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of application, has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, or has been adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States; 
(5)  A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall otherwise be qualified to obtain a license; 
(6)  A corporation if any manager, officer or director thereof or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than nonresidence within the City or County; 
(7)  A corporation if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock, of a corporation which: 
a.  Has had a retailer's license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708; or 
b.  Has been convicted of a violation of the drinking establishment act or the cereal malt beverage laws of the State; 
(8)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee; 
(9)  A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer's license for any reason other than citizenship, retailer residency requirements or age, except that this subsection shall not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal license; 
(10)  A person whose spouse has been convicted of a felony or other crime which would disqualify a person from licensure under this section and such felony or other crime was committed during the time that the spouse held a license under K.S.A. ch. 41, art. 27 (K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq.). 
(Prior Code, § 3-606; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 41-2703. 
Sec. 3-145. - Restriction upon location. 
    Provisions regarding restriction upon location are as follows: 
(1)  No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any cereal malt beverage on premises which are located in areas not zoned for such purpose; 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to sell or dispense at retail any cereal malt beverage at any place within the City limits that is within a one hundred fifty (150) foot radius of any church, school or library; 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment holding a private club license issued by the State; 
(4)  The distance limitation of Subsection (2) of this section shall not apply to any establishment holding a cereal malt beverage license issued by the City when the licensee has petitioned for and received a waiver of the distance limitation. The City Council shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing. 
(Prior Code, § 3-607; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-146. - License fee. 
    The license fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  General retailer . For each place of business selling cereal malt beverages at retail for consumption on the premises, the amount established by ordinance; 
(2)  Limited retailer . For each place of business selling only at retail cereal malt beverages in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, the amount established by ordinance. The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of the year in which the application is made, and the licensee shall only be authorized to operate under the license for the remainder of the calendar year in which the license is issued. 
(Prior Code, § 3-608; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- License fee, K.S.A. 41-2703. 
Sec. 3-147. - Suspension of license by Chief of Police. 
    The Chief of Police, upon five (5) days' written notice, shall have the authority to suspend such license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, for any violation of the provisions of this article or other laws pertaining to cereal malt beverages, which violation does not in his judgment justify a recommendation of revocation. The licensee may appeal such order of suspension to the Governing Body within seven (7) days from the date of such order. 
(Prior Code, § 3-609; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-148. - License suspension/revocation by City Council. 
    The City Council, upon five (5) days' written notice to a person holding a license to sell cereal malt beverages, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended such for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false information in the application therefor; 
(2)  If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article, K.S.A. ch. 41, art. 27 (K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq.) or any rules or regulations made by the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control or has become ineligible to obtain a license under this article; 
(3)  Drunkenness of a person holding such license or permitting any intoxicated person to remain in the licensed premises; 
(4)  The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under the legal age for consumption; 
(5)  For permitting any gambling in or upon any premises licensed under this article; 
(6)  There has been a violation of K.S.A. 21-4106 or 21-4107, prior to their repeal, or K.S.A. 21-6204, and amendments thereto, in or upon the licensee's place of business; 
(7)  The licensee has been convicted of a violation of the Beer and Cereal Malt Beverage Keg Registration Act (K.S.A. 41-2901 et seq.); 
(8)  For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in any premises licensed under this article or brought into the premises for this purpose; 
(9)  For the employment of any person under the age established by the State for employment involving dispensing cereal malt beverages; 
(10)  For the employment or continuation in employment of a person in connection with the sale, serving or dispensing of cereal malt beverages if the licensee knows such person has been, within the preceding two (2) years, adjudged guilty of a felony or of any violation of the intoxicating liquor laws of this State, another state or the United States; 
(11)  For the sale or possession of, or for permitting the use or consumption of alcoholic liquor within or upon any premises licensed under this article; 
(12)  The nonpayment of any license fees; 
(13)  If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under any alcoholic liquor, private club, or drinking establishment ordinance of the City; 
(14)  The provisions of Subsections (8) and (11) of this section shall not apply if such place of business is also currently licensed as a private club. 
(Prior Code, § 3-610; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 41-2708. 
Sec. 3-149. - License suspension/revocation; appeal. 
    The licensee, within twenty (20) days after the order of the City Council revoking any license, may appeal to the District Court of the County and the District Court shall proceed to hear such appeal as though such Court had original jurisdiction in the matter. Any appeal taken under this section shall not suspend the order of revocation of the license of any licensee. 
(Prior Code, § 3-611; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, K.S.A. 41-2708. 
Sec. 3-150. - Change of location. 
    If a licensee desires to change the location of his place of business, he shall make an application to the City Council showing the same information relating to the proposed location as in the case of an original application. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee established by ordinance. If the application is in proper form and the location is not in a prohibited zone and all other requirements relating to such place of business are met, a new license shall be issued for the new location for the balance of the year for which a current license is held by the licensee. 
(Prior Code, § 3-612; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-151. - Wholesalers and/or distributors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler and/or distributor, his or its agents or employees, to sell and/or deliver cereal malt beverages within the City, to a person authorized under this article to sell the same within the City unless such wholesaler and/or distributor has first secured a license from the State authorizing such sales. 
(Prior Code, § 3-613; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-152. - Business regulations. 
    It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations: 
(1)  The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at all times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business; 
(2)  The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Police and Health Officers of the City, County and State; 
(3)  Except as provided by Subsection (4) of this section, no cereal malt beverages may be sold or dispensed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to the following morning at 9:00 a.m., or consumed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to the following morning at 9:00 a.m., or on Sunday, except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises, and which derives not less than thirty percent (30%) of its gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises. Closing hours for clubs shall conform to K.S.A. 41-2614; 
(4)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. ch. 41, art. 27 (K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq.), and licensed as a club by the State; 
(5)  The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under a license issued by the State shall be open to the police and not to the public; 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been issued; 
(7)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has been issued; 
(8)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit the sale of cereal malt beverage to any person under the legal age for consumption; 
(9)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued; 
(10)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of business or brought in for such purpose; 
(11)  No licensee shall employ any person who has been adjudged guilty of a felony. 
(Prior Code, § 3-614; Ord. No. 860; Ord. No. 1060) 
Sec. 3-153. - Sanitary conditions required. 
    All parts of the licensed premises, including furnishings and equipment, shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from flies, rodents and vermin at all times. The licensed premises shall have at least one (1) restroom for each sex easily accessible at all times to its patrons and employees. The restrooms shall be equipped with at least one (1) lavatory with hot and cold running water, be well-lighted, and be furnished at all times with paper towels or other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities which shall be of sanitary design and readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing and toilet paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste material and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. The restrooms shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and free from offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the City or County Health Officer or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 3-615; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 3-154. - Minors on premises. 
    Provisions relating to minors on premises are as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain on any premises where the sale of cereal malt beverages is licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  This section shall not apply if the person under twenty-one (21) years of age is an employee of the licensed establishment, or is accompanied by his parent or guardian, or if the licensed establishment derives not more than fifty percent (50%) of its gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(Prior Code, § 3-616; Ord. No. 860) 
State Law reference- Sales of alcohol to minors, K.S.A. 21-5607; allowing consumption of possession of alcohol by minors, K.S.A. 41-2615. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Pet animals, K.S.A. 47-1701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any living organism which is endowed with the power of voluntary motion, excluding human beings. 
    Electronic fence means an electronic device buried in the ground which is used in conjunction with an electronic collar on an animal to control the movement of the animal by emitting an electric shock when the animal approaches the buried device. 
    Fowl means a bird that is customarily used as food or hunted as game, including, but not limited to, those of the order Galliformes . 
    Owning, keeping or harboring means encouraging any animal to habitually remain in or upon one's property by means of restraint or by providing food for said animal, provided that the term "owning," "keeping" or "harboring" shall not include the maintenance of a common bird feeder. 
(Prior Code, § 2-101; Ord. No. 611) 
Sec. 4-2. - Animal Control Officer. 
    The appointment of the Animal Control Officer and the duties of that office shall be as follows: 
(1)  Appointment . In the event the City is not a member of an animal control commission, the Mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the Council, some suitable person to be designated as an Animal Control Officer. 
(2)  Duties . It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer, his deputies and assistants, and under the direction of the Chief of Police, to assist in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 2-102; Ord. No. 611) 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping of animal prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal within the corporate limits of the City with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Dogs ( Canis Familiaries ). 
(2)  Cats ( Felis Catus ). 
(3)  Fish. 
(4)  Amphibians less than one foot (1') in length. 
(5)  Non-poisonous and non-constricting reptiles less than three feet (3') in length. 
(6)  Birds customarily kept in the home, excluding fowl and pigeons. 
(7)  Rodents weighing three pounds (3 lbs.) or less. 
(8)  Hares. 
(Prior Code, § 2-103; Ord. No. 311) 
Sec. 4-4. - Number of dogs or cats limited. 
    The owning, harboring or keeping of more than three (3) dogs over six (6) months of age or more than three (3) cats over six (6) months of age upon any property in the City shall be deemed a nuisance per se. 
(Prior Code, § 2-207; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 1019; Ord. No. 1268; Ord. No. 1330) 
Sec. 4-5. - Permission. 
(a)  The owner or keeper may apply to the City Council for formal permission to keep an animal not otherwise allowed by Sections 4-3 and 4-4 by submitting an application together with the required application fee as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance, and adequately showing that the premises where the animal will be kept will not constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Any variation from Subsection (a) of this section requires approval from the City Council. 
(c)  Permission granted in accordance with this section is specific to the animal which is the subject of the request for permission. 
(d)  Permission granted in accordance with this section shall be in addition to, and conditional upon, the issuance of a license to each dog owned, harbored or kept upon any property in the City, in accordance with Section 4-32. 
(e)  The City Council may revoke permission granted in accordance with this section at any time. 
(Prior Code, § 2-207; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 1019; Ord. No. 1268; Ord. No. 1330) 
Sec. 4-6. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 2-105; Ord. No. 611) 
Secs. 4-7-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-31. - Inoculation required. 
(a)  Inoculation against rabies shall be required for all animals of the class mammalian , except gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice, rabbits and rats whether licensed or not when the animal is owned, harbored, kept or sheltered within the City limits. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, harborer, keeper or shelterer to maintain a valid inoculation certificate against rabies. Proof of valid rabies inoculation must be produced upon request of the Animal Control Officer or a police officer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-202; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 1267) 
Sec. 4-32. - Licensing of dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person keeping or harboring in the City any dog over six (6) months of age to procure a license therefor from the Office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  For the issuance of each license provided for in this article, the keeper or harborer shall pay to the City a license fee in the appropriate amount as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. The license shall be for the calendar year and due on January 1, and shall become delinquent on April 1, and subject to delinquent fees in the amounts as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. After two (2) months of delinquency, the City shall issue a complaint and summons for the delinquent keeper or harborer who shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 4-6. 
(c)  Before the Office of the City Clerk shall issue any license or tag for a dog, the keeper or harborer thereof shall present a current certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been inoculated against rabies. The rabies inoculation must have an effective period of at least one (1) year and show the date of the animal's inoculation and expiration date of the inoculation period. The certificate shall be deemed valid when it is not expired before the owner, harborer, keeper or shelterer submits it to the Office of the City Clerk. Nothing in this article shall require the Office of the City Clerk to keep a copy of the inoculation certificate. 
(d)  At the time of the issuance of a license, the Office of the City Clerk shall deliver a license tag showing the registration number and the year of issuance. Upon the payment of a fee in the appropriate amount as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance, a replacement tag shall be furnished by the Office of the City Clerk to any such keeper or harborer when a tag has been lost. 
(e)  No keeper or harborer of any dog shall allow or permit such dog to be off the premises of the owner or keeper, at any time without a license tag attached to a collar or harness, provided for by Subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  No person shall remove or cause to be removed the collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog without the consent of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-201-2-206; Ord. No. 273; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 513; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1051; Ord. No. 1068; Ord. No. 1267; Ord. No. 1484) 
Sec. 4-33. - Conditions of enclosure. 
    All structures or yards wherein animals are kept, or permitted to be, shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and free from offensive odors. 
(Prior Code, § 2-104; Ord. No. 453) 
Sec. 4-34. - Animal health nuisance. 
(a)  Private property. 
(1)  Any person who maintains any animal in any building, pen or enclosure on his premises which is not kept clean and neat and free from offensive odors at all times, or which is or becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity, shall be deemed to be a nuisance. 
(2)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall allow any animal to damage any private property by its activity. 
(3)  No owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall allow such animal to perform any bodily function of excrement, including but not limited to fecal matter, upon any property not owned by the owner, keeper, or harborer of such animal unless the owner, keeper or harborer of such animal immediately and properly removes and disposes of any such waste. 
(4)  No owner, keeper or harborer shall allow any animal to scatter refuse or garbage that is bagged or otherwise contained or cause any condition which threatens or endangers the health or well-being of other persons or animals. 
(b)  Public property. Any person who maintains an animal under their control while on any City, County, or State owned or maintained property for the general public's access, recreation or use shall: 
(1)  Maintain consistent control of the animal so it will not molest or interfere with any other person's use of the public property. 
(2)  Not allow any animal to damage any public property by its activity in such a way that any other person could be injured or deprived of any use of the public property. 
(3)  Not allow any animal to perform any bodily function of excrement, including but not limited to fecal matter, upon any public property unless the owner, keeper or harborer of such animal immediately and properly removes and disposes of any such waste. 
(4)  Not allow any animal to scatter refuse or garbage that is bagged or otherwise contained or cause any condition which threatens or endangers the health or well-being of other persons or animals. 
(5)  Not allow or conduct the disposal or burial of any animal upon or in any public property. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-104, 2-218; Ord. No. 453; Ord. No. 1141) 
Sec. 4-35. - Dogs running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person keeping or harboring any dog to permit such dog to run at large within the City. For the purpose of this section, any dog shall be deemed to be running at large when found on property other than that of the owner, keeper or harborer thereof, unless such dog is securely fastened to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain such dog, and such leash is securely held by a responsible person capable of controlling such dog. 
(Prior Code, § 2-211; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 506) 
Sec. 4-36. - Electronic fence setback requirements. 
(a)  From and after October 1, 2014, all electronic fences installed at any location shall be setback twenty feet (20') from the curb unless there is a public sidewalk in which case the set back shall be measured from the edge of the sidewalk which is furthest from the curb. 
(b)  A permit is not required; however, the installation location must be verified in compliance with this section by the Building Inspector. If a complaint is registered on an electronic fence thought to be in noncompliance with this section and it is found by the Building Inspector that the electronic fence is in violation of this section, the Building Inspector will order the movement of the fence in compliance with this section. 
(c)  From and after October 1, 2014, all electronic fences shall not be considered a structure under the City zoning regulations, and shall only be regulated under the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 4-37. - Offensive animal noises. 
    No person shall keep or harbor any animal which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, howling, yelping or other sound shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood or person. 
(Prior Code, § 2-208; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 506) 
Sec. 4-38. - Destruction of property by animals. 
    No person shall keep or harbor any animal which destroys or damages the property of any person other than that of such keeper or harborer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-209; Ord No. 611; Ord. No. 1299) 
Sec. 4-39. - Bitches in heat. 
    Provisions relating to the keeping and confinement of bitches shall be as follows: 
(1)  The owner, keeper or person harboring a bitch shall, during the period that such animal is in heat, keep it securely confined and enclosed within a building except when on the keeper's or harborer's premises briefly for toilet purposes while under complete control of a responsible person. 
(2)  Any bitch which is not confined and enclosed as provided in this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded or destroyed at the expense of its owner, keeper or harborer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-210; Ord. No. 272; Ord. No. 506) 
Sec. 4-40. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal which destroys or damages the property of any person other than that of its owner, keeper or harborer; or any dog found running at large in violation of Section 4-35, may be taken up and impounded at such place in the custody of such agency as the City Council may designate from time to time, where such animal shall be held for seven (7) days. 
(b)  For the owner, keeper or harborer of any impounded animal to retrieve their animal from impoundment, it is required that the owner, keeper or harborer come to the Office of the City Clerk and pay a release fee and impoundment and boarding fees payable to the City in the appropriate amount as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. Upon payment of all applicable fees, the animal owner will be issued a release form to take to the impound facility to retrieve their animal. 
(c)  If an animal is impounded as provided in this article, City personnel will make a reasonable effort to notify the owner, keeper or harborer of such animal of such impoundment. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-212-2-214; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 1299) 

Sec. 4-41. - Animal bite quarantine procedure. 
(a)  Procedure for quarantine. The procedure for quarantine of animals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, an animal that bites a person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be quarantined immediately with a licensed veterinarian of the owner's, keeper's or harborer's choice or with a facility designated by the City at the owner's, keeper's or harborer's expense for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than twelve (12) days. 
(2)  If the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal cannot be immediately notified, the Animal Control Officer or a police officer shall cause such animal to be quarantined immediately, at the owner's, keeper's or harborer's expense, for a period of not less than ten (10) days and not more than twelve (12) days. If the address of the owner, keeper or harborer can be determined, the police officer or the Animal Control Officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify such owner, keeper or harborer that such animal is impounded under the provisions of this section and that such person has the right to redeem the animal at the expiration of confinement upon the payment of any license fees then owing and the charges of the veterinarian or facility wherein the animal was impounded. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Determining factors. In the event the investigating officer determines: 
a.  The animal which injured the person did so while confined on a leash on property under the control of the animal's owner, keeper or harborer or within a fence or building enclosing property under the control of the animal's owner, keeper or harborer; and 
b.  The animal had a valid rabies inoculation certificate and was duly licensed, if a dog, at the time of the injury; 
then the animal need not be impounded in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (a)(1) of this section, but the alternative procedure in Subsection (b)(2) of this section may be followed. 
(2)  Alternative procedure. 
a.  If the injured party, the parent or guardian desires that the animal be impounded and agrees in writing to pay for its board during the period of impoundment, it shall be impounded for the period of time specified in Subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
b.  If the injured party, the parent or guardian is unwilling to agree in writing to pay for the animal's boarding during the period of impoundment, the animal shall be permitted to remain on the property of its owner, keeper or harborer, provided that such owner, keeper or harborer signs a written agreement to keep the animal confined to the property for the period specified in Subsection (a)(1) of this section and further agrees to allow the animal to be examined periodically to determine its physical condition during the confinement period. If the owner, keeper or harborer of the animal is unwilling to sign such an agreement, the animal shall immediately be impounded in accordance with the provisions of Subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(Prior Code, §§ 2-215, 2-216; Ord. No. 196; Ord. No. 506; Ord. No. 611) 
Sec. 4-42. - Destruction of animals. 
    The Animal Control Officer or a police officer may kill any animal without notice to the owner, keeper or harborer thereof, whether it bears a tag or not, if such animal is deemed to be a vicious animal, or injured severely or in such pain as to warrant humane destruction. The remains of any animal destroyed, if such animal has or is suspected of having bitten or injured any person, shall be preserved to permit a test to be conducted for rabies, at the owner's expense. 
(Prior Code, § 2-217; Ord. No. 611) 
Secs. 4-43-4-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-75. - Keeping prohibited. 
    No person shall keep, harbor, possess or allow to be upon any premises occupied by him or under his charge or control within the corporate limits of the City a dangerous or vicious animal. Impoundment of animals whose owners have been cited for violation of this article shall be at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-301; Ord. No. 862) 
Sec. 4-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous or vicious animals means, but is not limited to, any of the following animals: 
(1)  Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal (including, but not limited to, non-human primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, hybrid wolves, and wild and exotic cats, but excluding small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes); 
(2)  Any reptile, arthropod or insect having poisonous bites or stings; 
(3)  Any animal, not including police canines active in the line of duty, which the owner or custodian thereof knows or has reason to know has a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, or to cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals. 
    Propensity, tendency or disposition to attack means any animal which either: 
(1)  Unprovoked or upon command attempts to attack, bite or cause injury to a human being or domestic animal; or 
(2)  Unprovoked or upon command attacks, bites or causes injury to a human being or domestic animal. 
(Prior Code, § 2-302; Ord. No. 862) 
Sec. 4-77. - Complaint. 
    Whenever a sworn complaint is filed in the Municipal Court against the owner of an animal claiming that the animal is dangerous or vicious and in violation of this article, the Municipal Judge shall hold a hearing to determine whether or not the animal is dangerous or vicious within the meaning of this article and thereby in violation of this article as follows: 
(1)  Hearing. The owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. In making a determination, the Municipal Judge shall consider the following: 
a.  The seriousness of the attack or bite. 
b.  Past history of attacks or bites. 
c.  Likelihood of attacks or bites in the future. 
d.  The condition and circumstances under which the animal is kept or confined. 
e.  The circumstances surrounding the attack or bite. 
f.  Other factors which may reasonably relate to the determination of whether or not the animal is dangerous or vicious. 
(2)  Outcome. The Municipal Judge shall order the impoundment, muzzling and/or the confinement of the animal accused of being in violation of this article in a manner and location that will ensure that it is no threat to persons or other animals pending the outcome of the hearing. If such impoundment, muzzling or otherwise safe confinement is not possible prior to the Court hearing, it will be handled as provided in Section 4-78. 
Sec. 4-78. - Custody of certain animals. 
    Any public health officer, law enforcement officer, animal control officer, licensed veterinarian, or any officer or agent of a duly incorporated humane society may take into custody any animal suspected of being kept, harbored or owned in violation of this article. When such person takes custody of such animal, the animal may be placed in the care of a duly incorporated humane society or a licensed veterinarian for boarding, treatment or such other care deemed necessary, at the expense of the owner, keeper or harborer. 
(Prior Code, § 2-304; Ord. No. 862) 
Sec. 4-79. - Disposition of certain animals. 
    Any animal kept in violation of this article may be ordered by the Court to be destroyed in a humane manner when, in the Court's judgment, such animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other animals. If the Court does not order destruction of the animal, the Court shall allow the owner, keeper or harborer thereof no more than forty-eight (48) hours to remove the animal from the City. Failure to remove such animal within the time allowed by the Court shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2-305; Ord. No. 862) 
Sec. 4-80. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 2-306; Ord. No. 862) 
Secs. 4-81-4-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Animal cruelty, K.S.A. 21-6411 et seq. 

Sec. 4-106. - Care of animal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or harborer of any animal to fail to provide such animal with sufficient food and water, shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care as needed, or to otherwise fail to provide humane care and treatment. 
(Prior Code, § 2-401; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-107. - Cruelty. 
    No person shall beat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise ill-treat or abuse any animal as more specifically set forth in the currently adopted Uniform Public Offense Code. 
(Prior Code, § 2-402; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-108. - Abandonment. 
    No owner, keeper or harborer of any animal shall cause it to be abandoned in the City. 
(Prior Code, § 2-403; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-109. - Intentional destruction or injury. 
    No person shall intentionally injure, destroy or kill any animal unless such animal is an immediate threat to the physical safety of such person or other persons or for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the suffering of a sick or injured animal; provided that nothing in this article shall prohibit the disposition of any animal in a humane manner as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 2-404; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-110. - Enforcement. 
    In the event the Animal Control Officer or any other law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that any owner, keeper, harborer or other person is mistreating any animal within the City limits as set forth in this article, such officer may enter upon private property to investigate the matter in order to make a proper determination, and if in the opinion of the officer, such animal is being mistreated, said officer shall file a complaint in the Municipal Court and may seize said animal for emergency treatment and/or care. 
(Prior Code, § 2-405; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-111. - Complaint. 
    Whenever a sworn complaint is filed in the Municipal Court by the Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officer against the owner of an animal claiming that the animal has been treated cruelly, abandoned or intentionally destroyed or injured and in violation of this article, the Municipal Judge shall hold a hearing to determine whether or not the animal has been treated cruelly, abandoned or intentionally destroyed or injured within the meaning of this article and thereby in violation of this article as follows: 
(1)  Hearing . The owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. In making a determination, the Municipal Judge shall consider the following: 
a.  The seriousness of the treatment. 
b.  Past history of treatment. 
c.  Likelihood of insufficient treatment in the future. 
d.  The condition and circumstances under which the animal is kept or confined. 
e.  The circumstances surrounding the treatment. 
f.  Other factors which may reasonably relate to the determination of whether or not the animal has been treated cruelly, abandoned or intentionally destroyed or injured. 
(2)  Outcome. The Municipal Judge may order the permanent removal of the animal from the custody of the owner, keeper or harborer. In such case, the animal will be placed with an animal shelter. If permanent removal is not ordered, the animal shall be returned to the owner, keeper or harborer. 
Sec. 4-112. - Financial responsibility. 
    In the event any owner, keeper or harborer or other person shall be found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this article, any financial liability incurred for the treatment and care of such animal shall be the personal responsibility of such owner, keeper, harborer or person. In the event such owner, keeper, harborer or person is a minor, the parent or legal guardian of such minor shall be financially responsible for such treatment and care. 
(Prior Code, § 2-406; Ord. No. 718) 
Sec. 4-113. - Penalty. 
    In addition to the financial responsibility provided in this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 2-407; Ord. No. 718) 
Secs. 4-114-4-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION 

Sec. 4-140. - Joint with other adopting cities agreement providing for a Northeast Animal Control Commission. 
(a)  The City joins with at least two (2) other adopting cities to establish a Johnson County Animal Control Commission as authorized by K.S.A. chapter 12, article 29 (K.S.A. 12-2901 et seq.). 
(b)  The Mayor and the City Clerk are hereby authorized, directed and empowered to execute and contract with other adopting cities an agreement for the cooperative establishment of the Northeast Animal Control Commission, said agreement to be substantially as set out in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 2-501; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-141. - Members, appointment, terms. 
    Provisions relating to members, appointment and terms as used in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a representative member to the Animal Control Commission as designated in this section. 
(2)  Each participating city shall have one (1) voting member and may have one (1) alternative member on the Commission. Either member may be an elected councilmember in said city. The alternate member shall have the right to vote in the absence of a voting member for a participating city. The term for the member and alternative appointment shall expire May 1 (originally May 1, 1983) of the appointed year and on May 1 of the following year after such appointment. Nothing in this section shall prevent reappointment of any duly appointed member or alternate. 
(3)  Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled by the appointment of the alternate member or another member from the participating city, for the unexpired term of a member whose position shall be vacant or vacated. Such appointment shall be by the mayor with the consent of the governing body of the participating city. 
(4)  Any appointed member or alternate may be removed during a term of appointment by the mayor with consent from the governing body of the participating city. 
(5)  No appointed member or alternate of the Animal Control Commission shall receive compensation for services on the commission, except the Secretary-Treasurer may receive compensation for payroll and other services of that office. 
(Prior Code, § 2-502; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control means the enforcement of the animal control ordinances of the participating cities regarding the pickup, housing, placement or impound, either temporary or permanent of abandoned, abused, ill, injured, neglected, unwanted or at-large domestic or wild animals and the removal from the participating cities of dead animals. 
    Enforcement means enforcement of the requirements of the participating cities regarding pickup and care of domestic or wild or running-at-large animals, but shall not include enforcement of ordinances of the participating cities regarding penalty provisions, such being the duty of the participating cities through their respective municipal courts. Kennel costs for housing, impounding or kenneling such animals, such costs being the separate expense of the participating city, the Animal Control Commission or upon agreement of the representative members of the Animal Control Commission, the combined expense of all participating cities. 
(Prior Code, § 2-503; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-143. - Purposes and objectives. 
    The purposes and objectives as set forth in this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The cost and operation of animal control can best be effected in the participating member cities by cooperative management, and consolidated financing of personnel, equipment and operating costs to enforce and provide animal control services, including pickup, care for, or disposal of, where necessary, domestic and wild unwanted or at-large animals or dead or dangerous or nuisance domestic or wild animals within or outside of the boundaries of the participating cities. 
(2)  To study and provide new or effective methods of animal control, to develop and maintain communications with the governing bodies and residents of the participating cities to eliminate problems of animal control. 
(Prior Code, § 2-504; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-144. - Duties and powers. 
    The powers and duties as related to this article are as follows: 
(1)  To organize and supervise animal control operations in participating cities necessary to effect the animal control requirements of the participating cities. 
(2)  To prepare an annual budget for the operation of the animal control service or facilities and for the expansion and improvements thereof. 
(3)  To receive donations, grants or gifts, lease or purchase real or personal property and equipment, hire such employees as are needed and retain professional services necessary to the operation of the animal control service, and effect such contracts or agreements with other persons to carry out the animal control program or service. 
(4)  Hold an organization meeting within thirty (30) days after the resolution is effective, (originally May 1, 1983), and then quarterly thereafter hold an annual meeting on the first Tuesday in December in the last quarter of each year, the time and place of said meetings to be determined by the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the Animal Control Commission. 
(5)  Elect from its membership at its organizational meeting at each annual meeting thereafter and whenever a vacancy in the office arises, a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Secretary-Treasurer to perform the duties commonly associated with their respective titles and as may be determined by the Commission members. 
(6)  Appoint and fix the membership of such members of standing and temporary committees as it may find expedient for the purpose of its duties. 
(7)  Hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday in the last month of each quarter beginning in March of each year. The time and place as it shall determine in its standing rules and special meetings upon call for same by the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary-Treasurer, Operations Supervisor for Animal Control or the mayor of any participating city. 
(8)  Add, adopt, amend, alter or discontinue bylaws and rules of procedure for the administration of business, keep records of its activities, keep audio or transcribed minutes of all meetings. All such business will be reported after each quarterly and annual meeting to the Mayor, Animal Control Commissioner and alternate and chief of police of each participating city. A complete annual activities and financial report shall be submitted to the mayor of each participating city after January 1 of each year. 
(9)  Work with and provide any information necessary to the participating cities and their respective police departments or municipal courts for enforcement by a participating city of the ordinances regarding animal control. 
(10)  Select or accept from one (1) of the participating cities a facility for a base of operations for animal control personnel from within one (1) of the police department facilities. Maintain office space, needed office equipment and utilities and maintain a recordkeeping and filing system and archived records, store communications equipment and maintain other equipment as needed to perform the task of animal control. Select or accept an operations supervisor from the selected or accepted police department. 
(Prior Code, § 2-505; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-145. - Commission expenses. 
    Provisions regarding expenses of the Animal Control Commission are as follows: 
(1)  The Commission shall prepare a budget to cover the initial cost of equipment and supplies, cost of personnel required and such other expenses needed to organize and commence operation of the animal control program and service. The participating cities shall pay to the Commission a per-capita contribution based upon the population figures for each participating city. The Johnson County population census figures, as set by the State, shall be used for the population count. Cities may, with the approval of the Commission, provide equipment or other facilities at a value agreed upon by the Commission as part of said city's contribution. Contributions in excess of the city's share shall be applied to the next budget year. 
(2)  Thereafter the Secretary-Treasurer shall prepare an annual budget of expenditures covering cost of printing, postage and other administration expenses, covering the cost of purchase of equipment, supplies, the employment of personnel employee benefits and any sums needed to expand and improve the operation of the animal control program or service. Any funds on hand at the end of a budget year not reserved for equipment, ongoing operations or personnel shall apply to the ensuing budget. The budget shall be presented to the governing bodies of the participating cities on or before May 1 of each year. Said budget shall be adjusted to comply with contributions agreed to by participating cities. Each participating city shall contribute annually a per-capita share as set out on the formula in Subsection (1) of this section. Said contribution shall be due on January 1 of each year. Any participating city that by ordinance or resolution withdraws as a member of the Commission shall forfeit any interest or funds it has paid the Commission under this agreement. 
(3)  In the event that the operation expenses to be assessed against any participating city shall exceed five dollars ($5.00) per resident person of said city, the Commission has the authority to increase and announce, in writing, to participating cities said assessment increase immediately after the scheduled second quarter meeting. Any participating city shall have the option to terminate from said animal control program for said year when such increase in per resident person assessment (per-capita assessment) is announced with proper notification to the Commission. 
(4)  Any participating city that, without ordinance, resolution and proper notification to the Commission, or for other reason, fails to make their contribution by no later than the last day of February of each year shall have their city's animal control service suspended for non-payment. Suspension shall be in effect until and when such time as the City has fully contributed as required in this agreement, ordinance or resolution. 
(5)  The city providing the operations a facility and supervisor by either selection or acceptance will be authorized by the Commission to receive ten percent (10%) of the scheduled total base salary of the animal control officer or officers for administrative and supervision costs, with no reduction in per-capita contribution from said City. 
(Prior Code, § 2-506; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 4-146. - Disposition of assets. 
    Immediately upon termination of the agreement by ordinance or resolution leaving less than two (2) participating cities, the Commission shall cease all operations. The Commission shall freeze all financial assets or financial accounts except for payment of outstanding accounts. The Commission shall advertise for and receive bids for the sale of all personal, real property or equipment in its control or ownership to the highest bidder. The proceeds from said sale and all funds remaining in the Commission's possession shall be returned to the participating cities of the Commission during the last year immediately preceding termination in the same ratio the contributions that were made to said Commission by participating cities during the last year preceding termination. 
(Prior Code, § 2-508; Ord. No. 735, 6-9-1982; Ord. No. 1184; Ord. No. 1639 , §§ 1, 2, 11-14-2016) 
Chapter 5 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire safety generally, K.S.A. 31-132 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Adoption of fire code. 
(a)  General incorporation of fire code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1607 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to fire code as published. The provisions of the International Fire Code (IFC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section [A] 101.1 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas". 
(2)  Section [A] 103.2 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, appointment, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. 
The fire code official shall be the fire chief of the Consolidated Fire District No. 2 of Johnson County, Kansas. 
(3)  Section [A] 103.3 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, Deputies, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.3 Deputies. 
As prescribed in Section 5-2 of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, the fire code official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy fire code official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. Additional enforcement authority is granted as provided in said Section 5-2. 
(4)  Section [A] 108.1 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, board of appeals established, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 108.1 Board of appeals established. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. 
(5)  Section [A] 108.3 of the International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby omitted in full. 
(Prior Code, § 5-105; Ord. No. 946; Ord. No. 1271; Ord. No. 1607 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference authorized, K.S.A. 12-3009 et seq., 12-3301 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The Fire Chief of the Northeast Johnson County Consolidated Fire District No. 2 Fire Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire code adopted by the City. Said Fire Chief may detail qualified members or qualified agents of said Fire Department as inspectors as shall be necessary from time to time. The appropriate City officers are empowered to issue and serve complaints upon advice of the Fire Department. 
(1)  The Chief of Police shall, in accordance with provisions of City ordinances and State laws, take all prudent measures to prevent all fires on any premises or place within the City limits. The Chief of Police, or a member of the Police Department under his direction may, whenever he has reasons to believe that the safety of persons or property from the hazards of the fire demand and as often as he may deem proper, enter upon any premises, yard, or buildings within the City to examine and inspect the same. 
(2)  The Chief of Police is authorized to direct or cause the owner or tenant of any of the aforesaid building, premises or places to make such alterations in the kind, management or keeping of such buildings or places and the storage, use or handling of such materials as will remove or lessen the likelihood of fire and may order the removal of all materials kept, stored, handled or used in violation of ordinance or law. 
(Prior Code, §§ 5-101, 5-106; Ord. No. 946; Ord. No. 1271) 
Sec. 5-3. - Fire hazards. 
    Any situation, condition, activity, object or substance conducive to the outbreak or spreading of fire in the City is declared to be a fire hazard and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or create any such condition or situation within the City or to permit or suffer to be on any premises under his or their control any activity, object or substance conducive to or likely to cause the outbreak of fire except as may otherwise be provided by ordinance or State laws. 
(Prior Code, § 5-102; Ord. No. 453) 
Sec. 5-4. - Burning is prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to dispose of any garbage or trash by burning unless by special permission as prescribed by Section 5-5; provided that this restriction shall not be construed to prohibit any such disposal in an approved type incinerator enclosed within a building that meets any and all applicable State or Federal requirements. 
(Prior Code, § 5-103; Ord. No. 543, § 1; Ord. No. 1271) 
Sec. 5-5. - Special permission. 
    Upon written request to the City Clerk naming the material, time, location and need to burn material of any kind, the City Council may grant special permission to burn where the conditions so warrant. 
(Prior Code, § 5-104; Ord. No. 543, § 2) 
Sec. 5-6. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 5-107; Ord. No. 611) 
Secs. 5-7-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND L-P GASES 

Sec. 5-31. - Aboveground tanks prohibited. 
    No person shall hereafter erect or place any aboveground tanks for the storage of flammable liquids within the City. 
(Prior Code, § 5-201; Ord. No. 453) 
Sec. 5-32. - Bulk oil stations, service stations. 
    The storage, handling and use of flammable liquids, and the design, construction and installation of containers and equipment for the storage and handling of flammable liquids, at bulk oil stations and service stations within the City shall be in compliance with the Rules and Regulations of the State Fire Marshal's Department, Article 7, and amendments thereto, as filed with the Revisor of Statutes (effective January 1, 1972), and the Rules and Regulations are hereby incorporated by reference as provided by law and made a part of this article as if the same had been set out in full in this article (K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012). 
(Prior Code, § 5-202) 
Sec. 5-33. - L-P gases. 
    The design, construction and installation of containers and equipment for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases within the City shall be governed by and in compliance with the Rules and Regulations Relating to the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Industry of the State of Kansas, Article 8, as promulgated by the State Fire Marshal's Department as filed with the Revisor of Statutes (effective January 1, 1973) and the Rules and Regulations are hereby incorporated by reference and shall be as much as part of this article as if the same had been set out in full in this article (K.S.A. 12-3009 to 12-3012). 
(Prior Code, § 5-203) 
Sec. 5-34. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or the Rules and Regulations incorporated in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 5-204) 
Secs. 5-35-5-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks regulations authorized, K.S.A. 31-134. 

Sec. 5-57. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire Official means the Chief of Police, or his designated representative. 
    Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require rockets underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or other devices of like construction, and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. The term "fireworks" does not include any toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which are used paper caps which contain an average of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) or less of a grain of explosive content per cap, nor any toy pistol paper caps manufactured as provided in this article, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. Each package containing toy paper caps offered for retail sale shall be labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(Prior Code, § 5-301; Ord. No. 635) 
Sec. 5-58. - Fireworks prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, use, explode or discharge any fireworks except for supervised public exhibitions or displays; provided, however, that such public exhibitions or displays shall be conducted only in accordance with any rules and regulations issued by the Fire Official; provided, further, however, that the provisions and prohibitions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the proper and lawful storage of fireworks, by an actual wholesaler, for sale outside the City limits. 
(Prior Code, § 5-302; Ord. No. 635) 
Sec. 5-59. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 5-303; Ord. No. 635) 
Chapter 6 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public health, K.S.A. 65-101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisance ordinances authorized, K.S.A. 12-1617g; nuisance abatement, K.S.A. 12-1617e; weed removal, K.S.A. 12-1617f. 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means an annoyance, and any use of property which endangers the life or health, violates the laws of decency, unreasonably pollutes the air with foul noxious odors or smoke, or obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use and enjoyment of the property of another or of the public. 
(Prior Code, § 6-201; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1350) 
Sec. 6-20. - General nuisances. 
    In addition to those nuisances otherwise specifically prohibited by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to exist any nuisance. 
(Prior Code, § 6-202; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1350) 
Sec. 6-21. - Deposit of certain substances endangering health. 
    No person shall dispose of any substance or material which is or may be a menace to public health or welfare or a danger to the health or welfare of the inhabitants of the City, or of any neighborhood, family or resident thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 6-204; Ord. No. 611) 
Sec. 6-22. - Inoperative vehicles and/or equipment. 
(a)  Generally. The City Council finds that junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned vehicles and/or equipment affect the health, safety and general welfare of citizens of the City in that they: 
(1)  Serve as a breeding ground for flies, mosquitoes, rats and other insects and rodents; 
(2)  Are a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken glass, sharp metal protrusions, insecure mounting on blocks, jacks or other supports; 
(3)  Are a ready source of fire and explosion; 
(4)  Encourage pilfering and theft; 
(5)  Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located; 
(6)  Constitute a fire hazard because they frequently block access for fire equipment to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperable means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the function or purpose for which it was originally constructed. 
    Motor vehicle means, without limitation, any vehicle or equipment which as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any other time. 
    Vehicle and/or equipment includes, without limitation, any automobile, van, recreational vehicle, truck, tractor, boat, trailer or motorcycle. 
(c)  Nuisances unlawful; defined; exceptions . It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any motor vehicle nuisance within the City. 
(1)  A motor vehicle nuisance is any motor vehicle which is not currently registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; or parked in violation of a City ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power; or in a junked, wrecked or inoperable condition. Any one (1) of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a motor vehicle is junked, wrecked or inoperable: 
a.  Absence of a current registration plate upon the vehicle; 
b.  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks or other supports; 
c.  Absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon a street or highway. 
(2)  The provisions of this Subsection (c) shall not apply to: 
a.  Any motor vehicle which is enclosed in a garage or other building; 
b.  To the parking or storage of a vehicle inoperable for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less; or 
c.  To any person conducting a business enterprise in compliance with existing zoning regulations or who places such vehicles behind screening of sufficient size, strength and density to screen such vehicles from the view of the public and to prohibit ready access to stored vehicles by children. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize the maintenance of a public nuisance. 
(d)  Complaints, inquiry and inspection . 
(1)  Any police officer or Codes Administrator shall make inquiry and inspection of premises: 
a.  Upon receiving a complaint or complaints in writing signed by two (2) or more persons stating that a nuisance exists and describing the same and where located; or 
b.  When informed that a nuisance may exist by the Chief of Police or by the Board of Health or Fire Chief. 
(2)  The police officer or Codes Administrator may make such inquiry and inspection when he observes conditions which appear to constitute a nuisance. 
(3)  Upon making an inquiry and inspection, the police officer shall make a written report of findings. 
(e)  Right of entry . It shall be a violation of this section to deny any police officer the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists. 
(f)  Notice . Any person, corporation, partnership or association found by a police officer to be in violation of this section shall be served a notice of such violation. The notice shall be served by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; provided that if the owner or his agent in charge of the property is a resident of the County, the notice shall be personally served by a law enforcement officer. 
(g)  Same; contents . The notice shall state the conditions which are in violation of this section. The notice shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or association that: 
(1)  He shall have ten (10) days from date of serving the notice to abate the conditions in violation of this article; or 
(2)  He shall have ten (10) days from date of serving the notice to request a hearing before the Governing Body, as provided in Subsection (j) of this section; 
(3)  Failure to abate the conditions or to request a hearing within the time allowed may result in prosecution as provided in this section and/or abatement of the conditions by the City as provided in this section. 
(h)  Failure to comply . Should the person, corporation, partnership or association fail to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance or request a hearing, the police officer may file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the City against such person, corporation, partnership or association. 
(i)  Abatement . In addition to, or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in this section, the police officer may seek to remedy violations of this section in the following manner. If a person to whom notice has been sent pursuant to this section has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the City Council within the time periods allowed in this section, the police officer may present a resolution to the Governing Body for adoption authorizing the police officer or other agents of the City to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten (10) days after passage of the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the City shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in this section. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation in one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon the person in violation; 
(2)  Service by registered mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; or 
(3)  In the event the whereabouts of such person is unknown and same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by the police officer and filed with the City Clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists. 
(j)  Hearing . If a hearing is requested within the ten (10) day period as provided in this section, such request shall be made in writing to the City Council. Failure to make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person's right to contest the findings of the police officer before the City Council. The hearing shall be held by the City Council as soon as possible after the filing of the request therefor, and the person shall be advised by the City of the time and place of the hearing at least five (5) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the person in the City may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the City Council. The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall record its determination of the matter by means of adopting a resolution and serving the resolution upon the person in the manner provided in this section. 
(k)  Costs assessed . If the City abates the nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this section, the cost of abatement shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located. The City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other taxes to the County Clerk, certify the costs as provided in this section. The County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and paid. 
(Prior Code, § 6-205; Ord. No. 931) 
Sec. 6-23. - Selling motor vehicles; premises, residential or nonbusiness. 
    No person shall offer, show or display for sale a motor vehicle on property zoned business. No person shall offer, show or display for sale a motor vehicle on property zoned residential unless the offer, showing or display is occasional. The term "occasional" is defined as an offer, showing or display of a motor vehicle from residential property of not more than two (2) motor vehicles in any twelve (12) month period and not more than one (1) motor vehicle at any one (1) time. 
(Prior Code, § 6-206; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 858) 
Sec. 6-24. - Penalty. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership or association violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day on which violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an additional or separate offense. 
Secs. 6-25-6-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 6-52. - Adoption of property maintenance code. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), Edition 2000, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc.; provided certain parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by Sections 6-53 to 6-56. No fewer than three (3) copies of this code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1304," and these copies shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours, provided that these official copies may not be removed from City Hall. A copy of Ordinance No. 1304 shall be attached to all official copies of this Code. All City officials requiring the use of this code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, the number of official copies of this code as may be deemed expedient by the City Council. Should any provision of the property maintenance code conflict with any other provision of this Code or the zoning ordinance, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(Prior Code, § 6-901) 
Sec. 6-53. - Amendment to Chapter 1 of the property maintenance code as published. 
    The following sections of Chapter 1 of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), Edition 2000, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 regarding title. Insert: "the City of Fairway." 
(2)  Section 102.3 regarding application of other codes. Replace with: 
102.3 Application of other codes . Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the City of Fairway's approved building code, energy conservation code, residential code, plumbing code, mechanical code, fuel gas code, electrical code, City Code, zoning ordinance or other applicable regulations. 
(3)  Section 103.6 regarding fees. Replace with: 
103.6 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the fee schedule separately approved by the City Council, which, for the purposes of this section, shall be considered incorporated in this section by reference. 
(4)  Section 106.4 regarding violation penalties. Replace with: 
106.4 Violations; Repeat Offenders; Chronic Offenders; penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the City. Any such person found guilty of violating these provisions shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
106.4.1 Repeat Violation; Process. If a repeat violation is found, the Code Official shall provide a notice of repeat violation to the repeat offender. The Code Official, however, is not required to give the repeat offender reasonable time to correct the violation, because the repeat offender, by the repeated violations, has demonstrated a pattern of disregard and failure to comply with the property maintenance code that compromises the health, safety and general welfare of the public and reduces the value of neighboring properties. 
106.4.2 Penalty Schedule for Repeat Violations. If a violation places a person into repeat offender status, the Code Official shall assess a penalty equal to triple the amount of the standard penalty assessed for a violation as established in Section 106.4, above, but shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If subsequent violations of the code provision that the person has repeatedly violated are committed during a person's status as a repeat offender, the penalty assessed shall be not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation of the same property maintenance code provision, as determined by a judge. 
106.4.3 Chronic Violation; Process . If a chronic violation is found, the Code Official shall provide a notice of chronic violation to the chronic offender. The Code Official, however, is not required to give the chronic offender reasonable time to correct the violation, because the chronic offender, by the repeated violations, has demonstrated a pattern of disregard and failure to comply with the property maintenance code that compromises the health, safety and general welfare of the public and reduces the value of neighboring properties. 
106.4.4 Penalty Schedule for Multiple Violations Reaching Chronic Offender Status. If a violation places a person into chronic offender status, the Code Official shall assess a penalty equal to triple the amount of the standard penalty assessed for a violation as established in Section 106.4, above, but shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). If subsequent violations are committed during a person's status as a chronic offender, the penalty assessed shall be not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation of the same property maintenance code provision, as determined by a judge. 
(5)  Section 106.5 regarding abatement of violation. Replace and supplement with: 
106.5 Abatement of violation. If the owner or person responsible fails to comply with any notice and order issued pursuant to Section 107 to bring any structure or land into compliance with the provisions of this code (or any order after an appeal of the same), the Code Official may take any action as is reasonably necessary to abate the violation (subject to the applicability of any required findings pursuant to Section 108.7). In doing so, neither the Code Official, his agents nor the City shall be responsible for damage to property due to reasonable methods of gaining entrance onto the property or for damages to property in the reasonable exercise of the abatement of the violations. The Code Official may use the City's employees or contract for services to abate these violations. 
106.5.1 Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or attempt to prevent the Code Official or his agents from an abatement action. 
106.5.2 Notice of Costs . If the Code Official takes action to abate a violation, the Code Official shall thereafter provide to the owner or person(s) responsible (in the same manner prescribed in Section 107.3) a notice of costs providing: 
a.  A description of the real estate sufficient for identification; 
b.  The nature of the violation; 
c.  The nature of the work performed to abate the violation; 
d.  The abatement costs incurred; 
e.  A demand for payment within thirty (30) days from the date of notice; 
f.  A statement that the failure to pay within thirty (30) days shall allow the City to file a tax lien against the property and/or to pursue litigation for the recovery of costs; and 
g.  A statement that any interest, and any City costs necessary to recover any amounts due, including court costs, attorneys fees and administrative costs, shall be added to the outstanding balance due. Included as part thereof are the costs for both the Code Official's expense, including postage, as well as any necessary court costs and attorney's fees. 
106.5.3 Collection of Abatement Costs . If unpaid after thirty (30) days of service of the notice of costs, these amounts shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property, and the City Clerk shall at the time of certifying other City taxes certify the unpaid portion of these costs, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the County against the lot or parcel of ground, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and paid. Assessments made under this section shall be superior to all liens except general tax liens. Provided further, that the City may collect such costs in the manner provided at K.S.A. 12-1,115, by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal debt, and the City may pursue both assessment and collection at the same time until the full cost, including applicable interest, court costs, attorney's fees and administrative costs have been paid in full. 
106.5.4 Impact with prosecution. The imposition of any abatement or collection action prescribed in this section shall not preclude any appropriate prosecution or penalties. Likewise, the imposition of any prosecution or penalties prescribed in this section shall not preclude the Code Official or other City official from instituting any appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises or to collect abatement costs. 
(6)  Section 106 regarding violations. Supplement with: 
106.6 Mediation. At the discretion of the Code Official, the prosecutor, or the Municipal Court, any alleged code violation subject to prosecution under Section 106.3 may be set for mediation with the Public Officer at any time before final resolution of the matter by the Municipal Court. The Public Officer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, shall review all charges and related issues, examine witnesses, receive evidence, and attempt to mediate a resolution between all parties of interest; provided any resolution shall comply with the underlying intent of this article. 
(7)  Section 107.1 regarding notice to owner or to persons responsible. Replace with: 
107.1 Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefor in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.2 and 107.3; provided, however, that the issuance of this notice shall not be required for second and subsequent violations of the same code provision by the same code offender at the same address within the preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(8)  Section 107.2 regarding form. Replace requirement 5 and supplement with new requirements 6-8 as follows (Note: requirements 1-4 shall remain unchanged): 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal the notice and order within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served; provided appeals relating to violations of Section 302.4 regarding weeds or Section 302.9 regarding defacement of property must be filed within five (5) days after the day of notice was served. 
6.  Inform the property owner that the failure to comply with this notice and order shall result in the City's right to abate the violation at the owner's expense, and that failure to thereafter pay the assessment within thirty (30) days of the notice of the cost of the abatement shall result in the filing of a tax lien against the property, or the filing for judgment against the recipient, or both. 
7.  Inform the property owner that these violations are subject to prosecution. 
8.  Inform the property owner that the City is not required to issue subsequent notices for subsequent violations of the same code provision during the following twenty-four (24) months before instituting abatement or prosecution procedures. 
(9)  Section 107 regarding notices and orders. Supplement with: 
107.6 Notice of repeat violation or chronic violation. Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a repeat or chronic violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a repeat or chronic violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefor in the manner prescribed in Sections 107.3 and 107.7. 
(10)  Section 107 regarding notices and orders. Supplement with: 
107.7 Form of notice of repeat or chronic violation. The notice prescribed in Section 107.6 shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  Be in writing. 
2.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
3.  Include a statement of the repeat or chronic violation or violations and why the notice is being issued. 
4.  Include a correction order stating that the City is not required to give the repeat offender or chronic offender reasonable time to correct the violation, because the repeat offender or chronic offender, by the repeated or chronic violations, has demonstrated a pattern of disregard and failure to comply with the provisions of this code that compromises the health, safety and general welfare of the public and reduces the value of neighboring properties. 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal the notice of repeat or chronic violation and order within ten (10) days after the day the notice was served; provided that appeals relating to violations of Section 302.4 regarding weeds or Section 302.9 regarding defacement of property must be filed within five (5) days after the day the notice was served. 
6.  Inform the property owner that the failure to comply with this notice and order shall result in the City's right to abate the violation at the owner's expense, and that failure to thereafter pay the assessment within thirty (30) days of the notice of the cost of the abatement shall result in the filing of a tax lien against the property, or the filing for judgment against the recipient, or both. 
7.  Inform the property owner that these violations are subject to prosecution. 
8.  Inform the property owner of the penalty imposed for attaining repeat or chronic violator status and the escalating penalties for subsequent violations while the owner remains in repeat or chronic offender status. 
(11)  Section 108.1.4 regarding unlawful structures. Replace with: 
108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered, occupied, or is being maintained in violation of this code, the City Code, the zoning ordinance, or any other applicable laws, statutes, rules or regulations. 
(12)  Section 108 regarding unsafe structures and equipment. Supplement with: 
108.7 Hearing and abatement . Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure under the provisions of this section as unsafe or dangerous and unfit for human occupancy, before any abatement or demolition may be taken pursuant to Section 106.5 or Section 110, the matter shall be set for hearing before the City Council; provided that this requirement shall not restrict or interfere with any necessary emergency measure pursuant to Section 109. 
108.7.1 Hearing Notice. The Code Official shall file a written report with the City Council describing the structure and its location and the circumstances supporting the Code Official's determination. This report may be filed simultaneously with the notice pursuant to Section 108.3. The Governing Body shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner's agent, any lienholders of record and any occupant may appear and show cause why this structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired or demolished. This resolution shall be published once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks on the same day of each week, and at least thirty (30) days shall elapse between the last publication and the hearing date. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by certified mail within three (3) days after its first publication to each such owner, agent, lienholders and occupant at the last know address and shall be marked "deliver to addressee only." 
108.7.2 Hearing Findings . At the hearing, the City Council shall hear all evidence submitted by the owner, owner's agent, lienholders of record, occupants, and relevant City Officials, and shall thereafter make findings by resolution. If the City Council finds that the structure is unsafe or dangerous and unfit for human occupancy, the resolution shall direct the structure to be repaired or removed and the premises made safe and secure. The resolution shall be published once in the official City newspaper and a copy mailed to the owner, agent, lienholders and occupant in the same manner provided for notice of hearing. The resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the repair or removal of the structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of this structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within this time, or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is completed, the Governing Body will cause the structure to be repaired or razed and removed. 
108.8 Fire or explosion. Damage to structures created by fire or explosion shall comply with the provisions of City Code Chapter 2, Article VII, Division 3, entitled "Liens on Property Damage Insurance Proceeds." 
(13)  Section 110.2 regarding notices and orders. Replace with: 
110.2 Notices, orders and hearing. All notices, orders shall comply with Section 107, and a hearing shall be conducted as provided by Section 108.7. 
(14)  Section 111 regarding means of appeal. Replace Sections 111.1 through 111.8 with: 
111.1 Application for appeal . Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal this decision to the Fairway Board of Zoning Appeals; provided, however, when a hearing is scheduled before the City Council pursuant to Section 108.7, any timely filed appeal shall instead be heard by the City Council at this scheduled hearing. A written application for appeal must be filed within ten (10) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served; provided that appeals relating to violations of Section 302.4 regarding weeds or Section 302.9 regarding defacement of property must be filed within five (5) days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means, or that the strict application of any requirement of this code would cause an undue hardship. 
111.2 Stay of enforcement. A timely filed appeal of a notice and order (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the Board. 
111.3 Hearing . A timely filed appeal shall be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the Board of Zoning Appeals with a quorum of the Board members, subject to the satisfaction of any necessary notice publication requirement. This hearing before the Board shall be open to the public, and the appellant, the appellant's representative, the Code Official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Thereafter, the Board may modify or reverse the decision of the Code Official by a majority vote. 
111.4 Court review. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board shall have any right authorized by State statute to appeal the decision to a court of proper jurisdiction. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the Board's decision shall be considered final as of the date of the vote on this decision. 
(Prior Code, § 6-902; Ord. No. 1304) 
Sec. 6-54. - Amendment to Chapter 2 of the property maintenance code as published. 
    The following sections of Chapter 2 of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), Edition 2000, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section 202 regarding General Definitions. Replace with: 
    Approved . Approved by the Code Official. 
    Basement . That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade. 
    Bathroom . A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
    Bedroom . Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
    Chronic offender . A person who has previously been issued a notice of violation or been found through the administrative appeals process or other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have violated, or who has admitting violating, any of the various provisions of this code at the same property at least three (3) times within twenty-four (24) months prior to the current violation. 
A.  A determination by any appellate body that no violation occurred shall nullify the City's previous actions regarding the specific alleged violation and, consequently, shall not be considered in establishing chronic offender status. 
B.  A person's status as a chronic offender shall terminate upon the expiration of a twenty-four (24) month period after the official date of the most recent notice of violation that triggers chronic offender status; provided that the twenty-four (24) month period is determined on a rolling basis and the period count shall be restarted upon the most recent notice of violation that either triggers chronic offender status or that occurs during a period in which the person is classified as a chronic offender. 
    Chronic violation. A violation that is at least the third violation of any provision of this code at the same property by the same person within the immediately preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
    Code Official . The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative. 
    Condemn. To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
    Dwelling unit . A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of the premises. 
    Extermination . The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
    Garbage . The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Guard . A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
    Habitable space . Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
    Imminent danger. A condition that could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
    Infestation . The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
    Labeled . Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards. 
    Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
    Notice of chronic violation. A notice issued by the Code Official to a chronic offender for the purpose of providing notice of a chronic violation of this code. 
    Notice of repeat violation . A notice issued by the Code Official to a repeat offender for the purpose of providing notice of a repeat violation of this code. 
    Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
    Occupant . Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building. 
    Openable area . That part of a window, skylight or door that is available for unobstructed ventilation and that opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator . Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises that is let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner . Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the State, county or City as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of the person, and the exterior or administrator of the estate of this person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Premises . A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon. 
    Repeat offender . A person who has admitted violating or who has previously been issued a notice of violation or been found through the administrative appeals process or other quasi-judicial or judicial process to have violated, the same provision of this code at least two (2) times within twenty-four (24) months prior to the current violation, regardless of whether the violations have occurred at different locations. 
A.  A determination by any appellate body that no violation of this code occurred shall nullify the City's previous actions regarding the specific alleged violation and, consequently, shall not be considered in establishing repeat offender status. 
B.  A person's status as a repeat offender shall terminate upon the expiration of a twenty-four (24) month period after the official date of the most recent notice of violation that triggers this status; provided that the twenty-four (24) month period is determined on a rolling basis and the period count shall be restarted upon the most recent notice of violation that either triggers this status or that occurs during a period in which the person is classified as a repeat offender. 
    Repeat violation . A violation of the same provision of this maintenance code at any location by the same person for which a notice of violation has been issued within the immediately preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
    Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
    Roominghouse. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
    Rubbish . Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
    Strict liability offense . An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act that was prohibited, or failed to do an act that the defendant was legally required to do. 
    Structure . That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
    Tenant . A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
    Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
    Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
    Workmanlike . Executed in a skilled manner (e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.) 
    Yard . An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Prior Code, § 6-903) 
Sec. 6-55. - Amendment to Chapter 3 of the property maintenance code as published. 
    The following sections of Chapter 3 of the International Property Maintenance Code (IMPC), Edition 2000, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section 301.4 regarding general requirements. Supplement with: 
301.4 Excavation fill. It shall be the duty of the owner upon removal of a structure to fill any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other action necessary to leave such property in a safe condition, including: the grading and seeding or sodding of the area; removal of dirt or mud from roads, streets, alleys or sidewalks; the allowance of proper drainage of the site; and the removal of any and all refuse, trash, debris, brush and limbs or materials from the site. 
(2)  Section 302.4 regarding weeds. Replace and supplement with: 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches (10") (254 mm). All noxious weeds, rank vegetation, vegetation subject to blight, and vegetation of any nature located in an area that harbors rodents, insects, animals, reptiles or any other creature which either may or does constitute a menace to health, public safety or welfare, shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, brush, annual plants, woody vines, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
302.4.1 Notice requirements. In addition to the other notice requirements of Section 107.2, a notice for a violation under this provision shall advise that the owner or person or persons responsible is ordered to cut, destroy or remove the identified weeds within five (5) days of receipt of the notice, and that the owner or person or persons responsible may appeal this order within this five (5) day period (as prescribed by Section 111); provided, in cases where the owner is unknown or is a nonresident, and there is no resident agent, the notice shall state that the owner or person or persons responsible has ten (10) days after publication of the notice in the official City paper to cut, destroy or remove the identified weeds, or to make an appeal; further provided, the Code Official, in his discretion, may extend these deadlines when appropriate. 
302.4.2 Application of State Statute. Nothing in this code shall affect, restrict or impair the rights of the City under the provisions of State statute (as amended), including, but not limited to, K.S.A. 12-1617e and 12-1617f, and K.S.A. Chapter 2, Article 13 relating to the control and eradication of certain noxious weeds as defined by such statute. 
(3)  Section 302.5 regarding rodent harborage. Replace with: 
302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. All openings in the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations of all structures, which may be reached by rodents from the ground by climbing or burrowing, shall be closed with material or equipment impervious to rodent gnawing. It shall also be unlawful for any person to create, permit or maintain any condition that provides shelter or protection for rodents in, under or outside any structure or exterior property. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by an approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(4)  Section 302.9 regarding defacement of property. Replace and supplement with: 
302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building, wall, rock, sidewalk, pavement, bridge, fence, gate, tree or other similar surface on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti; provided this requirement shall not restrict any necessary marking for governmental, utility or arborist activity. 
302.9.1 Restoration. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or person or persons responsible for the property to restore this surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair within a period of five (5) days, unless this period is extended by the Code Official in his discretion. 
302.9.2 Reward. As allocated by the City Council, the City will pay a reward up to the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to any person providing information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of this violation. 
(5)  Section 302 regarding exterior property areas. Supplement with: 
302.11. Parking and Storage of Vehicles in Residential Areas. 
1.  Except as provided for in other provisions of the City Code, no person shall, nor shall any property owner allow another person to store for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, more than twelve (12) occurrences per year on any lot zoned for residential use any trailer, semi-trailer, boat, bus, camper or recreational vehicle over ten feet (10') in height, or any oversized (self-propelled or otherwise) motor vehicle (as defined by the Code of the City of Fairway Section 10-63), regardless of height, anywhere on their property. Trailers, semi-trailers, boats, buses, campers or recreational vehicles under ten feet (10') in height may be stored indefinitely on residential property behind the front building line for interior lots and behind the front and interior-side building lines for corner lots. Items must be stored on a paved surface. 
2.  Except as provided for in other provisions of the City Code, trailers, semi-trailers, boats, buses, campers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes (self-propelled or otherwise), oversized motor vehicles (as defined by the Code of the City of Fairway Section 10-63), regardless of height, may be stored less than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours not more than twelve (12) occurrences per year, in front of the front building line for interior lots and in front of the front and interior-side building lines for corner lots, on any lot zoned for residential use. Items must be stored on a paved surface. 
3.  The above shall not apply to passenger vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, children's toys, garden carts and lawn equipment. 
(6)  Section 303.7 regarding roofs and drainage. Replace with: 
303.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water and water from intermittent sources such as discharges from sump pumps, foundation drains, or other similar sources, excluding lawn sprinkler, shall not be discharged: A) at a point no closer than five feet (5') to any adjoining side or rear property line; B) at a point no closer than five feet (5') to any adjoining public sidewalk or road; C) within the right-of-way in any circumstance; or D) in a manner that creates a public nuisance. All drains must also comply with the Tree Protection Ordinance. 
(7)  Section 303.14 regarding insect screens. Insert: "January 1 to December 31." 
(Prior Code, § 6-907; Ord. No. 1304; Ord. No. 1661 , § 1, 12-11-2017) 
Sec. 6-56. - Amendment to Chapter 6 of the property maintenance code as published. 
    The following sections of Chapter 6 of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), Edition 2000, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section 602.3 regarding heat supply. Insert: "January 1 to December 31." 
(2)  Section 602.4 regarding occupiable work spaces. Insert: "January 1 to December 31." 
(Prior Code, § 6-907; Ord. No. 1304) 
Chapter 7 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Kansas Retailers' Sales Tax Act. 
    Except as may otherwise be provided by law, such a tax shall be identical in its application and exemptions therefrom to the Kansas Retailers' Sales Tax Act (K.S.A. 79-3601 et seq.) and all laws, administrative rules and regulations of the State Department of Revenue relating to the State retailers' sales tax shall apply to such City retailers' sales insofar as such laws and regulations may be made applicable. The services of the Department of Revenue shall be utilized to administer, enforce and collect the sales tax. 
(Prior Code, § 8-801; Ord. No. 817, § 3) 
Secs. 7-2-7-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES 

Sec. 7-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business, trade, occupation or profession means callings, renderings or furnishings of services or products; provided the business, trade, occupation or profession is carried on from a fixed place of business or home located within the City. 
    License means the document issued by the City acknowledging payment of the required amount of occupational tax and stating the name of the license, the kind of business, where the business is located, the period which the tax covers, such other matters as may be required, and signed by the proper officer or officers. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, organization, association, joint stock company or syndicate who or which is engaged in any business, trade, occupation or profession or rendering or furnishing any service for profit or livelihood and subject to the provisions of this article; provided that any individual in the direct employ of any person licensed under the provisions of this article is not a person unless that individual operates as a subcontractor, but if such individual operates or practices his skill for compensation for any person other than his licensed employer, he is a person and must pay the tax and obtain a license, if such be required by the terms of this article. 
    Tax means an occupational tax, sometimes also referred to as an occupational license fee, for City revenue upon and for the privilege of engaging in a business, trade, occupation or profession, as herein defined, without regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 7-102; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 769; Ord. No. 1312; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-26. - License required. 
    No person, either as principal officer, agent, servant or employee, shall conduct, pursue, carry on, or operate any business, trade, occupation or profession, or render or furnish service specified in this article, without first making application to the City Clerk for a license therefor and paying to the City Clerk the license tax as prescribed in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-101; Ord. No. 216) 
Sec. 7-27. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as taxing: 
(1)  The interstate portion of any business, trade, occupation or profession. 
(2)  Instrumentalities of the government of the United States, unless authorized by laws of the United States, or instrumentalities of the government of the State or its political subdivisions or instrumentalities of the government of any other state or political subdivision. 
(3)  Organizations or their employees operating wholly for charitable, religious, benevolent, fraternal, civic, educational, military, municipal, State or similar purposes, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual. Organizations qualifying under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26 USC 501(c)(3), as amended, shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this article. 
(4)  Any attorney, for the occupation of attorney, if the attorney is registered with the clerk of any district court in the state, pursuant to K.S.A. 20-3127. 
(5)  Any producer or grower or any agent or employee of a producer or grower engaged in the sale of farm, garden or aquaculture products or fruits grown within the State, for that occupation, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1617. 
(6)  The income, premiums or gross receipts of any insurance company subject to taxation under K.S.A. 40-252 and 40-2810. 
(7)  Any captive insurance company formed under the provisions of K.S.A. 40-4301 to 40-4318. 
(8)  Any mutual insurance company paying taxes into the State treasury through the Commissioner of Insurance, pursuant to K.S.A. 40-1211. 
(9)  The business of using, manufacturing, selling or delivery of motor vehicle fuels or special fuels pursuant to K.S.A. 79-3424. 
(10)  Any utility paying a franchise fee to the City, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001. 
(b)  The City Administrator/City Clerk may require any person, business, trade, occupation, profession, instrumentality or organization claiming to be exempt under this section to file a verified statement of the facts upon which the exemption is claimed or to provide other documentation pertaining to the exemption. 
(Prior Code, § 7-103; Ord. No. 1312; Ord. No. 1524, § 2, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-28. - Taxes levied. 
    The occupational tax hereby levied shall be in the amounts as set out for a twelve (12) month period, unless a different time is specifically stated and according to the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance by the Governing Body and on record in the Office of the City Clerk for business categories as follows: 
(1)  Retail establishments and administrative offices. Any persons engaged in any type of business or profession that leases or owns space within the City that is zoned B-1 Neighborhood Business District, B-2 Office District or B-3P Planned Business/Mixed-Use District shall pay an occupational tax computed on the basis of total interior space footage of the leased or owned space regardless of use; provided that leased departments which have a private individual exterior entrance, even though under a common roof with another business establishment, shall pay an occupational tax as though a separate business according to the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. 
(2)  Drive-through facilities . For each drive-through lane associated with a business, the business shall pay a fee in addition to the fee as set out in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. 
(3)  Home occupations . Any business having its primary place of business conducted from a residential structure which is zoned R-1 Single-Family Residential District or R-2P Planned Residential District; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to convey the right to use any residential structure for a business use prohibited by the City zoning regulations including Sections 15-298 and 15-335. 
(4)  Rental properties. Any persons engaged in the business of owning and leasing or leasing apartments, duplexes, residential homes and all other rental properties for each building or dwelling leased. In the event rental property is offered for lease for the first time after commencement of any tax year, the owner-lessor or his leasing agent shall pay the tax within thirty (30) days after commencing the lease. An occupational license shall not be issued under this section to any person who has not first obtained a current and valid rental and non-owner-occupied dwelling registration pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 7-104; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-29. - More than one business. 
    Whenever several classifications shall be applicable to a business, the business, firm, or calling shall pay the highest classification in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-105; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-30. - License fee payable. 
    The license period shall be from July 1 to June 30 of each year and the fees required to be paid in one (1) annual payment by July 15 of each year. The licenses in effect at the time of the amendment of this section shall not expire until June 30. A penalty of five percent (5%) per month of the required tax shall be added in case of failure to pay the required fees when due, for each month or fraction thereof that the fees have remained unpaid with the exception that in no event will a penalty be assessed against a new business in the first year of the initial operation of the business. 
(Prior Code, § 7-106; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1050; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-31. - Application. 
    All licenses shall be secured by making written application to the City Clerk which shall set forth the business classification and the interior square footage where applicable. All persons doing business or their employees not having a permanent location within the City are required to carry their licenses with them, and all persons shall present their license for inspection on request that they do so by any police officer or building inspector or their authorized representatives of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 7-107; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-32. - Nontransferable. 
    An occupational license issued in this article shall not be transferable except when a sale of a going business has been made, in which event the buyer of the business shall notify the City Clerk of the change of management. 
(Prior Code, § 7-108; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-33. - New business, partial payment. 
    Every person commencing business shall first secure an occupational license covering the period from the date from which the business is to be started until the next succeeding July 1. The tax which would be payable on an annual basis shall be determined as provided in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance and the tax for this initial period shall be prorated based upon the number of months or fraction thereof remaining to the next July 1 period. No refunds for business ceasing during the year shall be made. 
(Prior Code, § 7-109; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1062; Ord. No. 1524, §§ 5, 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-34. - Issuance of licenses. 
    All licenses provided in this article shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the proper sum to the City Clerk as set forth in this article. All licenses shall be signed by the Mayor or the City Clerk or the City Treasurer and the seal of the City shall be affixed thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 7-110; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-35. - Record. 
    The City Clerk shall keep a record in which shall be entered the names of each and every person, his license, address, the date of the license, the amount paid therefor and the time when the license shall expire. 
(Prior Code, § 7-111; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-36. - Licenses displayed. 
    All persons doing business in a permanent location are hereby required to have their license conspicuously displayed in their place of business and all persons to whom licenses are issued not having a permanent place of business are required to carry their license with them and any licensee shall present the license for inspection when requested to do so by any citizen or officer of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 7-112; Ord. No. 216; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-37. - Person arrested, fined. 
    When any firm or corporation engages in any business in this article required to be licensed without first having obtained a license as required, the manager, local agent, or party in charge may be arrested and fined as provided in Section 7-40. 
(Prior Code, § 7-114; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-38. - Payment of fine does not pay tax; civil action. 
    The payment of the fine for failure to pay the tax and secure a license shall not constitute payment of the tax nor excuse the person from making payment, and the City may proceed by civil action to collect the tax. 
(Prior Code, § 7-115; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-39. - After-hours business license. 
(a)  Licenses required . No business shall be open to the general public in the City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. without first having been granted a license by the Governing Body, giving such person the privilege to so operate and carry on such trade or business. 
(b)  Application for license . Applications to the City for a license to operate or carry on any trade or business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. shall be filed with the City Clerk to be referred to the Chief of Police who shall have the power to inquire and make findings as to the method to be used in the operation and carrying on of said trade or business, the commodity to be sold or dispensed and the hours the business shall be open to the public. 
(c)  Approval of application. After investigation, the Chief of Police shall refer all applications to the Governing Body with his written recommendations as to whether the license should be granted or denied; the Governing Body shall act upon the application within a period of thirty (30) days after the recommendation has been made by the Chief of Police. 
(d)  License suspension . The Chief of Police upon information and investigation shall have the power to suspend any license issued according to Subsection (c) of this section, if it should appear that the trade or business is conducted in a manner so as to violate the ordinances of the City, or that the commodities sold or the services rendered are unlawful, or the business or trade is operated or carried on in such a manner as to disturb the peace of the community; provided that before any suspension order shall become effective a written notice of the same shall be delivered by the Chief of Police to the person so operating or carrying on the trade or business, and that upon completion of the service, the license is thereafter suspended until further notice of the Governing Body. 
(e)  License revocation. The Chief of Police shall immediately report to the Governing Body the suspension of any license issued according to Subsection (c) of this section, and at the next regular meeting of the City Council, the license shall be reinstated or revoked by the City Council; provided that the City Council may receive testimony other than that of the Chief of Police, or the City Council may order the Chief of Police to make further investigation before acting on the matter of revocation of the license. 
(f)  Term of license . All licenses issued under Subsection (c) of this section shall expire on June 30 of each calendar year. 
(g)  Penalty . Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, §§ 7-201-7-207; Ord. No. 159, §§ 1-5, 7, 8; Ord. No. 1524, § 8, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 7-40. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 7-113; Ord. No. 611; Ord. No. 1524, § 7, 4-9-2012) 
Secs. 7-41-7-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 7-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Fairway, Kansas. Any reference to "within the City" means within the corporate City limits of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
    Entity means any individual person, governmental entity, business, corporation, partnership, firm, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, unincorporated association, joint venture or trust and shall include all forms of business enterprise not specifically listed in this article. 
    Facilities means lines, pipes, mains, laterals, wires, cables, conduit, ducts, poles, towers, cabinets, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennae, transmitters, gates, meters, gas distribution system and gas distribution facilities, together with all necessary appurtenances or other equipment thereto, or any part thereof, for the purpose of providing or otherwise facilitating any service. 
    Franchise means the grant, right, privilege and franchise by the City to provide, distribute, transport or sell a service within the City and/or to install, construct, maintain, extend or operate facilities along, across, upon, under or within the right-of-way. The grant, right, privilege and franchise shall be in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. ch. 12, art. 20 (K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq.), the City's home rule power, and applicable City ordinances. 
    Franchise fee means consideration paid in the form of a charge upon a franchisee as prescribed in the ordinance granting the franchise. Any such franchisee fee shall be subject to any applicable provisions of Federal or State law. 
    Franchisee or grantee means any entity that has a franchise granted by the City pursuant to this article, K.S.A. ch. 12, art. 20 (K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq.), and/or the City's home rule power. 
    Gas consumer means, without limitation, any entity that receives natural gas or other energy within the City through a gas distribution system or gas distribution facilities. 
    Gas distribution system or gas distribution facilities means a pipeline or system of pipelines, including, without limitation, mains, pipes, boxes, reducing and regulating stations, laterals, conduits and services extensions, together with all necessary appurtenances thereto, or any part thereof, for the purpose of distribution or supplying natural gas or other energy for light, heat, power and all other purposes. 
    MCF means a measurement of natural gas equal to one thousand (1,000) cubic feet. It is assumed for purposes of this article that one (1) MCF equals one million British Thermal Units (1,000,000 BTUs). 
    Other energy means any energy provided in a gaseous, liquid, or slurry mixture form through pipelines for light, heat, power, and all other purposes as an alternative or replacement for natural gas, but specifically, it shall not include electrical energy. 
    Reseller means a provider of service within the City whereby the provider purchases and resells the service of a duly authorized franchisee, but only where the duly authorized franchisee is already paying fees for the resold service under its franchise with the City (i.e., the resale of local exchange service as contemplated by K.S.A. 12-2001(n)). 
    Right-of-way means present and future streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and public easements, including easements dedicated to the City in plats of the City for streets and alleys. The term "right-of-way" shall not include property owned by the City outside of said streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and easements, or public easements limited in their dedication of purpose or otherwise not intended for placement of facilities (i.e., a public easement dedicated only for stormwater purposes). 
    Service means any utility or similar service to be provided, distributed, transported or sold to an entity by means of a delivery or distribution system that is comprised of facilities within the City, including, without limitation, telecommunication, cable, broadband, Internet, open video systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, natural gas, other energy, or any other similar service. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1302; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-68. - Franchise requirement. 
    No entity shall provide, distribute, transport or sell a service within the City or shall install, construct, maintain, extend or operate facilities along, across, upon, under or within the right-of-way without a franchise authorizing the same, unless applicable Federal or State law prohibits City enforcement of such requirement. This franchise requirement includes: 
(1)  Entities with facilities within the City in order to provide, distribute, transport or sell service within the City; 
(2)  Entities with facilities within the City in order to provide, distribute, transport or sell service outside, but not within the City; and 
(3)  Entities without their own facilities within the City that lease or otherwise use the facilities of other entities in order to provide, distribute, transport or sell service within the City. 
Provided that this franchise requirement shall not include a reseller, or include a governmental entity that has entered into an agreement with the City pursuant to K.S.A. ch. 12, art. 20 (K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq.) regarding the use and occupancy of the right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1303; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-69. - Gas distribution systems and gas distribution facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any entity to install, construct, maintain, extend or operate or a gas distribution system or gas distribution facilities or to provide, distribute, transport or sell natural gas or other energy within the City without first obtaining a franchise authorizing the same and requiring a franchise fee. This franchise requirement applies to any provision, distribution, transportation or sale to a gas consumer within the City whether or not the portion of the entity's gas distribution system is in the right-of-way; provided that, in the event the gas distribution system or gas distribution facilities of a franchisee are used by an entity without its own gas distribution system or gas distribution facilities within the City for the transportation or sale of said entity's natural gas or other energy to a gas consumer, said entity shall be exempt from the requirement of obtaining a franchise if it reports, calculates and pays (either directly or through the franchisee) a sum to be submitted to the City for such services that is equivalent to the calculation of the franchisee's franchise fee. in such event, if gross receipts are not or cannot be reported, a sufficient volumetric rate multiplied by the number of MCF of the transported natural gas may be used in making such calculation. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1304; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-70. - Preservation of police power; authority and applicability of regulations. 
    Any rights granted pursuant to this article or pursuant to any franchise are subject to the authority of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances and regulations necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. All entities subject to this article shall also be subject to and comply with all applicable Federal and State laws, statutes and regulations, and all applicable rules, regulations, policies and ordinances enacted by the City, including, without limitation, the City's ordinance relating to the use and occupancy of the public right-of-way (codified as Article III of Chapter 9 of this Code, and amendments thereto) and the City's ordinance relating to utility facilities (codified as Division 4 of Article III of Chapter 15 of this Code and amendments thereto). Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to waive a right, if any, that an entity might have to seek judicial or regulatory review as provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1305; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-71. - Nature of rights granted by any franchise. 
    Franchises shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the right-of-way or any other public property, but shall give only the right to occupy the right-of-way for the purposes and period stated within the franchise. No franchise shall grant the right to use facilities owned or controlled by the City or a third party, without the consent of such party, nor shall a franchise excuse a franchisee from obtaining appropriate access or attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the facilities owned or controlled by the City or a third party. Any franchise granted by the City shall be nonexclusive. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1306; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-72. - Indemnification of the City. 
    Any entity installing, constructing, maintaining, extending or operating facilities within the City or otherwise providing, distributing, transporting or selling a service within the City shall hold the City harmless from any and all damages or claims arising or accruing from: the exercise of any right or privilege granted under this article or a franchise; the installation, construction, maintenance, extension, operation of its facilities within the City; and the negligence or intentional acts or omissions of its employees, agents, or servants (including contractors and subcontractors) in the exercise of said installation, construction, maintenance, extension, operation, provision, distribution, transportation or sale. Failure of said entity to obtain or maintain a franchise shall in no manner waive this requirement and obligation. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1307; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-73. - Liability insurance and bond requirement. 
(a)  Each franchisee shall file with the City evidence of liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State. The amount will be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate. The insurance will protect the City from and against all claims by any entity whatsoever for loss or damage from personal injury, bodily injury, death, or property damage to the extent caused or alleged to have been caused by the negligent or wrongful acts or omissions of the franchisee. The franchisee shall also have coverage for automobile liability in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate. The City shall be an additional insured on all policies of the franchisee, to the extent permitted by law, unless waived in writing by the City. If the franchisee is self-insured, it shall provide the City proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the above amounts, and shall agree to indemnify and hold the City harmless for any losses associated with the franchisee's activities in the right-of-way. All contractors actually performing work for any franchisee shall be subject to the same insurance requirements set forth in this section. A copy of the liability insurance certificate or proof of self-insurance must be on file with the City Clerk. 
(b)  To the extent any franchisee installs, constructs, maintains, extends or operates any facilities in the right-of-way, it shall maintain a performance and maintenance bond as set forth in the City's ordinance relating to the use and occupancy of the public right-of-way (codified as Article III of Chapter 9 of this Code and amendments thereto) or as set forth in the franchise ordinance of franchisee. To the extent any franchisee installs, constructs, maintains, extends or operates any facilities anywhere else within the City, the City may require a bond in the franchise when reasonably deemed necessary. A copy of any required bond must be on file with the City Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1308; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-74. - Franchise applications and renewals. 
(a)  Applications . All applications for a franchise shall be on forms provided or approved by the City. Any application fee shall be paid prior to processing by the City, unless otherwise agreed to by the City. Upon receipt of a completed application and any applicable fee, the designated City official shall prepare a report and make a recommendation respecting such application to the Governing Body. Each service subject to a franchise shall require a separate application. 
(b)  Application fee . An application fee shall be paid at the time of the application in the amount established by ordinance; provided that the City may agree to defer submission of part or all of the application fee until all costs have been determined. As part of said application fee, the City may include reimbursement for all reasonable costs incurred by the City in drafting, negotiating, adopting, and publishing the franchise. Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the City from having any publication or other reasonable costs billed directly to the applicant. Said fee and costs shall not be considered or credited against the collection of applicable franchise fees. 
(c)  Franchise renewal . Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law. The City and any franchisee, by mutual consent or as otherwise provided in such franchisee's franchise, may enter into renewal negotiations. The City may require such franchisee to update any application information and, subject to State statute or any provisions in such franchisee's franchise, submit an application fee. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1309; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-75. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the full extent of the terms in this article, and said provisions shall be deemed incorporated into each franchise. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1310; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-76. - Federal and State law. 
    The requirements set forth in this article shall be subject to the provisions of K.S.A. ch. 12, art. 20 (K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq.), and any other applicable Federal or State law. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1311; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-77. - Failure to enforce. 
    The failure of the City to insist upon the strict adherence to the requirements of this article or of any franchise shall not be construed as a waiver or relinquishment for the future of the rights of the City to enforce this article or any franchise or any term or provision thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1312; Ord. No. 1465) 
Sec. 7-78. - Violations. 
    Any entity violating this article shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. The payment of such fine notwithstanding, all such violators shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this article to fullest extent allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the payment of a franchise fee or the equivalent thereof, and indemnification of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1313; Ord. No. 1465) 
Secs. 7-79-7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL UNIT AND NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING REGISTRATION AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 7-100. - Registration required. 
    No person shall allow to be occupied, rent to another for occupancy or offer to rent to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit unless the owner has first obtained a registration or provisional registration under the terms of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1101; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-101. - Applicability and exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all dwelling units, including single-family dwellings and rented dwelling units in multiple-family dwellings. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any single-family dwellings in which the owner of the dwelling makes his residence, nor shall it apply to any dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling in which the owner of the multiple-family dwelling makes his residence. The term "residence" means the place which is adopted by a person as the person's place of habitation and to which, whenever the person is absent, the person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where the person sleeps shall be considered the person's residence. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to hotels, motels, jails, licensed nursing homes, licensed board and care homes and hospitals. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a bona fide sale of a residential rental dwelling to the resident/occupant by a contract for deed or similar instrument; provided that any such instrument or an affidavit of equitable interest which specifically identifies the instrument is properly executed and filed of record with the Register of Deeds of the County, and a file-stamped copy of said instrument is provided to the City Clerk's office. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1102; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-102. - Scope of registration. 
(a)  One registration shall be issued for each building containing one (1) or more dwelling units and shall be deemed to cover all dwelling units under single ownership in each building. 
(b)  The City shall have the authority to exercise its registration powers under this article, including the power to issue, deny, revoke and suspend registrations, with respect to an entire building or only a portion of a building. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1103; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-103. - Declaration of owner-occupied dwelling units. 
    The City Clerk's office shall annually obtain a situs report from the County Clerk's office. Individuals authorized to execute the duties of the City Clerk's office in this article shall be the City Administrator/City Clerk or his designee. For each lot or parcel of ground that the tax bill is sent to a different address than is listed for that lot or parcel of ground, the City Clerk's office shall send a request for declaration to the property owner on a form furnished by the City Clerk's office. The City Clerk's office shall also send a request for declaration form to the property owner of any property located within the City that the City Clerk's office reasonably believes may be subject to a registration under this article. The request for declaration form shall indicate the property owner's name, mailing address and the address of the property that is the subject of the request for declaration, and shall request that the property owner declare whether the property listed on the request for declaration form is occupied by the property owner. Failure to return the request for declaration form to the City within thirty (30) days from issuance shall subject the property owner to a penalty fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover the additional administrative costs necessary to investigate whether or not the property is owner occupied. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1104; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-104. - Application for registration. 
    The owner of existing rental or non-owner-occupied dwellings shall make a written application to the City Clerk's office for a registration and a permit authorizing the rental or non-owner-occupancy of residential dwellings. In addition, the owner of each dwelling constructed or converted to rental or non-owner-occupied usage after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall make written application to the City Clerk's office for a registration as provided in this section prior to initial occupancy. An application shall be made on a form furnished by the City Clerk's office for this purpose and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Name, residence address, e-mail address and telephone number of the owner of the dwelling. If the owner is a partnership, the name of the partnership, and the name and residence address of the managing partner. If the owner is a corporation, the name and address of the corporation, and the name and residence address of the chief operating officer. In cases where the owner of a dwelling resides outside of the County, the owner shall designate an agent/contact person who shall reside in the County. 
(2)  If the owner has appointed an agent authorized to accept service of process and to receive and give receipt for notices, the name, residence address e-mail address and telephone number of such agent. 
(3)  Every applicant, whether an individual, partnership or corporation, shall identify in the application, by name, residence address e-mail address and telephone number, a natural person who is actively involved in, and responsible for, the maintenance and management of the premises. A post office box is not acceptable as an address for such person. The individual designated in this subsection may also be the owner of the dwelling or an agent identified in Subsection (2) of this section. 
(4)  Street address of the dwelling. 
(5)  Number of dwelling units within each building; including correct street addresses for each individual unit. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1105; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-105. - Provisional registrations. 
(a)  The owner of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling who has submitted an application and paid the registration fee required by this article shall be considered operational under a provisional registration. A provisional registration shall authorize the occupancy of rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling units pending issuance of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration. 
(b)  A provisional registration indicates only that the owner has submitted an application for a registration and paid the required fee, and that the registration shall be issued or denied after the building and all dwelling units have been inspected for compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this article. A provisional registration is not a determination that the building complies with the minimum standards required by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1106; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-106. - Expiration, renewal. 
    All registrations and provisional registrations issued under this article shall expire on June 30 of each year, subject to renewal year to year in the manner provided in this article. The City Clerk's office will send a notice of renewal and application for renewal to each registrant on or before March 31 of each year. The purpose of the notice and application is to obtain information sufficient to verify the accuracy of the registrant's information currently on file and to request the consent of the tenant or occupant of each dwelling unit to facilitate the inspections required as a condition to registration renewal. No registration or provisional registration shall be granted without payment of the required registration fee. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1107; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-107. - Registration nontransferable. 
    A registration or provisional registration issued under this article is nontransferable. A new registration application shall be required for each change of ownership of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1108; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-108. - Registration and additional inspection fees. 
(a)  The original and annual registration fees for a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration or provisional registration shall be set by resolution adopted by the City Council and as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. The registration fees are estimated and intended to satisfy the regulatory costs of this article. If the actual cost of administration of this regulatory program exceeds the fee charged, the City may bill the registrant or applicant for the excess costs that can be specifically identified to the registration. A change in ownership shall require a new registration application and payment of the registration fee. An increase in the number of registered dwelling units during the registration year shall require an amended registration application and payment of an additional registration fee to cover the additional units. 
(b)  Additional inspection fees as set forth in the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance will be assessed for the second and each subsequent inspection of a dwelling unit in a calendar year which is necessary due to a determination that the dwelling unit does not meet the standards or requirements of Section 7-111. 
(c)  The original registration fee shall be due and payable at the time an application for a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration is made. The annual registration fee imposed by this section is due and payable on June 15 of each year, unless a different date is specified in this article. 
(d)  Any person failing to pay a registration fee, inspection fee or other cost of administration required under this section within thirty (30) days after it becomes due shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount for each thirty (30) days' delinquency. The penalty will be assessed on the fifteenth of each month delinquent. If any fee, cost or penalty associated with the provisions of this article remain unpaid after ninety (90) days after it becomes due, the fee, cost and/or penalty shall be assessed and charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the dwelling unit is located. If the fee, cost and/or penalty is to be assessed, the City Administrator/City Clerk, at the time of certifying City taxes, shall certify the fee, cost and/or penalty, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the County against the lot or parcel of ground, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City in the same manner as City taxes are collected and paid. Assessments made under this section shall be a lien on the property and the lien shall be superior to all liens except general tax liens. 
(e)  All fees required by this article shall be nonrefundable. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1109; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-109. - Inspections. 
(a)  Purpose . Inspections are necessary under this article to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the visitors to and citizens of the City in rental and non-owner-occupied dwellings by maintaining the character and stability of residential areas; enabling the City to prevent and correct housing conditions that adversely affect or are likely to adversely affect the life, safety, general welfare and health of persons occupying these dwellings; providing an additional mechanism for the City to enforce minimum standards for the maintenance of existing residential buildings; and by preserving the value of land and buildings throughout the City. 
(b)  Frequency . Inspections will be required as a prerequisite to the original issuance of a registration under this article, and then on an annual basis, unless a one (1) year waiver of inspection is granted as provided for in Subsection (c) of this section, as a prerequisite to the renewal of a registration, as provided in Section 7-106. The Code Official shall conduct inspections for registration renewal upon receipt of the application. All references to the Code Official in this article shall mean the Code Official or his designee. 
(c)  Waiver of inspection . Beginning with the 2014-2015 rental licensing period, if a property passes the annual inspection on the first inspection without a warning letter and a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration is issued, that property is eligible for a one (1) year waiver of inspection for the following rental licensing period. No property is eligible for a waiver of inspection for longer than one (1) year. This section does not constitute a waiver of the business license required for rental properties under Section 7-28(4). The one (1) year waiver of inspection is forfeited if at any time the property is found to be in violation of the City's property maintenance code. 
(d)  Scope . Inspections for the original issuance and renewal of registrations are limited to the exterior of all rental and non-owner-occupied dwellings to verify that these dwellings satisfy the minimum standards established in the property maintenance code, adopted as amended, in Chapter 6, Article III of this Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an interior inspection by the Code Official of any dwelling unit when requested by the tenant or occupant of the dwelling unit or to prohibit the Code Official from conducting any inspections otherwise authorized by law. 
(e)  Manner . Inspections of the dwelling units shall be conducted by the Code Official in the manner prescribed in the City's property maintenance code. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1110; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-110. - Issuance of registration. 
    When, upon completion of an inspection of rental and non-owner-occupied dwellings, the Code Official, in his discretion, finds that the minimum standards for licensing have been met, a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration may be issued. No registration shall be issued until all past due fees and penalties are paid in full. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1111; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-111. - Registration standards. 
    The following minimum standards and conditions shall be met in order to hold a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration under this article. Failure to comply with any of these standards and conditions shall be adequate grounds for the denial, refusal to renew, revocation or suspension of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration or provisional registration. 
(1)  The registrant or applicant shall have paid the required registration fee. 
(2)  Rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling units shall not exceed the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by this Code. 
(3)  No rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling or dwelling unit shall be over-occupied or illegally occupied in violation of this Code. 
(4)  The rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling shall not have been used or converted to rooming units in violation of this Code. 
(5)  The rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling shall not be under condemnation as hazardous or unfit for human habitation under this Code or a State statute. 
(6)  The owner shall not suffer or allow weeds, vegetation, junk, debris, or rubbish to accumulate repeatedly on the exterior of the premises so as to create a nuisance condition under Chapter 6, Article II of this Code. 
(7)  The rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling or any dwelling unit therein shall not be maintained in a manner that would constitute a violation of Chapter 6, Article II of this Code. 
(8)  The rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling shall not have delinquent real estate taxes due and owing. For purposes of this article, a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling is considered delinquent in the payment of real estate taxes when any taxes owed have gone unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days. 
(Prior code, § 7-1112; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-112. - Determination of noncompliance; notice. 
(a)  If the Code Official determines that a building or dwelling unit fails to meet the licensing standards, he shall mail a notice to the owner or the owner's agent. The notice shall specify the reasons why the building or unit fails to meet the licensing standards and shall include a copy of the inspection report if applicable. The notice shall also indicate that the registration holder or applicant has ten (10) days to correct the defects, after which the Code Official will request that the City Clerk's office deny, refuse to renew, revoke, or suspend the registration or provisional registration. 
(b)  The time period set forth in Subsection (a) of this section shall not renew nor be extended by the sale or transfer of any interest in the property or dwelling unless specifically authorized by the Code Official. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1113; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-113. - Denial; nonrenewal; revocation; suspension. 
(a)  If after any period for compliance under Section 7-112 has expired, the Code Official determines that the dwelling still fails to comply with the standards, the City Clerk's office shall mail the owner a notice of denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of the registration or provisional registration. The notice shall: 
(1)  State that the Code Official has determined that the building fails to comply with the licensing standards for rental or non-owner-occupied dwellings, as set forth in Section 7-111; 
(2)  State the specific reasons why the dwelling fails to meet licensing standards, including copies of applicable inspection reports; 
(3)  State that the City Clerk's office will deny, refuse to renew, revoke, or suspend the registration or provisional registration unless the owner appeals the determination within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice, in the manner provided in Section 7-114; 
(4)  State that after denial, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension, the dwelling or the affected dwelling units therein must be vacated, and shall not be reoccupied until a registration is issued after approval by the Code Official; 
(5)  Describe how an appeal may be filed under Section 7-114. 
(b)  The Code Official shall cause a notice to tenants to be prominently posted on the building. The notice shall indicate that the rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration for the building has been denied, revoked, or suspended, whichever is applicable; that the action will become final on a specific date unless the building owner appeals and requests a hearing; that tenants may be required to vacate the building when the action becomes final. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1114; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-114. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  Any person wishing to appeal the determination of denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of a registration or provisional registration shall file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk's office within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension. The notice shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  The appeal will be heard by the City Council. The City Council may promulgate its own rules and procedures for the appeals procedure consistent with this Code and this article. 
(c)  At the hearing, the City Council shall hear all relevant evidence and argument. The City Council may admit and give probative effect to evidence that possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(d)  The City Council shall render its decision in writing within fifteen (15) days after the close of the hearing. The decision shall determine whether the building, or dwelling units therein, meets the licensing standards, and shall specify the factual basis for the determination. 
(e)  The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the City Clerk's office. 
(f)  The final decision of the City Council shall be mailed to the registration holder or applicant. 
(g)  A notice to tenants of the final decision shall be mailed to each occupant and prominently posted on the building. The notice shall indicate the date upon which tenants must vacate the building, if required to do so, and shall clearly indicate which dwelling units are affected. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1115; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-115. - Vacation of affected dwelling units. 
    When an application for rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration has been denied, or a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration or provisional registration has been revoked, suspended, or not renewed, the Code Official shall order the dwelling or the affected dwelling units therein vacated, giving tenants a reasonable time to arrange new housing and to move their possessions. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1116; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-116. - Operation of rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling unit without a registration a misdemeanor. 
    Any person who violates, fails to comply with a provision of this article, or fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the City. A person who is convicted of any violation of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 8-209, provided that a person who is convicted for allowing to be occupied, renting to another or offering to rent to another any rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling unit, without a registration, as required in Section 7-100, or who violates the provisions of Section 7-118, shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1117; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-117. - Remedies in this article not exclusive. 
    The remedies provided in this article are not exclusive. They are in addition to, and do not supersede or preempt, other remedies such as condemnation, written violation orders and warnings, criminal charges for violation of substantive provisions of any City or State code relating to housing maintenance, fire safety, building codes, zoning, health, and the like. Further, the remedies in this article do not supersede or affect the legal rights and remedies of tenants provided under State law or this Code. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1118; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-118. - Duties of registrant. 
    Every holder of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling registration or provisional registration shall: 
(1)  Promptly notify the City Clerk's office in writing of any change of information contained in the last registration application filed. 
(2)  Maintain a current register of all tenants and other persons with a lawful right of occupancy to a dwelling unit within the building. The register shall be kept current at all times. The registrant shall designate the person who has possession of the register. The register shall be made available for inspection by the Code Official thirty (30) days after the Code Official has caused to be filed a complaint for violations of any applicable ordinance or code relating to property. 
(3)  The owner of any dwelling that is required to be registered by this article shall, prior to the time of sale of the dwelling, notify the buyer in writing of all unabated orders or violations issued by the Code Official pertaining to the dwelling, as well as the requirement that the dwelling, upon acquisition by a new owner, must be registered with the City Clerk's office. A copy of the notification shall be mailed to the Code Official within five (5) days of furnishing the notification to the buyer. If a corporation owns the dwelling, an officer of that corporation shall carry out the notification required by this section. If the property is owned by more than one (1) person, a notification by one (1) of the owners shall satisfy this section. For the purposes of this section, the term "time of sale" shall be construed to mean when a written purchase agreement is executed by the buyer or, in the absence of a purchase agreement, upon the execution of any document providing for the conveyance of a dwelling required to be registered. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1119; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-119. - Right of entry. 
    Absent exigent or emergency circumstances, whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the Code Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any dwelling, which is required to be registered by this article, any condition or violation that makes that building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the Code Official may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this article, provided that if the building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first provide notice and request entry pursuant to Section 7-120. If entry is refused, the Code Official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1120; Ord. No. 1309) 
Sec. 7-120. - Notices. 
    Whenever a notice is required to be sent to or served upon the registrant of a rental or non-owner-occupied dwelling under this article, notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent by first class mail or e-mail address, if this method of delivery is selected on the registration application, to the owner or owner's designated agent at the address or e-mail address, if this method of delivery is selected in the last registration application filed under Section 7-104. Notice may also be sent to the person identified as responsible for the maintenance and management of the premises. If the dwelling unit is not registered pursuant to this article, notice is deemed sufficient if sent by first class mail to the person listed with the County, for the purposes of paying taxes on the property. Notice so mailed is sufficient whether actually received or returned. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1121; Ord. No. 1309) 
Secs. 7-121-7-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-139. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult business means any business: 
(1)  That has as a substantial or significant purpose the sale or rental of merchandise that is intended for use in connection with specified sexual activities or that emphasizes matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area. 
(2)  That has as one (1) of its regular and substantial business purposes: 
a.  The providing of entertainment where the emphasis is on performance, live or otherwise, that depict, portray, exhibit or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or 
b.  The providing of services that are intended to provide sexual arousal or excitement or that allow observation of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas ancillary to other pursuits, or allow participation in specified sexual activities ancillary to other pursuits. 
(3)  That includes but is not limited to any and all of the following specific businesses: 
a.  Businesses that offer merchandise for sale or rent: 
1.  Adult media outlet means a business engaging in the sale or rental of merchandise where a substantial or significant portion of the business is devoted to the sale or rental of adult media. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumed that a substantial or significant portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of adult media if any one (1) or more of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(i)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the sales (including rentals), measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety (90) day period is derived from adult media; 
(ii)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the number of transactions, measured over any consecutive ninety (90) day period, relate to adult media; 
(iii)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult media; 
(iv)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the inventory consists of adult media at any time; 
(v)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the merchandise displayed for sale or rental consists of adult media at any time; or 
(vi)  Forty percent (40%) or more of the sales floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to adult media at any time. 
The presumption that a substantial or significant portion of a business is devoted to the sale or rental of adult media, based upon the guidelines of this subsection, shall be rebuttable. 
2.  Adult newsrack means any coin- or card-operated device that offers for sale by dispensing printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
3.  Adult retail establishment means a business that that displays or offers goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the following tests: 
(i)  It displays or offers for sale or rent items from any two (2) of the following categories: sexually oriented toys or novelties; lingerie; clothing that graphically depicts specified anatomical areas; leather goods designed or marketed for use for sexual bondage or sadomasochistic practices; and the combination of such items constitutes: 
A.  Ten percent (10%) or more of the sales (including rentals), measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety (90) day period; 
B.  Ten percent (10%) or more of the number of sales transactions, measured over any consecutive ninety (90) day period; 
C.  Ten percent (10%) or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time; 
D.  Ten percent (10%) or more of all inventory at any time; 
E.  Ten percent (10%) or more of the merchandise displayed for sale at any time; or 
F.  Ten percent (10%) or more of the sales floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, or any portion of the business not open to the public) at any time; 
(ii)  Five percent (5%) or more of the sales (including rentals), measured in dollars over any consecutive ninety (90) day period is derived from sexually oriented toys or novelties; 
(iii)  Five percent (5%) or more of the number of sales transactions, measured over any consecutive ninety (90) day period, relate to sexually oriented toys or novelties; 
(iv)  Five percent (5%) or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to sexually oriented toys or novelties; 
(v)  Five percent (5%) or more of all inventory consists of sexually oriented toys or novelties at any time; 
(vi)  Five percent (5%) or more of merchandise displayed for sale consists of sexually oriented toys or novelties at any time; or 
(vii)  Five percent (5%) or more of the sales floor area of the business (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, or any portion of the business not open to the public) is devoted to sexually oriented toys or novelties at any time. 
b.  Businesses that provide entertainment: 
1.  Adult entertainment business means any business to which patrons are invited or admitted, and where providing adult entertainment is a regular and substantial portion of its business. The term "adult entertainment business" also includes, but is not limited to, any and all of the following specific businesses: 
(i)  Adult motion picture theater means an establishment with a screen or projection areas, where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the exhibition to patrons of films, videotapes, motion pictures or other visually recorded images that are intended to provide sexual arousal or sexual excitement to the patrons and that are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(ii)  Adult theater means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing the live performance of activities relating to specified sexual activities or exhibition of specified anatomical areas of live entertainers for observation by patrons. 
(iii)  Adult entertainment cabaret means: 
A.  An establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing live adult entertainment that is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the entertainer or other entertainer or the patrons, and is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities; or 
B.  An establishment which regularly features entertainment of an erotic nature including exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers. 
(iv)  Adult entertainment studio (includes the terms "rap studio," "exotic dance studio," "sensitivity studio" or "encounter studio") means an establishment whose premises are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises, and where a regular and substantial portion of its business is providing entertainment that features materials or live performances characterized by an emphasis on or features materials relating to specified sexual activities or the exhibition of specified anatomical areas. 
(v)  Adult encounter parlor means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the provision of premises where patrons congregate, associate, or consort with employees, entertainers, and/or other patrons or private contractors who display specified anatomical areas or perform specified sexual activities in the presence of such patrons, with the intent of providing sexual arousal or excitement to such patrons. 
(vi)  Body painting studio means an establishment where a regular and substantial portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Businesses that provide services: 
1.  Bath house means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers to patrons with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
2.  Adult motel means an enterprise where a regular and substantial portion of its business is offering public accommodations, containing more than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area, for the purpose of viewing adult media by patrons therein and which rents room accommodations to patrons for less than six (6) hours at a time. 
(4)  The term "adult business" does not include, and this article shall not apply to, a theater, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment that is primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances and in which any of the circumstances covered by the term "adult business" are permitted or allowed as part of these art exhibits or performances. 
    Adult entertainment means any exhibition, performance, display or dance of any type, including, but not limited to, talking, singing, reading, listening, posing, serving food or beverages, soliciting for the sale of food, beverages or entertainment, pantomiming, modeling, removal of clothing, or any service offered on a premises where the exhibition, performance, display or dance is intended to arouse or excite the sexual desires of the entertainer, other entertainers or patrons, or if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Adult media means books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotapes, videotapes, compact discs, DVDs, motion pictures, films, CD-ROMs or other devices used to record computer images, or other print or audio media that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult video viewing booth means any enclosed booth, cubicle, stall or compartment that is designed, constructed or used to hold or seat patrons and is used for presenting or viewing adult media by patrons therein. The term "adult video viewing booth" is sometimes referred to as peep shows, adult video arcades, panorams and adult mini-motion picture theaters. The term "adult video viewing booth" shall not mean a theater, movie house, playhouse, or a room or enclosure or a portion thereof that contains more than one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area. 
    Contagious and communicable diseases means those diseases which are set out in K.A.S. 28-1-2. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult business. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult entertainment business, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for entertainment. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers, or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity at any adult business. 
    Minor means any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
    Nude or nudity means the appearance of the human bare buttocks, anus, human genitals, the areola or the nipple of the female breast or a state of dress which fails to opaquely or fully cover the anus, human genitals or the areola or the nipple of the female breast. 
    Operate means to own, conduct or maintain the affairs of any adult business. 
    Operator means any person owning, operating, conducting or maintaining an adult business. 
    Patron means any person or member of the public who enters an adult business, without regard to whether a purchase is made from the adult business or compensation is paid to the adult business or any employee of the adult business for merchandise, entertainment or service; provided that the term "patron" shall not include persons who enter an adult business for the sole purpose of providing services or merchandise to the adult business that is necessary to the operation of the adult business and who do not remain in the adult business after the purpose has been accomplished, including, but not limited to, persons performing construction, repair or maintenance on the premises or delivering goods or merchandise to the adult business and any similar activity. 
    Server means any person who serves food and drink at an adult entertainment business. 
    Sexually oriented toys or novelties means instruments, devices or paraphernalia that either depict specified anatomical areas or are designed or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. In determining whether an item is designed or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, the following guidelines may be considered: 
(1)  Expert testimony as to the principal use of the item; 
(2)  Evidence concerning the total business of a person or business or a person or business establishment and the type of merchandise involved in the business; 
(3)  National and local advertising concerning the use of the item; 
(4)  Evidence of advertising concerning the nature of the business establishment; 
(5)  Instructions, graphics or other material contained on the item itself or on the packaging materials for the item; 
(6)  The physical or structural characteristics of the item; or 
(7)  The manner in which the item is displayed, including its proximity to other regulated merchandise or signage relating to items in a display area. 
Any person may request an interpretive ruling from the Chief of Police, or his designee, as to whether a particular item is considered by the City to be designed or marketed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. An application for an interpretative ruling shall be made in writing on a form provided by the Chief of Police, and shall be accompanied by such other information as may reasonably be requested under the circumstances pertaining to the specified item about which a ruling is requested. The Chief of Police shall issue a written interpretive ruling within ten (10) business days following submission of a completed application. The decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the City Council within fifteen (15) days following the date of the interpretive ruling by submitting a written notice of appeal to the City Clerk. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Uncovered or exposed human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks, female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola encircling the nipple, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means any of the following acts of intended sexual arousal or excitement: 
(1)  Sexual conduct, including, but not limited to, actual or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other intentional touching of a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast of a female; 
(3)  Sadomasochistic acts; or 
(4)  Acts involving animals or latent objects. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1201; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-140. - Required for adult business. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain an adult business in the City unless the owner of the adult business has obtained an adult business license from the City, and it is unlawful to operate this type of business after the license has been revoked or suspended by the City. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed adult business. 
(c)  The failure to post an adult business license in the manner required in this division shall be prima facie evidence that an adult business has not obtained a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any entertainer, employee, manager, operator or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in an adult business, in which an adult business license is not posted in the manner required in this division, had knowledge that the business is not licensed. 
(d)  Any business that engages in the barter, rental, or sale of adult media, if that business is not open to the public in general, but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate City officials and inspection by those officials of only those business records necessary for the limited purpose of determining whether that business enterprise is an adult business. This entry and inspection shall take place during hours when the business is open to the public, unless otherwise requested by the business, and shall not unreasonably interfere with the conduct of the business. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1202; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-141. - Application to existing businesses. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all adult businesses existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, as well as to all adult businesses established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Any adult business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived that is ineligible for licensing solely as a result of the locational restrictions set forth in Section 7-181 shall be deemed a lawful nonconforming business. 
(c)  Each of the following adult businesses shall be considered a unique and separate adult business: adult media outlet; adult newsrack; adult retail establishment; adult motion picture theater; adult theater; adult entertainment cabaret; adult entertainment studio; adult encounter parlor; body painting studio; bath house; adult motel. The classification of each adult business shall be determined at the time a license is issued for the business. Where an adult business is considered a lawful nonconforming business under this section, the right to continue that nonconforming business shall be limited to that specific business and shall not include other adult businesses listed in this section. 
(d)  The extension of a lawful nonconforming business to any portion of a building, which portion was constructed expressly for that nonconforming business prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be permitted, provided that no structural alterations shall be made thereafter. 
(e)  An adult business lawfully operating as a conforming business is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to grant or renewal of the adult business license, of a school, church, licensed child care center or child care center that has been inspected by the City or Fire District, public park or properties owned or used for residential purposes located within the City limits and within one thousand two hundred and fifty feet (1,250') of the adult business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1220; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-142. - Regulations. 
    The City Clerk shall have the power to promulgate regulations as may be necessary and feasible for the carrying out of the duties of his office and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1217; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-143. - Standards of conduct. 
    The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by all adult businesses, their employees and all managers, servers and entertainers and patrons of adult businesses, while on or about the premises of the business: 
(1)  Identification cards. All or any manager, server or entertainer issued a license by the City under the provisions contained in this article shall, at all times when working in an adult business, have in their possession a valid identification card issued by the City, bearing the permit number, the employee's physical description and a photograph of the employee. The identification cards shall be laminated to prevent alteration. 
(2)  Age restriction. Only persons eighteen (18) years of age or older shall be permitted on the premises of any adult business. 
(3)  Exterior observation. The premises of all adult businesses will be so constructed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building. In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building. 
(4)  Exterior display. No adult business will be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of entertainers engaged in adult entertainment from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. 
(5)  Nudity prohibited. No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron in an adult business other than a licensed bath house shall be nude or clothed in less than opaque attire. 
(6)  Certain acts prohibited. 
a.  No manager, employee, server, entertainer or patron shall perform any specified sexual activities, wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates any specified anatomical area, use artificial devices or inanimate objects to perform or depict any of the specified sexual activities or participate in any act of prostitution as prohibited by State law or City ordinance while on the premises of an adult business. 
b.  All adult entertainment in adult entertainment businesses shall occur and be performed solely on a platform or stage which is raised at least two feet (2') above the primary level of the customer floor area. To ensure the performance area of the stage or performance platform is not within the reach of patrons and to further ensure patrons are unable to touch the entertainers during their performances, the owner, operator or manager shall either erect a physical barrier between the entertainers and the patrons that effectively eliminates the touching of the entertainers by the patrons or they shall paint a clearly discernible boundary line on the stage surface beyond which the entertainers shall not perform and which is sufficiently distant from the forward edge of the stage to ensure the patrons cannot touch the entertainers. Further, it shall be unlawful for any patron to be upon any portion of the stage during a performance or for an owner, operator or manager to permit a patron to be upon any portion of the stage during the performance. 
c.  No employee, server, entertainer or patron of an adult business, while on the premises of an adult business, shall knowingly touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch, fondle or caress any specified anatomical area of such employee, server, entertainer or patron, whether the specified anatomical areas are clothed, unclothed, covered or exposed. 
d.  No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for any act prohibited by this article and while on the premises of an adult business and no entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any patron for any adult entertainment except as follows: 
1.  While the entertainer is on the stage a patron may place a payment or gratuity into a container affixed to the stage; or 
2.  While the entertainer is not on the stage, but while on the premises of an adult business, and is clothed so as to not expose to view any specified anatomical area, a patron may either place such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under a leg garter worn by the entertainer at least four inches (4") below the bottom of the pubic region. 
e.  No owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the premises of an adult business shall: 
1.  Knowingly permit alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverages to be brought upon the premises unless authorized to do so by a properly issued and current drinking establishment or cereal malt beverage license; 
2.  Knowingly allow or permit the sale, distribution, delivery or consumption of any controlled substance or illegal drug or narcotic on the premises; 
3.  Knowingly allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in or upon the premises of an adult entertainment business; 
4.  Knowingly allow or permit any act of prostitution or patronizing prostitution on the premises, as prohibited by State law or City ordinance; or 
5.  Knowingly allow or permit a violation of this article or any other City ordinance provision or State law. 
(7)  Signs required. 
a.  All adult businesses shall conspicuously display on the principal entrance to the premises a sign, visible from the exterior of the premises, on which uppercase letters shall be at least two inches (2") high, and lowercase letters at least one inch (1") high, which shall read as follows: 
THIS BUSINESS IS AN ADULT BUSINESS. 
ONLY PERSONS EIGHTEEN (18) YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER SHALL BE PERMITTED ON THE PREMISES. 
b.  All adult entertainment businesses that provide adult entertainment shall conspicuously display in the common area at the principal entrance to the premises, a sign, on which uppercase letters shall be at least two inches (2") high, and lowercase letters at least one inch (1") high, which shall read as follows: 
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS IS REGULATED AND LICENSED BY THE CITY OF FAIRWAY. 
ENTERTAINERS ARE: 
Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct or prostitution on the premises or to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, patron or other entertainer or to permit any employee, patron or other entertainer to fondle, caress or touch the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of said entertainer. 
Not permitted to be nude. 
Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any customer for entertainment, except as follows: 
While such entertainer is on the stage, by placing such payment or gratuity into a box affixed to the stage; or 
While such entertainer is not on the stage, by either placing such payment or gratuity into the entertainer's hand, or under the entertainer's leg garter. 
CUSTOMERS ARE: 
Not permitted to be upon the stage at any time. 
Not permitted to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, pubic region, buttocks or genitals of any employee, serve, entertainer or patron or engage in solicitation for prostitution. 
(8)  Lighting required . The premises of all adult businesses shall be equipped with overhead lighting of every place to which patrons are permitted access, at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle, as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be maintained at all times that any patron is present in or on the premises. 
(9)  C losed booths or rooms are prohibited. The premises of all adult businesses shall be physically arranged in such manner that the entire interior portion of any booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls is visible from a common area of the premises. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever. Adult video viewing booths are prohibited whether or not the booth is visible from a common area of the premises. 
(10)  Ventilation and sanitation requirements. The premises of all adult businesses shall be kept in a sanitary condition. Except as otherwise provided in this section, separate dressing rooms and restrooms for men and women shall at all times be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition. 
(11)  Hours of operation . No adult business may be open or in use between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. unless expressly provided. 
(12)  Facilities necessary. No adult business license to conduct a bath house or body painting studio shall be issued unless an inspection by an appropriate City official reveals that the premises on which the applicant intends to conduct that type of adult entertainment business complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given or showers taken. Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the business' operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one (1) patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that the paper is changed for every patron. No activity related to an adult business shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within any permitted establishment that is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
b.  Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. Restrooms shall be provided and separately designated for men and women. 
c.  Lavatories or wash basins, provided with both hot and cold running water, shall be installed in either the restroom or a vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels. 
(13)  Certification. An appropriate City official shall certify that the proposed business establishment complies with all of the requirements of this section and shall give or send the certification to the City Clerk; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall be construed to eliminate other ordinance or statutory requirements concerning the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof. The appropriate City official may recommend the issuance of a license contingent upon the compliance with any requirements in this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1208; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-144. - Manager on premises. 
(a)  A manager shall be on duty at all adult businesses at all times the premises are open for business. The name of the manager on duty shall be prominently posted during business hours. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the manager to verify that any person who provides adult entertainment or works as a server within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer or server's license and that these licenses are prominently posted. It shall also be the responsibility of the manager to ensure minors do not enter upon the premises of an adult business. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1210; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-145. - Inspectors and inspections. 
    All adult businesses shall permit representatives of the Police Department or any other City official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to ensure the adult business is complying with all applicable regulations and laws. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1211; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-146. - Notice and hearing procedure. 
(a)  In any instance in this article wherein a hearing is required, the City Council shall, after no less than ten (10) days' written notice to the applicant or licensee, hold a hearing to ascertain all facts in the matter. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and shall set forth the reason for the hearing or the complaint against the applicant or licensee and shall be served upon the licensee in person or by registered or certified mail to the applicant or licensee's last-known address. In the event that the City Council is unable to serve the adult business applicant or licensee in person, and any notice sent by mail is returned by the postal service, if the hearing is for an existing adult business license or the renewal thereof, the City Council shall cause this notice to be posted at the principal entrance of the adult business and that posting shall be a valid means of service; and if the hearing is for a new application for an adult business license, the notice shall be published in the official City newspaper at least five (5) days prior to the hearing and that publication shall be a valid means of service. 
(c)  At this hearing, an applicant or licensee shall have full right to be represented by counsel, to produce witnesses and other evidence, and to cross examine all witnesses who appear against him. Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation. All proceedings in this hearing shall be recorded and transcribed as required by law. The City Council may receive evidence relevant to the issues from the applicant or licensee. Witnesses may be subpoenaed, and, upon request of any party, the City Council shall issue subpoenas, and in a proper case, subpoenas duces tecum, which shall be served and returned as in civil actions in Circuit Court. 
(d)  The City Council shall issue findings of fact and conclusions of law, and an order wherein it dismisses the complaint, or suspends or revokes the license previously issued or approves, approves with conditions or denies the application applied for. 
(e)  The City Council's order shall be served upon the applicant or licensee in person or by registered or certified mail to the applicant's or licensee's last-known address. In the event that the City Council is unable to serve the adult business applicant or licensee in person, and any notice of order sent by mail is returned by the postal service, if the order is for an existing adult business license or the renewal thereof, the City Council shall cause this notice of order to be posted at the principal entrance of the adult business and that posting shall be a valid means of service; and if the order is for a new application for an adult business license, the notice of order shall be published in the official City newspaper within twenty (20) days following the hearing and that publication shall be a valid means of service of the order. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1213; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-147. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Upon conviction thereof, such person shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be punished by incarceration for up to six (6) months, or by both a fine and incarceration. Each day's violation of, or failure, refusal or neglect to comply with, any provision of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1216; Ord. No. 1382) 
Secs. 7-148-7-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 7-177. - Required for managers, servers and entertainers. 
    It is unlawful for any person to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business without first obtaining a license to do so from the City, or to work as an entertainer, server or manager at an adult business after that person's license to do so had been revoked or suspended. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1203; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-178. - Classification and fees. 
(a)  The license year for all fees required by this division shall be from each January 1 through December 31. The application for a license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the fee in the amount established by ordinance, by certified or cashier's check or money order, and no application shall be considered complete until this fee is paid. 
(b)  All licenses shall be nontransferable to other persons. All license fees shall be nonrefundable. 
(c)  All adult business licenses shall be issued only for the one (1) adult business use listed on the application. Any material change in the adult business as described on the initial application or any change that would cause the City Clerk to have justifiable reason not to have issued a license or to have delayed or conditioned issuance of a license in the first instance shall invalidate the adult business license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use. A separate license is required for each adult business. The establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) adult business in the same building, structure, parcel or portion thereof is prohibited. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1204; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-179. - Applications. 
(a)  Adult business license. 
(1)  Application requirements. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate an adult business as required in this division shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person who owns the adult business. The application shall be signed by the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by its president. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner. In all other instances where the owner is not an individual, where applicable, the application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the owner. The City Clerk may require proof of authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require all of the following information: 
a.  The name, residence address, home telephone number, occupation, date, place of birth and social security number of the applicant. 
b.  The tax identification number and registered agent, if the owner is required to have a tax identification number or registered agent. 
c.  The name of the adult business, a description of the type of adult business to be performed on the licensed premises, and the name of the owner of the premises where the adult business will be located. 
d.  The names, residence addresses, social security numbers and dates of births of all partners, if the applicant is a partnership or limited liability partnership, and if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the same information for all corporate officers and directors and stockholders or members who own more than twenty-five percent (25%) interest in the corporation. 
e.  A statement from the applicant stating whether the applicant, or any corporate officer or director, or stockholder, partner or member who owns more than twenty-five percent (25%) interest in such entity, in previously operating in this or another City, County or State, has had an adult business license of any type revoked or suspended, and, if so, the reason for the suspension or relocation and the business activity subjected to the suspension or revocation. 
f.  A statement from the applicant, all partners or each corporate officer and director that each such person has not been either: convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on: 
1.  Any felony within the five (5) years immediately preceding the application; 
2.  A misdemeanor within the two (2) years immediately preceding the application; or 
3.  A Municipal or County ordinance violation within the two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where such felony, misdemeanor, Municipal or County ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography or related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in the state statutes or County or Municipal ordinances. 
g.  On applications requesting a license to operate a bath house or body painting studio, the applicant shall submit to the City Clerk within forty-eight (48) hours of the time each employee begins employment, a health certificate from a duly licensed State physician stating that within ninety (90) days prior to the date of employment, such employee has been examined and found free of any contagious or communicable disease. This shall be a continuing requirement and shall also initially apply to the applicant. 
h.  If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, a current certificate of registration issued by the State Secretary of State. 
i.  A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the applicant has read the provisions of this article regulating adult businesses. 
(2)  Incomplete application. Failure to provide the information and documentation required in this section shall constitute an incomplete application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) working days of the date the application is received by the City Clerk. 
(b)  Manager, server or entertainer license. 
(1)  Application requirements. All persons desiring to secure a license to be a manager, server or entertainer shall make a verified application with the City Clerk. All applications shall be submitted in the name of the person proposing to be a manager, server or entertainer. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City Clerk and shall require all of the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, social security number, and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining. 
b.  A statement from the applicant that the applicant has not been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or diverted from prosecution on, any felony (whichever event is later) within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of, or diverted from prosecution on, a misdemeanor, or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor (whichever event is later) within two (2) years immediately preceding the application, where the felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, indecent exposure, sexual abuse of a child or pornography and related offenses, or controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics offenses as defined in State statutes or City ordinances. The statement shall also indicate that the applicant has not been convicted of a Municipal ordinance violation or diverted from prosecution on a Municipal ordinance violation within two (2) years immediately preceding the application where the Municipal ordinance violation involved sexual offenses, indecent exposure, prostitution or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or narcotics. 
c.  The applicant shall present to the City Clerk, who shall copy, documentation in the form of any identification deemed by the City Clerk to be reliable that the applicant has attained the age of eighteen (18) years at the time the application is submitted. 
(2)  Incomplete application. Failure to provide the information required in this section shall constitute an incomplete application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) working days of the date the application was received by the City Clerk. 
(c)  Processing. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for an adult business, manager, server or entertainer license, the City Clerk shall immediately transmit one (1) copy of the application to the Chief of Police for investigation of the application. In addition, the City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the City Administrator and Building Official. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the City Clerk and the Chief of Police to investigate the application to determine whether the information contained in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements in this section for issuance of the license for which the application is made. The Chief of Police shall report the results of the investigation to the City Clerk not later than twenty (20) working days from the date the application is received and deemed complete by the City Clerk. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the Building Official to determine whether the structure where the adult business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable health, zoning, building and fire ordinances of the City. The Building Official shall report the results of his investigation to the City Clerk not later than twenty (20) working days from the date the application is received and deemed complete by the City Clerk. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police and the Building Official, the City Clerk shall schedule the application for consideration by the City Council at the earliest meeting consistent with the notification requirements established by law, provided the license application for an adult business, server, manager or entertainer license shall be approved or disapproved within forty-five (45) days from the date a complete application is received by the City Clerk. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date when the City Council will consider the application and shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard at that meeting. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1205; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-180. - Examination of application, issuance of license, disapproval. 
(a)  The City Council shall examine an application for an adult business license, or a manager, server, or entertainer license within forty-five (45) days of the date the application was received and deemed complete by the City Clerk. After the examination, the City Council shall approve the issuance of a license only if the appropriate license fee has been paid, the applicant is qualified, and all the applicable requirements set forth in this division are met. No license shall be approved for any person ineligible pursuant to the provisions of this division. All incomplete applications shall be denied. 
(b)  The record of the City Council shall show the action taken on the application, and if the license is granted, the City Council shall direct the City Clerk to issue the proper license. The adult business license and all manager, server and entertainer licenses shall state that it is not transferable to other persons or entities and shall state the calendar year for which the license is issued. 
(c)  If an application for an adult business license is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the applicant's last known address, and the notification shall state the basis for the denial. Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an adult business license application may seek judicial review in the County District Court in a manner provided by law. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1206; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-181. - Ineligibility and disqualification. 
(a)  Adult business license. No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to an applicant for an adult business license if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The premises for which an application for an adult business has been made is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, church, licensed child care center or child care center that has been inspected by the City or Fire District, or within three hundred feet (300') of any public park, or property zoned or used for residential purposes. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the premises from which the adult business would be operated to the nearest point on the property line of any school, church, licensed child care center or child care center that has been inspected by the City or Fire District, public park or property zoned or used for residential purposes. If the premises is a leased or subleased portion of a larger building, the nearest point of the premises to the protected uses described in this section shall be determined by a review of the building plans of which the premises are a part, and it shall be the duty of the applicant to supply the Code Official with a copy of the plans, including a scaled site layout of the premises within the building: 
a.  Provided the phrase "property zoned or used for residential purposes" shall not include any property zoned for residential use for which a special use permit has been granted for an indefinite period of time which permit allows a nonresidential use; 
b.  Provided, further, the measurement to a protected use listed in Subsection (a)(1) of this section shall exclude streets, alleys and highway rights-of-way; 
c.  Provided, further, any school, church, licensed child care center, or child care center inspected by the City or Fire District located within commercially zoned property, pursuant to a special use permit, shall not be included as a protected use; 
d.  Provided, further, that the one thousand foot (1,000') minimum distance from adult businesses to any school, church, licensed child care center, or child care center inspected by the City or Fire District may be waived by the City Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, if the applicant demonstrates by substantial and competent evidence and it is found that: 
1.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or contrary to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this article will be observed; 
2.  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted area as defined in K.S.A. 17-4760, as amended; and 
3.  All applicable regulations of this article will be observed; 
(2)  The premises for which an application for an adult business has been made is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other adult business for which there is a license issued by the City regardless of whether those businesses are located on the same property or separate properties. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the premises from which an adult business would be operated to the nearest point on the property line of such other adult business located within the City: 
a.  Provided the list of protected uses set forth in this section shall exclude streets, alleys and highway rights-of-way; and 
b.  Provided, further, that the one thousand foot (1,000') restriction between such regulated uses may be waived by the City Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, if the applicant demonstrates by substantial and competent evidence and it is found that: 
1.  The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or contrary to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this article will be observed; 
2.  The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a blighted area, as defined in K.S.A. 17-4760, as amended; and 
3.  All applicable regulations of this article will be observed; 
(3)  The applicant knowingly failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(4)  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(5)  The premises, or any portion thereof or of the parcel on which the premises is situated, from which the applicant proposes to operate the adult business does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable health, zoning, building, fire and property maintenance ordinances of the City; provided, however, that upon a showing by the applicant that the applicant or owner has taken steps toward and achieved compliance with the applicable requirements and the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration by the City Council; 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth Section 7-179(a)(1)f during the time period set forth in this division; 
(7)  The applicant has had an adult business license or comparable license revoked or suspended in this or any other City during the past five (5) years; or 
(8)  If the applicant is applying for a license to operate a bath house or body painting studio and the applicant has not produced a health certificate as required in Section 7-179(a)(1)g for all persons working on the premises. 
(b)  Manager, server, or entertainer license. No person is eligible nor shall a license be issued to an applicant for a manager, server or entertainer license if one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted, released from incarceration for conviction or diverted on any of the crimes set forth in this section during the time period set forth in this division; 
(2)  The applicant knowingly failed to provide all of the information required on the application; 
(3)  The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(4)  The applicant has had a manager, server or entertainer license revoked or suspended in this or any other City during the past five (5) years; or 
(5)  The applicant is applying for a license for a manager, server or entertainer in a bath house or body painting studio and has not produced a health certificate as required by this division. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1207; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-182. - Posting or display. 
(a)  Every premises licensed as an adult business shall post its license in a conspicuous place and manner on the adult business premises. 
(b)  Every person holding a server, manager or entertainer license shall post his license in his work area on the adult business premises, so it shall be readily available for inspection by City authorities responsible for enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1209; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-183. - Suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal. 
(a)  Whenever the City Clerk has information that: 
(1)  The owner or operator of an adult business or a holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has violated, or knowingly allowed or permitted the violation of, any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  There have been recurrent violations of provisions of this article that have occurred under such circumstances that the owner or operator of an adult business knew or should have known that these violations were committed; 
(3)  The adult business licensee or the manager, server or entertainer license was knowingly obtained through false statements in the application for that license, or renewal thereof; 
(4)  The adult business licensee or the manager, server or entertainer licensee knowingly failed to make a complete disclosure of all information in the application for that license, or renewal thereof; 
(5)  The owner or operator, or any person holding an adult business license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this division; or 
(6)  If the owner or operator of an adult business or the holder of a manager, server or entertainer license has become disqualified from having a license by a conviction as provided in this division; 
then the City Clerk shall make this information known to the City Council, which shall conduct a public hearing, in accordance with the notice and hearing procedure set forth in Section 7-146, to determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  Based on the evidence produced at the hearing, the City Council may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Suspend the license for up to ninety (90) days; 
(2)  Revoke the license for the remainder of the license year; or 
(3)  Place the license holder on administrative probation for a period of up to one (1) year, on the condition that no further violations of this article occur during the period of probation. If a violation does occur and after a hearing the violation is determined to have actually occurred, the license will be revoked for the remainder of the license year. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1212; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-184. - Judicial review; stay of enforcement of orders. 
    Following the entry of an order by the City Clerk suspending or revoking a license issued pursuant to this article, or disapproving the renewal application for a license, that licensee or applicant may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. The City Clerk shall stay enforcement of the order for a period of time not to exceed forty-five (45) days pending the filing and/or final disposition of proceedings for judicial review. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1215; Ord. No. 1382) 
Sec. 7-185. - Renewal. 
(a)  A license may be renewed by making application to the City Clerk. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year, and renewal applications for licenses shall be submitted between December 16 and December 31. 
(b)  Upon timely application and review as provided for a new license, a license issued under the provisions of this article shall be renewed by issuance of a new license in the manner provided in this division. 
(c)  If the application for renewal of a license is not made during the time provided in this division, the license shall have expired, and a new application shall be required. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1214; Ord. No. 1382) 
Secs. 7-186-7-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-209. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to protect the residents of the City against: 
(1)  Crimes, fraud and misrepresentation committed by persons posing as solicitors, canvassers and peddlers; 
(2)  The continuing danger of fraud, robbery and other crimes; and 
(3)  Undue annoyances caused by solicitors, canvassers and peddlers. 
(Prior Code, § 7-501) 
Sec. 7-210. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvass or canvassing means attempting to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate; 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a noncommercial event or service; or 
(3)  Opinion sampling or poll taking. 
    Canvasser means any person who engages in canvassing in person for himself or any other person, even if incidental to the canvassing the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against a cause. 
    Charitable means any activity represented as carried on from unselfish, civic or humanitarian motives or for the benefit of others and not for private gain and may include, without limitation, patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, cultural, scientific, historical, athletic, medical or religious activities, either actual or implied. 
    Commercial handbill. 
(1)  The term "commercial handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which: 
a.  Advertises for sale merchandise, products, or commodities; 
b.  Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
c.  Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. 
(2)  Exemption for mail and newspapers. The term "commercial handbill" does not include mail delivered by the United States Postal Service or newspapers duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States and newspapers filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by general law, or any periodical or current magazine regularly published at least annually and sold to the public. 
    Peddle means: 
(1)  Attempting to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service; 
(2)  Operation from a temporary stand, display or similar facility for the purpose of attempting to sell a good or service; or 
(3)  Traveling from house to house, door to door, street to street or from place to place for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service. 
    Peddler means a person who peddles for himself or for any other person. 
    Personal gain means direct or indirect financial or commercial benefit of any person or company. 
    Solicit and solicitation means attempting to make personal contact with a resident at his residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident for the primary purpose of requesting the contribution of funds or anything of value or advertising or selling or offering for sale or taking or attempting to take orders for any service, merchandise, product, commodity, meeting, performance or event, of any kind, in character or description, for philanthropic, charitable, religious, commercial or any other purposes, while traveling from house to house, door to door, street to street or from place to place in the City or distributing a commercial handbill or advertising a commercial event or service. The term "solicitation" shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale. 
    Solicitor means a person who solicits for himself or any other person. 
(Prior Code, § 7-502) 
Sec. 7-211. - Uniformity of administration of article. 
    The Police Clerk is directed to administer this article uniformly, and is to require all applicants to submit the application and supporting data required by this article before issuing a permit. All applicants are to be treated alike. 
(Prior Code, § 7-512) 
Sec. 7-212. - Prohibited acts. 
    The following acts are unlawful and prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or peddler or canvasser to ring the bell or knock on the door, or otherwise attempt to gain admittance for the purpose of soliciting, peddling or canvassing at a residence, dwelling or apartment at which a sign bearing the words "No Solicitors," "No Trespassers" or words of similar meaning indicating that those persons are not wanted on the premises, is painted, affixed or otherwise exposed to public view; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to any solicitor, peddler or canvasser who gains admittance to a residence at the invitation, permission or consent of the occupant thereof. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to solicit, peddle or canvass prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., local time, of any day. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to engage in soliciting, peddling or canvassing upon any premises or in any dwelling house, apartment or other residences after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave the premises or residence. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or peddler to make more than one (1) appearance for purposes of soliciting or peddling at the same residential premises for identical goods, services or contributions within any consecutive sixty (60) day period, without receiving prior permission therefor from the occupants of the premises. This provision shall be construed to include solicitation and peddling upon the same premises by employees, agents or other persons acting on behalf of the same person more than once during the aforesaid period without prior permission, as provided in this section. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to fail to provide at the request of the purchaser or donator, a written receipt for purchases or donations exceeding five dollars ($5.00) in cash or tangible property, which receipts shall be signed by the person making the sale or accepting the donation and shall set forth: 
a.  The brief description of the goods or services sold, the total purchase price thereof, amount of cash payment, if any, and the balance due and terms of payment; or 
b.  For any donation or charitable solicitation, a written receipt acknowledging that contribution and personally signed by the person accepting the contribution. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to fail at the outset to disclose to the prospective buyer, donor or canvassee his name and the name of the company, product or organization he represents. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to make any assertion, representation or statement that misrepresents the purpose of his call or use any plan or scheme that misrepresents that purpose. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to conduct his business in a way that would restrict or interfere with ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property or an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police or sanitation vehicles. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser who has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or other violation of the laws of the United States or of any state or city of the United States, where that conviction was for an offense involving force, threat of force, theft, burglary, dishonesty, fraud, sexual misconduct or moral turpitude within the past five (5) years, or been charged with a felony, misdemeanor or other violation of the laws of the United States or of any state or city of the United States and an arrest warrant has been issued therefor by the jurisdiction in which the crime is alleged and remains outstanding, to solicit, peddle or canvass within the City. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, peddle or canvass or attempt to solicit, peddle or canvass at a place of residence at any entrance other than the main entrance of the residence. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or peddler to solicit or peddle or attempt to solicit or peddle without carrying upon their person a copy of the permit issued by the City authorizing solicitation or peddling and an identification badge or card as described in Section 7-238(8). 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or peddler to solicit or peddle or attempt to solicit or peddle without carrying upon their person a State or Federal government identification card, if the solicitor or peddler is legally able, by age, to obtain this form of identification. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to solicit, peddle or canvass at a residence the owner or occupant of which has signed on to the City's "no visit" list after the creation of the list, pursuant to Section 7-214. 
(Prior Code, § 7-513) 
Sec. 7-213. - "No visit" list. 
    The Police Clerk may maintain a list of persons and their respective addresses within the City who restrict visits to their residential property by peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers. The Police Clerk may provide a form to assist residents, and this form may allow the resident to select certain types of visits that the resident finds acceptable while refusing permission to others. If created, this "no visit" list shall be a public document, reproduced on the City's web site, and available for public inspection and copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided upon request to each peddler, solicitor or canvasser wishing to conduct business within the City, and it is the responsibility of peddlers, solicitors and canvassers to be aware of the contents of the City's current "no visit" list for purposes of compliance with this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-514) 
Sec. 7-214. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates or causes to be violated any provisions of this article or who gives information to the Police Clerk in filing statements or reports required by this article, which such person knows or should reasonably know to be false or incorrect, is guilty of a municipal offense and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject for the first offense to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and for the second or any subsequent offense to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Prior Code, § 7-515; Ord. No. 1392) 
Secs. 7-215-7-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 7-237. - Solicitation and peddling permits required. 
    Every solicitor or peddler must obtain a permit from the City before soliciting or peddling within the City. To obtain a permit to solicit or peddle, the applicant must furnish the information required under this article to the Police Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 7-503) 
Sec. 7-238. - Information required on application for solicitation and peddling permit. 
    An applicant for a solicitation or peddling permit shall furnish to the Police Clerk an application containing the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the principal office of the person applying for the permit (including both local and nonlocal principal offices where such exist); 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and executives; 
(3)  The purpose of the solicitation or peddling activity; 
(4)  The name and address of the person soliciting or peddling; 
(5)  The time when the solicitations or peddling will be made, giving the expected dates for commencement and termination of the solicitation or peddling, subject to the limitations on time for solicitations contained in this article; 
(6)  A copy of a State or Federal government issued identification card of the solicitor or peddler, if the applicant is legally able, by age, to obtain this identification; 
(7)  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted: 
a.  It will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the City or by any department or officer thereof; 
b.  That, during the period specified in the permit, if there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant will notify the Police Clerk in writing thereof within forty-eight (48) hours after that change; 
c.  That at no time during the period of solicitation or peddling will the applicant or his agents solicit or peddle at any residence within the City where there is clearly and visibly posted any sign requesting "No Solicitation" or "No Trespassing" or words of similar meaning; 
d.  That at no time during the period of solicitation or peddling will the applicant or his agents solicit or peddle at any residence within the City the property owner or resident of which has signed the City's "no visit" list; 
e.  That the applicant and all persons for whom application is made will carry on their person a copy of the solicitation or peddling permit issued by the City; 
f.  That the City is authorized to make inquiry to the appropriate authorities concerning the qualification of the applicant under Section 7-239(3); and 
g.  That at no time during the period of validity of the permit will the solicitor or peddler solicit or peddle without carrying a State or Federal government issued identification card if the solicitor or peddler is legally eligible, by age, to obtain such an identification card; 
(8)  A sample of the identification badge or card that each peddler or solicitor shall wear or carry, indicating that person's name and the name of the organization for which he is soliciting. The badge or card shall be furnished by the organization and must be approved by the Police Clerk. 
(Prior Code, § 7-504) 
Sec. 7-239. - Standards for issuance. 
    The following are the standards for issuance of the solicitation or peddling permit: 
(1)  Upon receiving a completed application from the applicant or applicant's representative and upon making the all the following findings, The Police Clerk shall issue a solicitation or peddling permit provided by this article. 
(2)  The Police Clerk or any person designated by the Police Clerk to review applications for solicitation or peddling permits may defer issuance of any solicitation or peddling permit for such period of time as is reasonably necessary, not to exceed seven (7) days, to verify the accuracy of information required to be provided in the application for solicitation or peddling permit or that an identifiable harm to the health, safety and welfare of the City will result from the issuance of the permit. 
(3)  The Police Clerk shall not issue a solicitation or peddling permit to any person who has: 
a.  Been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or other violation of the laws of the United States or of any state or city of the United States where that conviction was for an offense involving force, threat of force, theft, burglary, dishonesty, fraud, sexual misconduct or moral turpitude within the past five (5) years; or 
b.  Been charged with a felony, misdemeanor or other violation of the laws of the United States or of any state or city of the United States and an arrest warrant has been issued therefor by the jurisdiction in which the crime is alleged and remains outstanding. 
(4)  The Police Clerk determines that some identifiable harm to the health, safety and general welfare of the City will result from the issuance of the permit. 
(5)  Any person who is aggrieved by the refusal of the Police Clerk to issue a solicitation or peddling permit may appeal that refusal to the City Council. On refusal, the Police Clerk shall notify the applicant by United States mail, postage prepaid, of the refusal to issue a solicitation or peddling permit and informing the applicant that the applicant may appeal that refusal to the City Council by requesting of the Police Clerk to have a hearing before the City Council not later than thirty (30) days following receipt of the notice of refusal. The notice of refusal shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the Police Clerk acted in refusing to issue a permit. On receipt of the request for hearing before the City Council, the Police Clerk shall schedule the matter to be heard before the City Council at its next regular or special meeting for the purpose of determining whether or not the permit should be issued, unless the applicant shall request that the hearing be scheduled at a later date. Unless the applicant requests otherwise, in no event shall this hearing be held more than thirty (30) days following receipt of the applicant's request for hearing. At the hearing, the applicant may offer evidence to support any contention that a permit should be issued. In the event the City Council sustains the denial of issuance of the permit, the applicant may appeal that decision to the County District Court. 
(Prior Code, § 7-505) 
Sec. 7-240. - Application and permit available for public inspection. 
    All solicitation or peddling applications, permits and supporting documentation filed with the Police Clerk shall be a matter of public record and shall be available for examination and inspection by any member of the public during regular business hours. 
(Prior Code, § 7-506) 
Sec. 7-241. - Fees. 
    A fee in the amount established by ordinance is required to be paid to the City for processing solicitation and peddling permit applications to cover City staff application processing time. 
(Prior Code, § 7-507) 
Sec. 7-242. - Contents. 
    Permits issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, the permit expiration date, a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the City or its officers or employees, the name of the person conducting the solicitation, if different than the name of the person to whom the permit was issued, the purpose of the solicitation or peddling and the signature of the Police Clerk or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 7-508) 
Sec. 7-243. - Term. 
    Permits issued pursuant to this article are valid for the number of days requested in the application, but may not exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. Applications for renewal of permits may be made and shall be granted if the requirements of this article are still being met and no violations of the permit or this article have been found to exist. 
(Prior Code, § 7-509) 
Sec. 7-244. - Nontransferable. 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this article is transferable or assignable. 
(Prior Code, § 7-510) 
Sec. 7-245. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any determination by the Police Clerk that the holder of a City permit has violated any provisions of this article or of the permit issued pursuant thereto, or that the holder of the permit has made representations or factual statements in the application for the permit that the applicant knew or should reasonably have known to be false or incorrect, shall cause the Police Clerk to give notice to the permit holder that the permit is immediately suspended. The notice of immediate suspension is to be mailed to the permit holder by United States mail, postage prepaid, and shall notify the holder that a hearing will be held before the City Council at its next regular or special meeting for the purpose of determining whether or not the permit shall be revoked. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the Police Clerk acted in suspending the permit and, at the hearing, the permit holder may offer evidence to support any contention that the permit should not be revoked. Peddling and solicitation activity shall cease during the period of suspension or revocation of a permit. Except upon request of the permit holder, in no event shall the hearing be held more than thirty (30) days following the permit holder's receipt of notice of suspension of the permit. In the event the City Council revokes the permit, the revocation may be appealed to the County District Court. No peddling or solicitation shall be made during the period of appeal of the revocation. 
(Prior Code, § 7-511) 
Secs. 7-246-7-268. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 7-269. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale means the sale of any goods, which sale is conducted on or about the premises of a private residence by an occupant of the premises, which sale is open to the public. The term "garage sale" shall include, but not be limited to, all sales entitled garage sale, lawn sale, rummage sale, sample sale, flea market sale, basement sale, porch sale, yard sale, estate sale, moving sale or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property that is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale. 
    Goods includes any new or used goods, wares, merchandise, or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1401; Ord. No. 1534, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-270. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day that the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1407; Ord. No. 1534, § 7, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-271. - Who may conduct. 
    At least one (1) of the persons conducting each garage sale must be a resident of the premises on which the garage sale takes place. No business or other license shall be required to hold a garage sale. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1402; Ord. No. 1534, § 2, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-272. - Unlawful to hold more than the allowed number of sales per year. 
    It is unlawful for any person or household to hold more than two (2) garage sales at the same location within one (1) calendar year. If occupants of more than one (1) premises join in holding a garage sale, then that sale shall be considered to have been held for each and all such persons. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1403; Ord. No. 1534, § 3, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-273. - Location and parking. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to display items for or conduct a garage sale in any place other than a dwelling unit, garage, accessory use building, driveway or front yard. 
(b)  The persons conducting the sale are responsible for obtaining appropriate parking signage for the street so as not to block the flow of traffic. If traffic is impeded on any street as a result of a garage sale, or the Chief of Police or his designee otherwise determines that a traffic safety issue exists, the Chief of Police or his designee shall determine the appropriate parking signage needed and may require the persons conducting the garage sale to close the sale until the appropriate amount of parking signage necessary to provide for the flow of traffic on the street is in place. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1404; Ord. No. 1534, § 4, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-274. - Time limit. 
    It is unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in violation of the length and separation requirements set forth in this article. Each of the two (2) garage sales permitted during a calendar year shall consist of not more than five (5) consecutive days or portions thereof. For the purposes of this article, a garage sale shall be considered to be conducted when either merchandise is offered or displayed for sale, or when any signs or other advertisements indicate it is being conducted, or both, and shall be considered concluded upon the earlier of there being an absence of these criteria or five (5) consecutive days from its commencement have elapsed. When the first sale in a calendar year is concluded, the second permitted garage sale may not commence until at least thirty (30) calendar days have elapsed from the conclusion. 
(Prior Code, § 7-1405; Ord. No. 1534, § 5, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 7-275. - Signs. 
    Signs for sales at homes are governed by Chapter 15. See Section 15-553(2). 
(Prior Code, § 7-1406; Ord. No. 1534, § 6, 8-13-2012) 
Chapter 8 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Distribution of written or printed material. 
(a)  Prohibition . No publisher of a newspaper, shopper, news circular, magazine or similar written or printed material shall directly or indirectly deliver or cause the delivery of such material to a dwelling in any residential area of the City, if the occupant of the dwelling gives notice requesting nondelivery of any such matter. 
(b)  Notice by occupant . An occupant of a dwelling may give notice requesting nondelivery of any written or printed material, including, but not limited to, any newspaper, shopper, news circular, magazine or similar written or printed matter, by: 
(1)  So stating in writing to any publisher thereof; or 
(2)  So stating orally or in writing to any person directly or indirectly delivering or causing the delivery of such matter. 
(c)  Exceptions . The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Distributions made through the United States Postal Service; or 
(2)  Solicitations made on behalf of persons not organized for profit. 
(d)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling means any building or structure used for human abode and the lot on which it is located. 
    Persons not organized for profit means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, cooperative, association or other entity which does not have as its purpose private gain, direct or indirect, of its members, partners, shareholders, beneficiaries or other constituent elements. 
    Publisher means any person who holds himself out to be a publisher of any newspaper, shopper, news circular, magazine or similar written or printed material or who is responsible for or causes the preparation and printing of any newspaper, shopper, news circular magazine or similar written or printed matter. The term "publisher" shall not include any person who does no more than print or distribute such material. 
    Residential area means any area zoned for residential use. 
(e)  Penalty . Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each prohibited delivery shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, §§ 7-301, 7-303-7-306; Ord. No. 570, §§ 1, 3-6) 
Sec. 8-2. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Established . It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to loiter, lounge, loaf, wander or play in or upon any public street, alley, public park, any parking lot or any sidewalk within the City after the hour of 11:00 p.m. and before the hour of 6:00 a.m. the following day, Sunday through Thursday, and after 12:00 midnight and before 6:00 a.m. the following day, Friday and Saturday. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age whose parent or legal guardian has renounced his right to the care, custody and earnings of that person or to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age who is legally married. 
(b)  Exceptions . The curfew restrictions set out in Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is accompanied by his parent or guardian; 
(2)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is attending a church or school function or other activity organized or sponsored by and under the supervision of a church or school or sponsored by parents or while returning home from any such function or activity by way of the most direct route; 
(3)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is going to or from a place of lawful employment by way of the most direct route; 
(4)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is engaged in normal travel through, to or from the City to another destination; 
(5)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is upon an emergency errand directed by such minor's parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(6)  When the person under eighteen (18) years of age is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech, assembly, or exercise of religion. 
(c)  Violations . Any police officer finding a person under eighteen (18) years of age in violation of Subsection (a) of this section shall ascertain the name and address of the minor and warn the minor that he is in violation of the curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode. If any minor refuses to heed the warning or direction by any police officer or refuses to give his correct name and address, he shall be taken to the Police Department and the parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. 
(d)  Permitting violation of curfew . It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person lawfully entitled to the care, custody or control of any person under eighteen (18) years of age to knowingly suffer or permit such person to violate Subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Penalty . Any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection (d) of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, §§ 6-701-6-705; Ord. No. 1058) 
Sec. 8-3. - Overnight camping. 
(a)  Special use permit required . Overnight camping on public or private property is hereby prohibited, without having first obtained, in advance, a special use permit from the Governing Body and, where private property is involved, the private property owner's permission. 
(b)  Application for special use permit . Applications for a special use permit may be made at any time sufficient in advance of a regular Council meeting so as to permit thirty (30) full days to elapse between the time the special use permit is first considered and the date of the proposed overnight camping. 
(c)  Discretion of the City Council. Such special use permit may, at the sole discretion of the Governing Body, be issued to regularly organized sponsored clubs or groups which are nonprofit, charitable, eleemosynary or fraternal in nature. The special use permit, when so granted, shall be upon such terms and conditions as the City Council shall, in its sole discretion, deem advisable. 
(d)  Fee . The fee for the granting of the application for a special use permit shall be as established by ordinance unless the City Council shall waive the same. 
(e)  Violation . Violation of any of the provisions of this section or for camping or attempting to camp overnight on public property or private property without having first obtained the permission and permit required by this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor and the violators shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day's violation; each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense for the purpose of this section. 
(Prior Code, §§ 7-601-7-605; Ord. No. 615, §§ 1-5) 
Secs. 8-4-8-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM PUBLIC OFFENSE CODE 

Sec. 8-25. - Incorporated by reference. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public offenses within the corporate limits of the City that certain code known as the "Uniform Public Offense Code for Kansas Cities," Edition of 2018 ("2018 UPOC"), prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except those articles, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed, and with those additions thereto as are made by this or any other ordinance of the City hereafter adopted; this incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009-12-3012 and 12-3301-12- 3302, inclusive, as amended. At least one (1) copy of this Uniform Public Offense Code shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1676," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be changed clearly marked to show any change, and to which shall be attached a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives, and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and to be available to the public at all reasonable hours. The Police Department, Municipal Judge and all administrative departments of the City, charged with enforcement of the ordinance from which this article derives, shall be supplied, at the cost of the City, the number of Official copies of this Uniform Public Offense Code, similarly marked, as it may be deemed expedient. 
(Prior Code, § 10-101; Ord. No. 1240; Ord. No. 1264; Ord. No. 1295; Ord. No. 1322; Ord. No. 1352; Ord. No. 1387; Ord. No. 1413; Ord. No. 1438; Ord. No. 1461; Ord. No. 1491; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 1539, § 1, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 1, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 1, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 1, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1658 , § 1, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1676 , § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 8-26. - Abusing toxic vapors. 
    Section 9.9 of the 2018 UPOC is hereby amended by deleting existing Section 9.9 and inserting in place thereof the following: 
    Section 9.9. Abusing Toxic Vapors. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess, buy, use, smell, or inhale the fumes of toxic vapors with the intent of causing a condition of euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulled senses of the nervous system. 
(2)  Definitions: For the purposes of this Section, the term "toxic vapors" means the following substances or products containing these substances: 
a.  Alcohols, including methyl, isopropyl, propyl or butyl; 
b.  Aliphatic acetates, including ethyl, methyl, propyl or methyl cellosolve acetate; 
c.  Acetone; 
d.  Benzene; 
e.  Carbon tetracholoride; 
f.  Cyclohexane; 
g.  Freons, including freon 11 and freon 12; 
h.  Hexane; 
i.  Methyl ethyl ketone; 
j.  Methyl isobutyl ketone; 
k.  Naptha; 
l.  Perchlorethylene; 
m.  Toluene; 
n.  Trichloroethane; or 
o.  Xylene. 
(3)  This section shall not be construed to apply to the inhalation of anesthesia or other substances for medical or dental purposes. 
(4)  In a prosecution for a violation of this Section, evidence that a container lists one (1) or more of the substances described in Subsection (2) of this section as one (1) of its ingredients shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in that container contains toxic vapors and emits the fumes thereof. 
(5)  Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to any sentence or fine imposed, the court shall enter an order requiring that the person enroll in and successfully complete an alcohol and drug safety action education program or treatment program, as provided in K.S.A. 8-1008, and amendments thereto, or both the education and treatment programs. 
(Prior Code, § 10-102; Ord. No. 1116; Ord. No. 1352; Ord. No. 1387; Ord. No. 1413; Ord. No. 1438; Ord. No. 1461; Ord. No. 1491; Ord. No. 1513, § 3, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 1539, § 3, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 3, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 3, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 3, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 3, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1658 , § 3, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1676 , § 3, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 8-27. - Criminal use of weapons. 
    Section 10.1 of the 2018 UPOC is hereby amended by deleting existing Section 10.1 and inserting in place thereof the following: 
    Section 10.1 Criminal Use of Weapons. 
(1)  Criminal use of weapons is knowingly: 
a.  Possessing with the intent to use the same unlawfully against another, any bludgeon, sand club, metal knuckles, throwing star, billy, blackjack, slingshot or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character; 
b.  Setting a spring gun; 
c.  Selling, giving or otherwise transferring any firearm with a barrel less than 12 inches long to any person under 18 years of age whether the person knows or has reason to know the length of the barrel; 
d.  Selling, giving or otherwise transferring any firearms to any person who is both addicted to and an unlawful user of an controlled substance; 
e.  Selling, giving or otherwise transferring any firearm to any person who is or has been a mentally ill person subject to involuntary commitment for care and treatment, as defined in K.S.A. 59-2946, and amendments thereto, or a person with an alcohol or substance abuse problem subject to involuntary commitment for care and treatment as defined in K.S.A. 59-29b46, and amendments thereto; 
f.  Possession of any firearm by a person who is both addicted to and an unlawful user of a controlled substance; 
g.  Possession of any firearm by any person, other than a law enforcement officer, in or on any school property or grounds upon which is located a building or structure used by a unified school district or an accredited nonpublic school for student instruction or attendance or extracurricular activities of pupils enrolled in kindergarten or any of the grades 1 through 12 or at any regularly scheduled school sponsored activity event whether the person knows or has reason to know that the person was in or on that property or grounds. 
h.  Refusal to surrender or immediately remove from school property or grounds or at any regularly scheduled school sponsored activity or event any firearm in the possession of any person, other than a law enforcement officer, when so requested or directed by any duly authorized school employee or any law enforcement officer; or 
i.  Possessing a firearm with a barrel less than 12 inches long by any person less than 18 years of age whether the person knows or has reason to know the length of the barrel. 
(2)  Criminal use of weapons as defined in: 
a.  Subsections (1)a, (1)b, (1)c, (1)d, and (1)h of this section is a Class A violation; 
b.  Subsections (1)f and (1)g of this section is a Class B violation; 
c.  Subsection (1)i of this section is a Class A violation on a first offense. 
(3)  Subsection (1)a shall not apply to: 
a.  Law enforcement officers, or any person summoned by any officers to assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting that officer; 
b.  Wardens, superintendents, directors, security personnel and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries, jails or other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted of crime, while acting within the scope of their authority; 
c.  Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United States or the Kansas national guard while in the performance of their official duty; or 
d.  The manufacture of, transportation to, or sale of weapons to a person authorized under Subsections (3)a, (3)b, and (3)c to possess the weapons. 
(4)  Subsection (1)g shall not apply to: 
a.  Possession of any firearm in connection with a firearms safety course of instruction or firearms education course approved and authorized by the school; 
b.  Any possession of any firearm specifically authorized in writing by the superintendent of any unified school district or the chief administrator of any accredited nonpublic school; 
c.  Possession of a firearm secured in a motor vehicle by a parent, guardian, custodian or someone authorized to act in that person's behalf who is delivering or collecting a student; 
d.  Possession of a firearm secured in a motor vehicle by a registered voter who is on the school grounds, which contained a polling place for the purpose of voting during polling hours on an election day; or 
e.  Possession of a handgun by an individual who is licensed by the attorney general to carry a concealed handgun under K.S.A. Supp. 75-7c01 et seq. , and amendments thereto. 
(5)  Subsection (1)e shall not apply to a person who has received a certificate of restoration pursuant to K.S.A. 75-7c26, and amendments thereto. 
(6)  Subsection (1)i shall not apply if that person, less than 18 years of age, was: 
a.  In attendance at a hunter's safety course or a firearm safety course; 
b.  Engaging in practice in the use of the firearm or target shooting at an established range authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction in which the range is located; 
c.  Engaging in an organized competition involving the use of the firearm, or participating in or practicing for a performance by an organization exempt from federal income tax pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code of 1986 which uses firearms as a part of the organization's performance; 
d.  Hunting or trapping pursuant to a valid license issued to that person pursuant to article 9 of chapter 32 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto; 
e.  Traveling with the firearm in that person's possession being unloaded to or from any activity described in Subsections(6)a through (6)d, only if the firearm is secured, unloaded and outside the immediate access of that person; 
f.  On real property under the control of that person's parent, legal guardian or grandparent and who has the permission of that parent, legal guardian or grandparent to possess the firearm; or 
g.  At that person's residence and who, with the permission of that person's parent or legal guardian, possesses the firearm for the purposes of exercising the rights contained in K.S.A. Supp. 21-5222, 21-5223 or 21-5225, and amendments thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 10-103; Ord. No. 1491; Ord. No. 1513, § 5, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 1539, § 5, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 5, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 5, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 5, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 5, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1658 , § 5, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1676 , § 5, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 8-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1658 , § 7, adopted December 11, 2017, repealed § 8-28, which pertained to unauthorized possession of a weapon in City-owned buildings and derived from Prior Code, § 10-104; Ord. No. 1361; Ord. No. 1539, § 7, adopted October 8, 2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 7, adopted September 9, 2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 7, adopted November 10, 2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 7, adopted December 14, 2015; and Ord. No. 1635 , § 7, adopted October 10, 2016. 
Sec. 8-29. - Littering. 
(a)  Littering is intentionally or recklessly depositing or causing to be deposited any object or substance into, upon or about: 
(1)  Any public street, highway, alley, road, right-of-way, park or other public place, or any lake, stream, watercourse, or other body of water, except by direction of some public officer or employee authorized by law to direct or permit these acts; or 
(2)  Any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant of that property. 
(Prior Code, § 10-105; Ord. No. 1360; Ord. No. 1539, § 9, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 9, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 9, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 9, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 9, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1658 , § 8, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1676 , § 8, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 8-30. - Unlawful discharge of a firearm. 
    Section 10.5 of the 2018 UPOC is hereby amended by deleting existing Section 10.5 and inserting in place thereof the following: 
    Section 10.5. Unlawful Discharge of a Firearm. 
(1)  Unlawful discharge of a firearm is the reckless discharge of a firearm within or into the corporate limits of any city. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to the discharge of any firearm within or into the corporate limits of any city if: 
a.  The firearm is discharged in the lawful defense of one's person, another person or one's property; 
b.  The firearm is discharged at a private or public shooting range; 
c.  The firearm is discharged by authorized law enforcement officers, animal control officers or a person who has a wildlife control permit issued by the Kansas department of wildlife, parks and tourism; 
d.  The firearm is discharged by special permit of the chief of police; 
e.  The firearm is discharged using blanks; or 
f.  The firearm is discharged in lawful self-defense or defense of another person against an animal attack. Unlawful discharge of firearms is a Class B violation. 
(Prior Code, § 10-205; Ord. No. 1557, § 11, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 11, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 11, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 11, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1658 , § 10, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1676 , § 10, 9-10-2018) 
Secs. 8-31-8-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRUGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Controlled Substances Act, K.S.A. 65-4101 et seq. 

Sec. 8-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous drug means a drug that is unsafe for use except under the supervision of a practitioner because of its toxicity or other potentiality for human effect, method of use, or collateral measures necessary to use. 
    Delivery means sale, dispensing, giving away, transporting or supplying in any other manner. 
    Drug means: 
(1)  The salts and derivatives of barbituric acid or compounds, preparations or mixtures thereof; 
(2)  Amphetamine, its salts and derivatives or compounds, preparations or mixtures thereof; 
(3)  Hallucinogens, including bufotenine ibogaine, DET (diethyltryptamine), DOM (SYP), psilocybin, psilocyn, DMT (dimenhyotryptamine), LSTS-25 or LSD (d-lysergic acid diethylamide) and any other derivative of dlysergic acid producing stimulating or hallucinogenic effects similar to those caused by LSD; 
(4)  Other drugs or compounds, preparations or mixtures thereof which the State Board of Health shall find and declare by rule or regulation duly promulgated after reasonable public notice and opportunity for hearing to have a dangerous hallucinogenic, hypnotic, somnifacient or stimulating effect on the body of a human or animal; 
(5)  Cannabis, which includes all parts of the plant cannabis sativa L. (more commonly known as marijuana), whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound manufacture salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
    Manufacturer means a person who manufactures drugs, and includes persons who prepare such drugs in dosage forms by mixing, compounding, encapsulating, entableting, or other process, but does not include pharmacists so preparing such drugs solely for dispensing on prescriptions received or to be received by them. 
    Patient , as the case may be, means: 
(1)  The individual for whom a drug is prescribed or to whom a drug is administered; 
(2)  The owner or the agent of the owner of the animals for which a drug is prescribed or to which a drug is administered; provided that the prescribing or administering referred to in this subsection is in good faith and in the course of professional practice only. 
    Pharmacist means a person duly registered with the State Board of Pharmacy pursuant to the Pharmacy Act of the State of Kansas (K.S.A. 65-1625 et seq.) or acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto. 
    Practitioner means any person authorized by law to prescribe and administer drugs in the course of his professional practice; professional practice of a practitioner means treatment of patients under a bona fide practitioner-patient relationship. 
    Prescription means a written order, and in cases of emergency, a telephone order, issued by a practitioner in good faith in the course of his professional practice, to a pharmacist for a drug for a particular patient, which specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of the patient (and, if such drug is prescribed for an animal, the species of such animal), the name and quantity of the drug prescribed, the directions for use of such drug, and the signature of such practitioner. 
    Somnifacient and stimulating has the meaning attributable in standard medical lexicons. 
    Warehouseman means a person who, in the usual course of business, stores drugs for others lawfully entitled to process them and who has no control over the disposition of such drugs except for the purpose of such drugs except for the purpose of such storage. 
    Wholesaler means a person engaged in the business of distributing drugs to persons included in any of the classes named in Subsections (1) through (6) of the definition of "drug" in this section, inclusive of Section 8-52(1)b. 
(Prior Code, § 10-201; Ord. No. 528, § 1) 
Sec. 8-50. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior Code, § 10-207; Ord. No. 1415) 
Sec. 8-51. - Handling of drugs. 
    Rules and regulations relating to handling, control, usage, etc., of drugs shall be as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, possess, manufacture, have under his control, sell, or offer for sale any drugs unless: 
a.  Such drug is delivered by a pharmacist, or his authorized agent, in good faith upon prescription and there is affixed to the immediate container in which such drug is delivered a label bearing: 
1.  The name and address of the owner of the establishment from which such drug was delivered; 
2.  The date on which the prescription for such drug was filled; 
3.  The number of such prescription as filed in the prescription files of the pharmacist who filled the prescription; 
4.  The name of the practitioner who prescribed such drug; 
5.  The name and address of the patient, and, if such drug was prescribed for an animal, a statement showing the species of the animal; 
6.  The direction for use of the drug and cautionary statements, if any, as contained in the prescription; 
b.  In the event that such delivery is pursuant to telephonic order, such prescription shall be promptly reduced to writing and filed by the pharmacist; and 
c.  Such drug is delivered by a practitioner in faith and in the course of his professional practice only. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refill any prescription for a drug unless such refilling is specifically authorized by the prescriber. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep the records required by Section 8-53. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a drug unless such person obtained such drug on the prescription of a practitioner or in accordance with Subsection (1)c of this section or from a person licensed by the laws of any other state or the District of Columbia to prescribe or dispense drugs. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to make available and to accord full opportunity to check any record, file, stock, or inventory as required by Section 8-53. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use to his own advantage, or to reveal other than to a public officer or employee charged with the duty of enforcing laws relating to the handling, sale and distribution of drugs, or to a court when relevant in a judicial proceeding, any information acquired under the authority of Section 8-53 concerning any method of process which as a trade secret is entitled to protection. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain a drug by fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge; or by the forgery or alteration of a prescription; or by the use of a false name or the giving of a false address. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or have in his possession with the intent to sell any hallucinogenic or stimulating drug described in Section 8-49. 
(Prior Code, § 10-202; Ord. No. 528, § 2) 
Sec. 8-52. - Exemptions. 
    Exemptions relating to this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The provisions of Sections 8-51(1) and (5) shall not be applicable to: 
a.  The delivery of drugs for medical or scientific purposes only to persons included in any of the classes named in this article, or to be the agents or employees of such persons for use in the usual course of their business or practice or in the performance of their official duties, as the case may be; 
b.  The possession of drugs by such persons or their agents or employees for such use: 
1.  Pharmacists; 
2.  Practitioners; 
3.  Persons who procure drugs: 
(i)  For disposition by or under the supervision of pharmacists or practitioners employed by them; or 
(ii)  For the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing and/or resale; 
4.  Hospitals and other institutions which procure drugs for lawful administration by or under the supervision of practitioners; 
5.  Manufacturers and wholesalers; 
6.  Carriers and warehousemen. 
(2)  Nothing contained in Section 8-51 shall make it unlawful for a public officer, agent or employee, or person aiding such public officer in performing his official duties to possess, obtain, or attempt to obtain a drug for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of any State law or United States law relating to the regulation of the handling, sale or distribution of drugs. 
(3)  Nothing in this article shall apply to a compound, mixture, or preparation containing a drug which is sold in good faith for the purpose which it is intended and not for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article if such compound, mixture, or preparation contains a sufficient quantity of another therapeutic agent in addition to such a drug, to cause it to prevent the ingestion of a sufficient amount of drug to cause a dangerous hypnotic somnifacient or stimulating action. 
(Prior Code, § 10-203; Ord. No. 528, § 3) 
Sec. 8-53. - Records, inventories by certain persons. 
    Records and inventories to be kept by certain persons relating to drugs in the City shall be as follows: 
(1)  Persons (other than carriers) to whom the exemptions of Section 8-52 are applicable shall maintain detailed, but not necessarily separate, records and inventories relating to drugs manufactured, purchased, sold, distributed and handled and retain all such records and inventories required by this subsection for not less than two (2) calendar years after the date of the transaction shown by such record and inventory. 
(2)  Pharmacists shall, in addition to complying with the provisions of Subsection (1) of this section, retain each prescription and written record of telephonic order for a drug filled by them, for not less than two (2) calendar years immediately following the date of the filling or the date of the last refilling of such prescription, whichever is the later date. 
(Prior Code, § 10-204; Ord. No. 528, § 4) 
Sec. 8-54. - Access to records; inspection. 
    Persons required by Section 8-53 to keep files, inventories or records relating to drugs shall, upon the written request of a public officer or employee charged with the duty of enforcing laws relating to the handling, sale and distribution of drugs: 
(1)  Make such files, inventories or record available to such officer or employee, at all reasonable hours, for inspection and copying; and 
(2)  Accord to such officer or employee full opportunity to check the correctness of such files, inventories or records, including opportunity to make inventory of all stock of drugs on hand. 
(Prior Code, § 10-205; Ord. No. 528, § 5) 
Sec. 8-55. - Controlled substances and drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Use or possession unlawful. No person shall use or possess, with the intent to use within this City: 
(1)  Any simulated controlled substance; or 
(2)  Any drug paraphernalia used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act. 
(b)  Delivery or manufacture unlawful. 
(1)  No person shall sell, offer for sale, have in that person's possession with intent to sell, deliver, possess with the intent to deliver, manufacture with the intent to deliver or cause to be delivered within this City any drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section or the Uniform Controlled Substances Act. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly deliver or cause to be delivered in this City any substance that is not a controlled substance: 
a.  Upon an express representation that the substance is a controlled substance or that the substance is of a nature or appearance that the recipient will be able to distribute the substance as a controlled substance; or 
b.  Under circumstances that would give a reasonable person reason to believe that the substance is a controlled substance. 
(3)  If any one (1) of the following factors is established, there shall be a presumption that delivery of a substance was under circumstances that would give a reasonable person reason to believe that a substance is a controlled substance: 
a.  The substance was packaged in a manner normally used for the illegal delivery of controlled substances; 
b.  The delivery of the substance included an exchange of or demand for money or other consideration for delivery of the substance, and the amount of the consideration was substantially in excess of the reasonable value of the substance; or 
c.  The physical appearance of the capsule or other material containing the substance is substantially identical to a specific controlled substance. 
(4)  As used in this section, the term "or under circumstances where one reasonably should know" that an item will be used in violation of this section, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Actual knowledge from prior experience or statements by customers; 
b.  Inappropriate or impractical design for alleged legitimate use; 
c.  Receipt of packaging material, advertising information or other manufacturer supplied information regarding the item's use as drug paraphernalia; or 
d.  Receipt of a written warning from a law enforcement or prosecutorial agency having jurisdiction that the item has been previously determined to have been designed specifically for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(c)  Determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or person in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of any owner or person in control of the object under any municipal, State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this article or the Uniform Controlled Substances Act; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
(6)  Advertising of the item in magazines or other means that specifically glorify, encourage or espouse the illegal use, manufacture, sale or cultivation of controlled substances; 
(7)  Oral or written instructions provided with the object concerning its use. 
(8)  Descriptive material accompanying the object that explains or depicts its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning the object's use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner or person in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of similar or related items to the community, such as a distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning the object's use; 
(15)  Any evidence that alleged paraphernalia can or had been used to store a controlled substance or to introduce a controlled substance into the human body, as opposed to any legitimate use for alleged paraphernalia; and 
(16)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or person in control of the object to deliver it to a person in an instance where the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know that the person to whom the object is delivered intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section or the Uniform Controlled Substances Act. The innocence of an owner or person in control of the object as to a direct violation of this section or the Uniform Controlled Substances Act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(d)  Drug paraphernalia sale and display prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, dispense, give away or display any instrument intended for use for inhaling or ingesting any controlled substance or drug in or upon any premises: 
(1)  That are in close proximity to a school; or 
(2)  Open to minors, unless the instruments are kept in a part of the premises that is not open to view by minors or to which minors do not have access; provided, however, that display of any of these items at a place of display for educational or scientific purposes shall not be unlawful. 
(e)  No defense to prosecution. The fact that an item has not yet been used or did not contain a controlled substance or drug at the time it was seized as evidence shall not be a defense to a charge that the item was possessed with the intention for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Prior Code, § 10-206; Ord. No. 1415; Ord. No. 1438; Ord. No. 1461; Ord. No. 1491; Ord. No. 1513, § 7, 9-12-2011; Ord. No. 1539, § 11, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1557, § 12, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1584 , § 12, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1606 , § 12, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1635 , § 13, 10-10-2016) 
Secs. 8-56-8-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 8-84-8-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8-110. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm signal means a detectable signal, audibly, visually or both, to which the police are expected to respond on an emergency basis, generated by an alarm system, indicating the commission of or an attempt to commit a crime. 
    Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other emergency activity requiring immediate attention and to which the police are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user means any person in possession of any building, structure or facility, or part thereof, who purchases, leases, contracts for or otherwise obtains an alarm system; any person who contracts for the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system; any person who contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor an alarm system. 
    Automatic dial protection device means an electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically sends over regular telephone lines a pre-recorded voice alarm upon receipt of a stimulus from the sensory apparatus that has detected a force or condition characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion of an emergency message indicating a need for an emergency response. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal eliciting a response by the police when a situation requiring an immediate response does not in fact exist, such as when no breach of security has been attempted or committed. An alarm will not be considered a false alarm if it is determined that the alarm was caused by: 
(1)  Natural or manmade catastrophe. Such events include tornadoes, floods, earthquakes or other similarly violent conditions. 
(2)  Vandalism causing physical damage to the premises. 
(3)  Telephone line outage. 
(4)  Attempted entry of a location causing visible physical or other evidence of damage to the location. 
(5)  Severe weather causing physical damage to the premises. 
(6)  The test of a local alarm system by a licensed alarm business agent or employee who is present at the premises servicing, repairing or installing the alarm when such testing does not result in the alarm being activated for an uninterrupted period exceeding sixty (60) seconds and when the City Police Department has received prior notification of the test. 
    Local alarm system means an alarm system which when activated causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated only on the premises within which the system is installed and which is intended to be heard or seen by others outside of the protected premises. 
    Permit year means each twelve (12) month period, beginning on the date of issuance or the succeeding anniversary date of an alarm user's permit. The date of issuance for new systems shall be the actual date the permit is issued by the City Alarm Coordinator or the date of the first alarm reported by the system, whichever occurs first. The effective date for registration and issuance of permits for alarm systems shall commence April 1, 1992. 
(Prior Code, § 7-901) 
Sec. 8-111. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of any other provisions of this division for failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this division shall be guilty of a public offense and punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the City ordinance is committed, continued or permitted by any such person. 
(Prior Code, § 7-909) 
Sec. 8-112. - Alarm user permit. 
(a)  Permit requirement and fees . No person shall use an alarm system after April 1, 1992, which is designed to elicit, either directly or indirectly, a police response without first obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the City Alarm Coordinator. The permit fee upon registration is set forth in the fee schedule as established by ordinance. 
(b)  Exception . A permit shall not be required to operate the local alarm systems affixed to motor vehicles. 
(c)  Existing alarm systems. All persons using an alarm system installed prior to April 1, 1992, shall obtain a permit prior to April 1, 1992, from the City Alarm Coordinator authorizing the continued use of the alarm system. 
(d)  Building code compliance . No permit shall be issued for a new installation until the work required by the building code, if any, applicable in this Code has been completed and approval obtained thereunder. 
(e)  Application . The permit shall be requested on an application provided by the City Alarm Coordinator, which shall include: 
(1)  Address . Common address at which the alarm system is installed or to be installed, not to include post office boxes. 
(2)  Alarm user. Full name and address of the alarm user. 
(3)  Property owner. Full name, street address and telephone number of the owner of the property at which the system is installed or to be installed. 
(4)  Type of system . Description of the alarm system, including whether it is equipped to cease emitting an audible alarm sound with thirty (30) minutes of the activation. 
(5)  Installer . Full name and address of the person installing or who has already installed the alarm system. 
(6)  Date . Date the alarm system is to be or was installed. 
(7)  Service . If the alarm system is serviced or maintained by someone other than the alarm user, full name and address of the person servicing or maintaining the alarm system. 
(8)  Monitor . If the alarm system is monitored by someone other than the alarm user, full name, address and telephone number of the person monitoring the alarm system. 
(9)  Contact . Name, address and telephone number of the person to be contacted by the Police Department in the event the alarm user is not available. 
(10)  Additional information . Any other information required by the City Alarm Coordinator to facilitate compliance with this division. 
(f)  Transfer of possession. When the possession of the premises at which an alarm is maintained is transferred, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm user permit within thirty (30) days of obtaining possession of the property. 
(g)  Information correction . Whenever the information provided on the alarm user permit application changes, the correct information will be provided to the City Alarm Coordinator within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(h)  Identification sticker . No person shall use an alarm system without posting at the front entrance of the premises served by the alarm system an identification sticker issued by the City Alarm Coordinator with the alarm user permit. 
(Prior Code, § 7-902; Ord. No. 1010) 
Sec. 8-113. - Grace period. 
    False alarms reported or caused to be reported within the first thirty (30) days following installation of the alarm system shall not be considered for any purposes of Sections 8-117 and 8-118. 
(Prior Code, § 7-903) 
Sec. 8-114. - Local alarm systems; length of alarm. 
    Local alarm systems shall automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within thirty (30) minutes of activation. An alarm system which emits an intermittent signal shall discontinue emitting an audible sound within thirty (30) minutes of activation. However, an alarm system installed prior to April 1, 1992, which does not have the capability to automatically discontinue the audible alarm sound within thirty (30) minutes of activation shall not be subject to the requirement of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 7-904) 
Sec. 8-115. - Review of false alarm determinations. 
(a)  Notification . An alarm user shall be notified in writing of each false alarm determination. 
(b)  Review of false alarm determinations. The City Alarm Coordinator shall, when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was false. Such review may be done by the City Alarm Coordinator only if the alarm user requests such a review within fifteen (15) days of the date of the mailing or other delivery of the notice of false alarm determination. A request for a determination by the City Alarm Coordinator shall include, at least the following information: 
(1)  Alarm user's name. 
(2)  Address at which alarm is installed. 
(3)  Date of alarm being contested. 
(4)  Alarm user permit number. 
(5)  Facts upon which the request for a determination is made. 
(Prior Code, § 7-905) 
Sec. 8-116. - Automatic dial protection devices prohibited. 
    No automatic dial protection device shall be used to report, or cause to be reported, any recorded message to the Police Department. 
(Prior Code, § 7-906) 
Sec. 8-117. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this division. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to use an alarm system which reports, or causes to report, five (5) or more false alarms within a calendar year. 
(Prior Code, § 7-907; Ord. No. 1010) 
Sec. 8-118. - False alarms; fees required. 
    Fees are established to defray the cost of false alarms to the City. These are fees and are in no manner in lieu of penalties provided in this division. Any alarm system which has recorded more than four (4) false alarms within any calendar year shall be subject to the fees as established by ordinance for each ensuing false alarm. 
(Prior Code, § 7-908; Ord. No. 1010) 
Secs. 8-119-8-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Kansas Emergency Preparedness Act, K.S.A. 48-904 et seq. 

Sec. 8-150. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions defined in this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 10-304; Ord. No. 465) 
Sec. 8-151. - Proclamation of emergency. 
(a)  Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor or in the event of his inability to act, the President of the Governing Body determines that an emergency exists as a result of mob action or other civil disobedience within the Kansas City Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area causing danger or injury to or damage to persons or property, he shall have power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations necessary to preserve the peace and order of the City: 
(1)  To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City thereby requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves, and/or their motor vehicles, from the public street, alleys, public parking lots, parks or other public places; provided that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining essential public services, firefighters and City authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew. 
(2)  To order the closing of any business establishment anywhere within the City for the period of the emergency such businesses to include, but not be limited to, those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal malt beverages, gasoline or firearms. 
(3)  To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking area closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or without the City, including the Sheriff's Department under provisions of mutual emergency police protection compact, to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the City. 
(b)  Any and all the regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies, organizations and their individual officers shall have the full power and authority to make arrests and to act on behalf of the City in order to enforce the provisions provided for in this division and any and all other City ordinances that might be violated as a result of any mob or other civil disobedience. 
(c)  The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into a mutual emergency police protection compact with any and all governing bodies of the County, and any other duly authorized governing body within the Kansas City Standard Metropolitan Area. 
(Prior Code, § 10-301; Ord. No. 465, § 1) 
Sec. 8-152. - News media. 
    The proclamation of emergency provided in this division shall become effective upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media. 
(Prior Code, § 10-302; Ord. No. 465, § 2) 
Sec. 8-153. - Termination. 
    Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this division shall terminate after forty-eight (48) hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided that such emergency may be extended for such additional periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the Governing Body. 
(Prior Code, § 10-303; Ord. No. 465, § 3) 
Secs. 8-154-8-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELEVATORS AND DUMBWAITERS 

Sec. 8-175. - Scope. 
    This article governs the installation, maintenance, testing and inspection of commercial elevators, dumbwaiters and their components. 
Sec. 8-176. - General. 
    The owner shall be responsible for the safe operation and maintenance of each elevator and dumbwaiter installation and shall cause periodic inspections, tests and maintenance to be made on such conveyances as required in this article. It shall be unlawful to operate any elevator or dumbwaiter without a current inspection report from a qualified individual or agency. 
Sec. 8-177. - Periodic inspections and tests required. 
    Valid annual inspection reports and other reports, as required by ASME A-17.1/CSA B44-07, must be presented by said qualified individual or agency, indicating that the conveyance is safe and that the inspections and tests have been performed in accordance with ASME A-17.1/CSA B44-07. 
(Prior Code, § 7-703) 
Sec. 8-178. - Alterations, repairs and maintenance. 
    Alterations, repairs and maintenance shall be made as required by ASME A-17.1/CSA B44-07. 
Sec. 8-179. - Inspection costs. 
    All costs of such inspections and tests shall be paid by the owner. 
Sec. 8-180. - Inspection reports. 
    After each required inspection, a full and correct report of such inspection shall be filed with the Building Official or designated representative. 
Sec. 8-181. - Issuance of certificate. 
    A certificate acknowledging that an annual inspection report has been completed and is on file with the City Clerk's office will be issued for the period of July 1 through June 30 upon the receipt of satisfactory inspection reports for each elevator or dumbwaiter. 
Sec. 8-182. - Certificate displayed. 
    All business owners operating commercial elevators are hereby required to have their certificate issued by the City conspicuously displayed in each elevator. 
Sec. 8-183. - Fees. 
    In the event an owner or lessee does not comply with the tests and inspections provided by this article, the City shall cause such inspection or tests to be performed by a qualified agent or agency at the expense of the owner or lessee as provided in the applicable lease. 
Sec. 8-184. - Time limitation. 
    Any deficiency in any equipment covered by this article determined by tests or inspections as required in this article must be corrected within thirty (30) days. If such deficiency is not corrected within thirty (30) days, the Building Official shall forthwith issue an order prohibiting the operation of such equipment. 
(Prior Code, § 7-719; Ord. No. 1038; Ord. No. 1121) 
Sec. 8-185. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), provided that each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Prior Code, § 7-720; Ord. No. 802, § 19; Ord. No. 1038) 
Secs. 8-186-8-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER OFFENSES 

Sec. 8-209. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 10-410; Ord. No. 910) 
Sec. 8-210. - Criminal use of noxious matter. 
    Criminal use of noxious matter is the possession, manufacturer or transportation of any noxious matter with intent to use such matter for an unlawful purpose, or the use or attempt to use noxious matter to the injury of persons and property, or the placing or depositing of such matter upon or about the premises of another person without the consent of such person. The term "noxious matter" as used in this section means any bomb, compound or substance which may give off dangerous or disagreeable odors or cause distress to persons exposed thereto. 
(Prior Code, § 10-403; Ord. No. 910) 
Sec. 8-211. - Trespassing for purpose of parking vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass for purpose of parking a vehicle. Trespassing for the purpose of parking a vehicle is the going upon the property owned or occupied by another for the purpose of parking any vehicle upon such property, without the permission of the property owner or occupant. 
(Prior Code, § 10-404; Ord. No. 910) 
Sec. 8-212. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, maintain or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary, unreasonable or unusually loud noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of a reasonable person within the City. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit the use or operation of any electronic device, radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device producing or reproducing sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of a reasonable person. 
(c)  No person shall congregate, participate in or be in any party or gathering of people from which sound emanates of sufficient volume as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of reasonable persons residing in any residential area. No person shall visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering is taking place except persons who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating said disturbance. A police officer may order all persons present in any group or gathering from which sound emanates, other than the owners or tenants of the dwelling unit, to immediately disburse in lieu of being charged under this section. Owners or tenants of the dwelling unit shall immediately abate the disturbance and, failing to do so, shall be in violation of this section. 
(d)  Exemptions. Sounds emanating from the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Emergency public safety vehicles; 
(2)  Emergency activities of the Fire or Police Department; 
(3)  Emergency activities of any utility company; 
(4)  Any commercial vehicle providing a bona fide delivery service; 
(5)  Any concert, theatrical performance or other activity sponsored by or approved by the Governing Body. 
(Prior Code, § 10-405; Ord. No. 910; Ord. No. 1223) 
Sec. 8-213. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass upon the property owned or occupied by another and look into a window or other opening in a house, room or building, or to loiter in a public street, alley or parking lot or other public place for the purpose of wrongfully observing the actions of occupants of any such house, room or building. 
(Prior Code, § 10-406; Ord. No. 910) 
Sec. 8-214. - Noisy machines; use restricted. 
(a)  No person shall operate, use or run a power mower, power saw, power sprayer, garden tractor, solid waste disposal machinery, tool, equipment, vehicle, electronic device or set, instrument, television, phonograph or other noise or sound producing device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at any adjacent property line, or for fifty (50) feet or more in the case of a multiple-family dwelling, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. on any day and 7:00 a.m. the following day. If the following day is a Saturday, Sunday, or a day that has been declared by the Congress of the United States of America, or the State legislature to be a legal holiday, this prohibition shall be extended to 9:00 a.m. 
(b)  Exemptions. Sounds emanating from the following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Emergency public safety vehicle; 
(2)  Emergency activities of or at the direction of the Fire, Police or Public Works Departments; 
(3)  Emergency activities of any utility company; 
(4)  Any commercial vehicle providing a bona fide delivery service; 
(5)  Any concert, theatrical performance or other activity sponsored by or approved by the Governing Body; 
(6)  Any commercial activities that are required by City or fire safety codes and cannot as a practical matter be accomplished during the times set forth in Subsection (a) of this section; 
(7)  Power generators when there is a temporary power outage; and 
(8)  Any activities approved by the Governing Body. 
(Prior Code, § 10-407; Ord. No. 910; Ord. No. 1022; Ord. No. 1224; Ord. No. 1496; Ord. No. 1533, § 1, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 8-215. - Throwing dangerous missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to throw or project any ball, stone, brick, piece of wood, clay or other hard substance along, over or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or at or against any house, building, vehicle or at or towards any person. 
(Prior Code, § 10-408; Ord. No. 910) 
Chapter 9 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Violation. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person or entity violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every day that this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. Additionally, the City shall have the authority to maintain civil suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In addition to any other remedies, the City Attorney may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent a violation of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 13-111; Ord. No. 1212) 
Sec. 9-2. - Supervision. 
    The supervision and control of the construction, alteration, maintenance and repair of all streets, bridges, tunnels, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, driveway entrances, storm sewers, street lights, and other public rights-of-way and thoroughfares of the City shall be under the direction of the Public Works Director or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 13-101) 
Sec. 9-3. - Required approval to use right-of-way. 
    As provided by Federal and State law, any person requiring a contract, grant, right, privilege or franchise to engage in any activity requiring the use of the public right-of-way shall first receive the appropriate City approval before engaging in such activity. To aid in the review and approval of such persons, the City shall: 
(1)  Develop appropriate application requirements and forms; 
(2)  Establish and require the payment of a nonrefundable application fee to offset the City's costs and expenses in developing, negotiating and administering the terms of any approval permitting the use of the public right-of-way. Such fee shall be approved by the City Council and listed in the fee schedule as established by ordinance; 
(3)  Seek reimbursement of any reasonable City cost and expense exceeding the application fee amount as described in Subsection (2) of this section. To aid such reimbursement, the City Council may approve, in addition to such application fee, a required sum to be deposited by applicants that may be used for any such additional City cost and expense. Such deposit shall be approved by the City Council and listed in the fee schedule as established by ordinance. Within a reasonable time after the completion of the City approval (or denial), the unused balance of such deposit shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 13-102) 
Sec. 9-4. - Specifications and standards. 
    The Public Works Director shall provide, with the aid of the City Engineer, minimum specifications and standards for the purposes of regulating the design, construction, alteration, maintenance and repairs of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, driveway entrances, storm sewers, street lights and other public right-of-way and thoroughfares of the City. All contracts entered into by the City relating to the construction of road and drainage structures and replacement of paving and curbing within the City shall comply with these specifications and standards. 
(Prior Code, § 13-103) 
Sec. 9-5. - Permit. 
    A permit to excavate and/or construct within a public right-of-way is required and application for the permit shall be made at the Public Works Director's office. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, a separate permit may be required for each separate phase of work. All information required by the permit must be completed prior to the approval and issuance of the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 13-104) 
Sec. 9-6. - Cutting, excavating or tunneling of public right-of-way. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any cut, excavation or tunnel in, through or under any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or public rights-of-way in the City for any purpose whatsoever, except for as provided by Article III of this chapter. 
(Prior Code, § 13-105) 
Sec. 9-7. - Building materials in public right-of-way. 
    No person shall use or temporarily appropriate any sidewalk, street and/or right-of-way or any material part thereof for the temporary deposit of building material during the construction, excavation or repair of any building without the consent of the Public Works Director. Any person desiring such temporary use shall apply for permission from the Public Works Director, who, at his discretion, may grant such permission; provided that not more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the width of the street shall be used, and in case the sidewalk is obstructed, a temporary walkway shall be provided around such obstruction; further provided that the gutter shall be kept open for flow of water. Under no circumstances shall any dumpster be allowed in any part of the street. Upon the completion of any such permitted use, the material in the sidewalk, street and/or right-of-way shall be removed within five (5) days. Any obstruction shall be adequately lighted from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise to give warning to others. 
(Prior Code, § 13-106) 
Sec. 9-8. - Commercial use of public right-of-way. 
    No person may use any portion of any sidewalk, street or any other part of the public right-of-way for the purpose of displaying or offering for sale wares, goods, merchandise or other items. Nothing in this chapter, however, shall be construed as prohibiting the City Council from waiving the prohibition of this section in connection with community promotions or community-wide celebrations when such waiver is considered to be in the best interest of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 13-107) 
Sec. 9-9. - Dangerous objects in public right-of-way. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or cause to be placed or thrown in or on any sidewalk, street, alley, public right-of-way or other public grounds of the City, any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, wire or other dangerous objects that might wound any person or animal, or cut or puncture any pneumatic tire while passing over the same. 
(Prior Code, § 13-108) 
Sec. 9-10. - Driving over curbs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over or across any curb or gutter where there is no established or improved driveway entrance or drive across any sidewalk when the same is not constructed as a part of the driveway entrance unless such curb or curb and gutter is temporarily bridged by the use of planks of sufficient size and number so that no weight shall be imposed upon the curb or curb and gutter; provided that such bridging shall not obstruct drainage in the streets. 
(Prior Code, § 13-110) 
Sec. 9-11. - Altering drainage. 
    No person shall change or alter any gutter, storm sewer, drain or drainage structure which has been constructed, or is being lawfully maintained or controlled by the City unless such change or alteration has been authorized or directed by the Public Works Director. 
(Prior Code, § 13-301) 
Sec. 9-12. - Burning in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any fire upon any of the paved streets, alleys, or street intersections within the City. 
(Prior Code, § 13-302) 
Sec. 9-13. - Hauling loose material. 
    It shall be unlawful to haul over the streets or alleys of the City any loose material of any kind except in a vehicle having a tight box so constructed as to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon the streets or alleys. 
(Prior Code, § 13-303) 
Sec. 9-14. - Dumping prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited in or on any street, right-of-way, gutter, storm sewer, waterway or drainageway any dirt gravel, rubbish, snow, ice, leaves or other debris, including, but not limited to, lumber, paper, trash, concrete or metal (collectively referred to as dumped materials). Erosion of soil which flows onto any street, right-of-way, gutter, storm sewer, waterway or drainageway from property before or during construction shall be considered as depositing dirt, gravel or other construction debris. 
(b)  If, upon inspection by the Building Inspector, Public Works Director or the designated representative of either of them, it is determined that any dumped materials have been dumped or deposited in or on any street, right-of-way, gutter, storm sewer, waterway or drainageway in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall then notify the responsible person and give a four (4) hour period to make the affected area free and clear of said dumped materials. If the said area is not free and clear at the conclusion of this period, the Building Inspector, Public Works Director or designated representative may authorize the City to take necessary action to clean up the said area and assess all charges (including administrative costs) to the responsible person at an established hourly rate, but in no case will the charges be less than two (2) hours for labor, materials and equipment. The Public Works Director shall establish a fee structure for charges to be assessed for cleanup required by this section. The responsible person shall then be given thirty (30) days to reimburse the City for said costs. In the event the responsible person does not pay said costs within the thirty (30) days, the City may take all necessary steps to recover its costs (including any additional administrative or legal costs), including, but not limited to, recovering the same under any performance or maintenance bond issue. 
(Prior Code, § 13-304; Ord. No. 1212; Ord. No. 1474) 
Secs. 9-15-9-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 9-32. - Repairs by owner or City. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of the abutting property to keep the sidewalk in repair; provided, however, that the City may construct and make any and all repairs and perform any maintenance necessary to sidewalks within the City at the City's expense after providing notice to the owner of the abutting property or its agent, if known, five (5) days prior to constructing the sidewalks, making any repairs, or performing any maintenance thereto. Repairs may be made by force account or by contract and an account of the cost thereof shall be kept and reported to the Governing Body. 
(b)  The City may by ordinance levy a special assessment against the lot or piece of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired for the cost of repairs, and if the abutting property owner does not pay the assessment within thirty (30) days, upon the City Clerk mailing to the owner or his agent, if known, a printed or written notice of the amount of such repairs, the full amount shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk to be put on the tax rolls for collection like other taxes. The temporary financing of repairs may be borne by the City out of the fund for maintaining streets or out of the general fund or general improvement fund. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the use of the procedure provided by K.S.A. ch. 12, art. 6a (K.S.A. 12-6a01 et seq.) or any statute relating to the construction, repair or reconstruction of sidewalks. 
(Prior Code, § 13-201; Ord. No. 1550, § 1, 5-13-2013) 
Sec. 9-33. - Work according to specifications. 
    Any person who shall construct or assist in constructing any sidewalk or crosswalk, or rebuild or assist in rebuilding any sidewalk or crosswalk, or make or assist in making any improvement whatever upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the City shall do so in accordance with the maps, plans, specifications and profiles of the Public Works Director and the rules and directions contained in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-207) 
Sec. 9-34. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build or construct any step or other obstruction, whether temporary or permanent, or to store, leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, merchandise, goods, containers, benches, display or showcases, on any sidewalks or other public ways in the City or to obstruct the same longer than is necessary for loading or unloading any such article or object. 
(Prior Code, § 13-208) 
Sec. 9-35. - Same; exception. 
    The Public Works Director may authorize the granting of temporary permits in connection with a building or moving permit for limited times only to the owner of property abutting on any sidewalk to use or encumber such sidewalk or public way of the City during the construction of any building or improvement thereon. No permit shall be issued for such purpose until plans for warning and safeguarding the public during such use of sidewalks shall have been submitted by the owner or his contractor and approved by the City Council. 
(Prior Code, § 13-209) 
Sec. 9-36. - Sidewalks covered with earth. 
    No lot or piece of land abutting on any sidewalk shall be allowed to become or remain in such condition that earth or other substance therefrom shall accumulate on the sidewalk and it shall be the duty of the owner of such lot or piece of land to place the same in such condition as to prevent the accumulation of such earth or other substance on such sidewalk. 
(Prior Code, § 13-210) 
Secs. 9-37-9-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AND EXCAVATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned facilities means those facilities owned by the ROW user that are not in use and will not be utilized by the owner in the future. 
    Affiliate means any person controlling, controlled by or under the common control of a service provider. 
    Applicant means any person requesting permission to occupy, lease or operate facilities using the right-of-way, or to excavate the right-of-way. 
    Area of influence means that area around a street excavation where the pavement and sub-grade is impacted by the excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration. 
    City means the City of Fairway, Kansas, a municipal corporation and any duly authorized representative. 
    Construct means and includes construct, install, erect, build, affix or otherwise place any fixed structure or object, in, on, under, through or above the right-of-way. 
    Day means calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a user. 
    Excavate means and includes any cutting, digging, excavating, tunneling, boring, grading or other alteration of the surface or subsurface material or earth in the right-of-way. 
    Excavation fee means the fee charged by the City for each street or pavement cut which is intended to recover the costs associated with construction and repair activities of the ROW user and its contractors and/or subcontractors. 
    FCC means Federal Communications Commission. 
    Facility means lines, pipes, irrigation systems, wires, cables, conduit facilities, ducts, poles, towers, vaults, pedestals, boxes, appliances, antennae, transmitters, gates, meters, appurtenances, or other equipment. 
    Governmental entity means any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political subdivision of this State or of any other state of the United States and any agency or instrumentality of this State or of any other state of the United States or of the United States. 
    KCC means the Kansas Corporation Commission. 
    Parkway means the area between a property line and the street curb, sometimes called boulevard, tree-shelf or snow-shelf. 
    Pavement means and includes Portland cement concrete pavement, asphalt concrete pavement, asphalt treated road surfaces and any aggregate base material. 
    Permit and inspection fee means the fee charged by the City to recover its cost incurred for right-of-way management, including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration of improvements; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the City may incur in managing the provisions of this article. 
    Permittee means any person to whom a right-of-way permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way. 
    Public improvement means any project undertaken by the City for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any public infrastructure, and including, without limitation, streets, alleys, bridges, bikeways, parkways, sidewalks, sewers, drainage facilities, traffic control devices, street lights, public facilities, public buildings or public lands. 
    Public lands means any real property of the City that is not a right-of-way. 
    Public works director means the Public Works Director of the City, or his authorized representative. 
    Registration means the application process of a service provider, the approval of the application by the City, and the authorization of the service provider to use any portion of the right-of-way within the City to provide service both within and beyond the City limits. 
    Repair means the temporary construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable. 
    Repair and restoration costs means those costs associated with repairing and restoring the public right-of-way because of damage caused by the ROW user and its contractors and/or subcontractors in the right-of-way. 
    Restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is returned to the same condition, or better, that existed before the commencement of the work. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation for public use and intended to be occupied by a street, bike path, alley, walkway, crosswalk, electric transmission line, cable/fiber, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses. It normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment), such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts, and bridges. The interest acquired may be a full fee interest or an easement interest. 
    Right-of-way permit means the authorization to excavate for the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of any type of facility within the right-of-way. 
    Routine service operation means a work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt traffic. 
    ROW user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work, excavation, provision of services, or to install, construct, maintain, repair facilities thereon, including, but not limited to, landowners and service providers. A ROW user shall not include ordinary vehicular or pedestrian traffic or any governmental entity that has entered into an agreement pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2901 et seq., with the City regarding the use and occupancy of the City's right-of-way. 
    Service means a commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, Internet services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewerage. 
    Service provider means any person owning, possessing or having an interest in facilities in the right-of-way that are used for the provisions of a service for or without a fee; provided that this definition shall also include persons owning, possessing or having an interest in facilities in the right-of-way that are used by, may be used by or are intended for use by another person, in whole or in part, to provide a service for or without a fee, regardless of whether the actual facility owner provides any service. 
    Street means the pavement and sub-grade of a City residential, collector or arterial roadway. 
(Prior Code, § 13-403; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-62. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or entity violating any provision of this article is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Every day that this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article is hereby deemed to be grounds for revocation of the permit and registration to operate with the City. 
(c)  The City shall have the authority to maintain civil suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. In addition to any other remedies, the City Attorney may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-434; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-63. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  To recognize the City's primary role as chief steward of the right-of-way and its duty to its citizens to recover the costs of managing the right-of-way and incursions into it; 
(2)  To clarify and regulate conditions of occupancy and construction for those ROW users occupying space within the City's right-of-way given the anticipated increased use of the right-of-way by various ROW users throughout the country; 
(3)  To recognize the necessity for sound management practices in light of the increased use of the right-of-way and the fact that the right-of-way is a limited resource; 
(4)  To treat each ROW user equitably and in a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory manner with considerations that may be unique to the technologies and situation of each particular ROW user; 
(5)  To minimize disruption, visual impact or inconvenience to the public, and to preserve the public health, safety and welfare; and 
(6)  To comply with State and federal legislation. 
(Prior Code, § 13-402; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-64. - Federal, State and City jurisdiction. 
    This article shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article to the contrary, the construction, operation and maintenance of the ROW user's facilities shall be in accordance with all laws and regulations of the United States, the State and any political subdivision thereof, or any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction. In addition, the ROW user shall meet or exceed the most stringent technical standards set by regulatory bodies, including the City, now or hereafter having jurisdiction. The ROW user's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The ROW user shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances enacted pursuant to that power. Finally, failure of the ROW user to comply with any applicable law or regulation may result in a forfeiture of any permit, registration or authorization granted in accordance with this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-431; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-65. - Compliance. 
    No person shall excavate the right-of-way, construct, or use the facilities within the right-of-way of the City except as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-401; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-66. - City's failure to enforce. 
    This article or of any permit granted under this article shall not constitute a waiver of the City's rights nor a waiver of any person's obligation as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-433; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-67. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the City by this article, the City reserves unto itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance under any registration, permit or other authorization granted under this article. The City shall have the right to waive any provision of this article or any registration, permit or other authorization granted thereunder, except those required by Federal or State law, if the City determines that it is in the public interest to do so; and that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the person. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the City. Further, the City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article, the provisions of this article shall not infringe upon the rights of any person pursuant to any applicable State or Federal statutes, including, but not limited to, the right to occupy the right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 13-4351; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-68. - Policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the City to authorize any ROW user to utilize the right-of-way in a competitively neutral, non-discriminatory manner that maximizes the efficient use of and conserves the right-of-way and minimizes the burden on the right-of-way, physically and aesthetically. Any use of the right-of-way by a ROW user shall be subject to the terms and conditions hereof, in addition to other applicable Federal, State or local requirements. 
(b)  The right granted to the ROW user to use the right-of-way is limited to the use that the ROW user has filed with the City in accordance with this article. These rights are for the exclusive use of the ROW user except where otherwise provided in this article, or when authorized by the City. 
(c)  This article also is designed to regulate occupancy and excavations in the right-of-way by providing, among other things, for the issuance of permits which grant the authority to utilize and occupy the right-of-way within the City. 
(d)  All ROW users shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power and are subject to all applicable laws, orders, rules and regulations adopted by governmental entities now or hereafter having jurisdiction. In addition, the ROW users shall be subject to all technical specifications, design criteria, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power relating to permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, surface restoration, and other requirements on the use of the right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 13-404; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-69. - Administration. 
(a)  The Public Works Director is the principal City official for administration of right-of-way permits for work and excavations made in the right-of-way. The Public Works Director may delegate any or all of the duties in this article. 
(b)  The City Administrator is the principal City official responsible for administration of the registering of a service provider. The Public Works Director or the City Administrator may delegate any or all of the duties in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-405; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-70. - Appeals process. 
(a)  Whenever a person shall deem himself aggrieved by any decision or action taken by the Public Works Director, the person may file an appeal to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days of the date of notice of such decision or action. 
(b)  The person shall be afforded a hearing on the matter before the City Council within thirty (30) days of filing the appeal. 
(c)  In cases of applicability or interpretation of the rules, the City Council may revoke such decision or action taken by the Public Works Director. 
(d)  In cases where compliance with such decision or action taken by the Public Works Director would cause undue hardship, the City Council may extend the time limit of such decision or action, or may grant exceptions to, or waive requirements of, or grant a variance from the specific provisions or rules. The City Council shall give due consideration to the purposes of the rules in preserving public safety and convenience, integrity of public infrastructure, and the operational safety and function of the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Pending a decision of the City Council, the order of the Public Works Director shall be stayed, unless the Public Works Director determines that such action will pose a threat to public safety or the integrity of the public infrastructure. 
(f)  If a person still deems themselves aggrieved after the appeal to the City Council, such person shall have thirty (30) days after the effective date of the City Council's final decision to institute an action in the County District Court. 
(Prior Code, § 13-428; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-71. - Requirements of service provider. 
(a)  Any existing service provider must register within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Any person who is not an existing service provider prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to become a service provider must first register with the City. 
(c)  The service provider shall report any changes in its registration information within thirty (30) days. 
(d)  No service provider shall be authorized to utilize the right-of-way in any capacity or manner without registering and obtaining the necessary right-of-way permit from the City. 
(e)  The information required for registration includes the following: 
(1)  Identity and legal status of service provider, including related affiliates. 
(2)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement. 
(3)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of the local representative of the service provider who shall be available at all times to act on behalf of the service provider in the event of an emergency. 
(4)  Proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the KCC. 
(5)  Description of the service provider's intended use of the right-of-way. 
(6)  Information sufficient to determine whether the service provider is subject to franchising by State law. 
(7)  Information sufficient to determine whether the service provider has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the KCC. 
(8)  Information sufficient to determine that the service provider has applied for and received any permit or other approvals required by the FCC. 
(9)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City to complete the registration statement. 
(f)  Each service provider shall designate a local person familiar with the facilities who will act as a local agent for the service provider and will be responsible for satisfying information requirements of this article. The service provider shall present to the City the agent's name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address. The agent shall be the person to whom relocation notices and other such notices shall be sent, and with whom rests the responsibility to facilitate all necessary communications. The service provider shall be responsible for all costs incurred by the City due to the failure to provide such information to the City. 
(g)  Prior to construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or relocation of facilities owned by the service provider in the right-of-way, the service provider shall first obtain the necessary right-of-way permit as provided hereafter. 
(h)  Prior to providing service to the City and its residents, the service provider shall first obtain the necessary franchise agreement, if any, from the City. 
(i)  The service provider shall participate in any joint planning, construction and advance notification of right-of-way work, including coordination and consolidation of street cut work as directed by the Public Works Director. In addition, the service provider shall cooperate with other service providers and the City for the best, most efficient, most aesthetic and least obtrusive use of the right-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic and other disruptions, including street cuts. 
(j)  The service provider shall furnish maps showing the location of facilities of the service provider within the City as provided hereafter. 
(k)  The City shall not exercise its authority under this provision to in any way deter competition or discriminate against any service provider. 
(Prior Code, § 13-406; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-72. - Mapping requirements of service provider. 
(a)  The service provider shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting accurate location of all its facilities constructed, reconstructed or relocated in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Within ten (10) days of a request by the City, the service provider will provide to the City information concerning such facilities as may be reasonably requested. 
(c)  When available to the service provider, such information will be submitted electronically in an AutoCad&reg; format to the extent compatible with the City's Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and the County Automated Integrated Mapping Systems (AIMS); provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to require the service provider to acquire or modify any electronic mapping system. 
(d)  Underground facilities shall be differentiated from overhead facilities. 
(e)  Such mapping and identification shall be at the sole expense of the service provider. 
(Prior Code, § 13-407; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-73. - Service provider's right to sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose. 
    Except as provided in this article, the service provider shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of its facilities, or any portion thereof, that is located in City right-of-way, or any right, title or interest in the same, or the transfer of any rights granted by the City to any person either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, without notice to the City. This provision shall not apply to the sale of property or equipment in the normal course of business or to the sale or lease of facilities to reseller service providers. No notice to the City shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other similar instrument, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, or for a pro forma transfer to a corporation, partnership, or other entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the service provider. 
(Prior Code, § 13-408; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-74. - Use of the right-of-way. 
(a)  The ROW user's use of the right-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's use or occupation of the right-of-way. The City may reserve sufficient space within the right-of-way for future public improvements. Without limitation of its rights, the City expressly reserves the right to exercise its governmental powers now and hereafter vested in or granted to the City. 
(b)  The ROW user shall coordinate the placement of facilities in a manner which minimizes adverse impact on any public improvement, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not regulated, the facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement as defined in the City's Manual of Infrastructure Standards available in the office of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  The ROW user shall consider any request made by the City concerning placement of facilities in private easements in order to limit or eliminate future street improvement relocation expenses. 
(d)  All facilities shall be located and laid so as not to disrupt or interfere with any pipes, drains, sewers, irrigation systems, or other structures or public improvements already installed. In addition, the ROW user shall, in doing work in connection with its facilities, avoid, so far as may be practicable, disrupting or interfering with the lawful use of the right-of-way or other public lands of the City. 
(e)  All facilities of the ROW user shall be placed so that they do not interfere with the use of right-of-way and public lands. The City, through its Public Works Director, shall have the right to consult and review the location, design and nature of the facility prior to its being installed. 
(f)  Whenever reasonably possible, all newly constructed facilities shall be located underground. The ROW user shall comply with all requirements of the City relating to underground facilities. This requirement may be waived by the Public Works Director at his discretion for safety concerns, or some other good cause under the condition that does not cause discrimination among ROW users. If this requirement is waived, the facilities shall be located as directed by the Public Works Director, including, but not limited to, requirements regarding location and height. 
(g)  The ROW user shall not interfere with the facilities of the other ROW users without their permission. If and when the City requires or negotiates to have a service provider cease using its existing poles and to relocate its facilities underground, all other service providers using the same poles shall also relocate their facilities underground at the same time. 
(h)  The Public Works Director may assign specific corridors within the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility that is currently or, pursuant to current technology, the Public Works Director expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All right-of-way permits issued by Public Works Director shall indicate the proper corridor for the ROW user's facilities. Any ROW user whose facilities are currently in the right-of-way in a position at a variance with the designated corridors shall, no later than at the time of next reconstruction or excavation of the area where its facilities are located, move the facilities to its assigned position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the Public Works Director for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, user service needs and hardship to the ROW user. 
(i)  If, in the preparation and planning of a right-of-way project, the Public Works Director deems it appropriate for a conduit to be constructed along, across or under the right-of-way, the Public Works Director shall contact all appropriate ROW users for their input on the planning and design of such conduit. If a ROW user desires to construct, maintain or operate facilities along such right-of-way, the Public Works Director may require the ROW user to use such conduit, and to contribute to the expense of such conduit, provided, however, the ROW user's use of the conduit is reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances. 
(j)  All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, other public improvements or improvements of any kind damaged or removed by the ROW user shall be fully repaired or replaced promptly by the ROW user at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. Upon determination by the Public Works Director that such repair or replacement is a public safety matter, all such repair or replacement shall be commenced within twenty-four (24) hours of notice from the City, or the Public Works Director may direct the City to make such repair or replacement and bill the ROW user for the City cost. The Public Works Director has the authority to inspect the repair or replacement of the damage, and if necessary, to require the ROW user to do any necessary additional work. 
(k)  All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of a ROW user's facilities in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local law and regulations, including those promulgated by national trade associations commonly associated with the service provided by the ROW user. It is understood that the standards established in this subsection are minimum standards and the requirements established or referenced in this article may be in addition to or stricter than such minimum standards. A ROW user shall not construct or reconstruct any of its facilities located upon, over, under or within the City right-of-way without first having submitted in writing a description of its planned improvement to the Public Works Director and having received a permit for such improvement. The Public Works Director may require that any drawings, plans and/or specifications submitted be certified by a State registered professional engineer stating that such drawings, plans and/or specifications comply with all applicable technical codes, rules and regulations, unless such plans are based directly on nationally recognized codes, which are appropriately cited, and attested to on the plans by the signature of an authorized official of the organization applying for the permit. 
(l)  The ROW user shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete on-site information regarding the nature and horizontal and vertical location of its facilities located within the right-of-way, both underground and overhead, when requested by the City or its authorized agent for a public improvement. Such location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the ROW user without any expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. 
(m)  The City shall have the authority to prohibit the use or occupancy of a specific portion of the right-of-way by a ROW user due to public health, safety or welfare considerations. 
(Prior Code, § 13-410; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-75. - Facility relocation. 
(a)  The ROW user shall promptly remove, relocate or adjust any facilities located in the right-of-way as directed by the City for a public improvement or when reasonably required by the City by reason of public health, safety and welfare. Such removal, relocation, or adjustment shall be performed by the ROW user at the ROW user's sole expense without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules, regulations and schedules of the City pertaining to such. The ROW user shall proceed with relocations at due diligence upon notice by the City to begin relocation. 
(b)  The ROW user shall promptly remove, relocate or adjust any facilities located in a private easement, as directed by the City, for a public improvement, at City expense, by moving such facilities to areas within the expanded right-of-way or within remaining private easements or remaining portions of such easements not condemned by nor disclaimed to the City to avoid conflict with City construction and improvements. The ROW user shall disclaim those parts of its easements which lie within the expanded right-of-way. Should the City, in the future, elect to require the ROW user to again relocate its facilities to other areas within the expanded right-of-way, the cost of any such future relocation shall be borne by the City. 
(c)  As soon as working drawings are available for public improvements which will require the ROW user to relocate its facilities, the City shall provide the ROW user with written notice of relocations and the anticipated bid letting date of said improvement. The ROW user shall respond with any conflicts and a proposed construction schedule within thirty (30) days. 
(d)  Following notice by the City in the form of the delivery of final design plans for such public improvements, the ROW user shall remove, and relocate its facilities in accordance with the mutually agreed upon schedule, provided the project is not delayed by adverse weather conditions and other factors beyond the control of the ROW user. The ROW user shall certify to the City, in writing, that its facilities have been relocated or adjusted to clear construction in accordance with project plans provided by the City. 
(e)  Any damages suffered by the City, its agents or its contractors to the extent caused by the ROW user's failure to timely relocate or adjust its facilities, or failure to properly relocate or adjust such facilities, shall be borne by the ROW user. 
(f)  In the event the ROW user is required to move its facilities in accordance with this section, any ordinary right-of-way permit fee shall be waived. 
(g)  It is the intent of this section for both the City and the ROW user to cooperate with one another so that the need for facility relocation is minimized and, when required and feasible, relocations may be completed prior to receipt of bids by the City for a public improvement. 
(Prior Code, § 13-411; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-76. - Protection of the public. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the ROW user to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities in the right-of-way from harm and damage. 
(b)  The City shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any of the ROW user's facilities within the right-of-way as a result of or in connection with any construction, excavation, grading, filling or work of any kind, including public improvements by or on the behalf of the City, except to the extent caused by the negligent, willful, intentional, or malicious acts or omissions of the City. 
(c)  The ROW user shall be responsible to the City and its agents, representatives, and authorized contractors for all damages suffered by them, including, but not limited to, delay damages, repair costs, downtime, construction delays, penalties or other expenses of any kind arising out of the failure of the ROW user to timely perform any of its obligations under this article to the extent caused by the acts or omissions of the ROW user. 
(d)  The City or its authorized contractors shall be responsible for taking reasonable precautionary measures including calling for facility locations when constructing its public improvements. 
(e)  Any ROW user who for any purpose makes or causes to be made any excavation in, upon, under, through or adjoining any street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way, and shall leave any part or portion thereof open, or shall leave any part or portion thereof disrupted with rubbish, building or other material during construction and/or the night time, shall cause the same to be enclosed with good substantial and sufficient barricades or drums equipped with the appropriate type warning lights and orange safety fencing material which is properly secured around the excavation or the disruption. 
(f)  Whenever a ROW user shall excavate the full width of any street, sidewalk, alley, driveway approach or other right-of-way, it shall be its duty to maintain an adequate passage for vehicles and pedestrians across or around the excavation until it is refilled as specified. 
(g)  Any excavation left open overnight on any thoroughfare or collector type street shall be securely covered. The ROW user assumes the sole responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, plates, safety fencing and/or lights as required from the time of opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
(h)  Every permittee shall notify the occupants of all properties within two hundred feet (200') of the work, provided that the Public Works Director may waive or modify this notification requirement in those limited instances where the Director determines the modification or waiver will not adversely impact the public health, safety or general welfare. There shall be notification, to each such occupant, which notification shall be in the form of a door hanger and shall be received by each occupant no later than three (3) days before the commencement of work. This door hanger notification shall include: 
(1)  Scope of project; 
(2)  Construction schedule, including the date of commencement and expected completion of work; 
(3)  Name of field superintendent; and 
(4)  Telephone numbers (office and mobile) and electronic mail addresses for permittee personnel who can timely provide additional project information as needed. 
(i)  Upon the appropriate request of any person having satisfied City procedure and ordinances, the ROW user shall remove, raise, or lower its facilities temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the ROW user may require such payment in advance. The ROW user must be given not less than fifteen (15) days' written notice from the person detailing the time and location of the moving operations, and not less than twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice from the person advising of the actual operation. 
(j)  In the event the ROW-user severely disturbs or damages the root structure of any tree in the right-of-way to the detriment of the health and safety of the tree, the ROW-user will be required to remove and replace the tree at the ROW-user's cost. Further, in review of the ROW-user's plan, Public Works Director, in his discretion, may require the ROW-user to directionally bore around any tree in the right-of-way. 
(Prior Code, § 13-412; Ord. No. 1284; Ord. No. 1638 , § 1, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 9-77. - Right-of-way vacation. 
(a)  If the City vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of the service provider, and if the vacation does not require the relocation of the service provider's facilities, the City shall reserve, to and for itself and all service providers having facilities in the vacated right-of-way, an easement for the right to install, maintain and operate any facilities in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon such vacated right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining or repairing the same. 
(b)  If the vacation requires the relocation of facilities, and: 
(1)  If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the service provider, the service provider must pay the relocation costs. 
(2)  If the vacation proceedings are initiated by the City, the service provider must pay the relocation costs unless otherwise agreed to by the City and the service provider. 
(3)  If the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person other than the service provider or the City, such other person must pay the relocation costs. 
(Prior Code, § 13-413; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-78. - Abandonment and unusable facilities. 
(a)  A ROW user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way must either: 
(1)  Remove its facilities and replace or restore any damage or disturbance caused by the removal at its own expense. The Public Works Director may allow underground facilities or portions thereof remain in place if the Public Works Director determines that it is in the best interest of public safety to do so. At such time, the City may take ownership and responsibility of such vacated facilities left in place; 
(2)  Provide information satisfactory to the City that the ROW user's obligations for its facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized ROW user; or 
(3)  Submit to the City a proposal and instruments for transferring ownership of its facilities to the City. If the ROW user proceeds under this section, the City may, at its option ,purchase the equipment, require the ROW user, at its own expense, to remove it, or require the ROW user to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the City for reasonable anticipated costs to be incurred to remove the facilities. 
(b)  Facilities of a ROW user who fails to comply with this section, and whose facilities remain unused for two (2) years, shall be deemed to be abandoned after the City has made a good faith effort to contact the ROW user, unless the City receives confirmation that the ROW user intends to use the facilities. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance, taking possession and ownership of the facility and restoring it to a useable function, or requiring the removal of the facility by the ROW user. 
(Prior Code, § 13-414; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-79. - Other obligations. 
(a)  Obtaining a right-of-way permit under this article shall not relieve the permittee of its duty to obtain any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the KCC, and to pay any fees required by any other City, County, State, or Federal rules, laws, or regulations. A permittee shall perform all work in full accordance with any and all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved by the parties and in accordance with applicable State statutes and the rules and regulations of the KCC or any other local, State or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the parties. A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations and shall be responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless by whom the work is done by. 
(b)  Except in cases of an emergency or with approval of the Public Works Director, no right-of-way work may be done when conditions are unreasonable for such work. 
(c)  A permittee shall not disrupt a right-of-way such that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways is interfered with. Private vehicles may not be parked within or next to the permit area. 
(Prior Code, § 13-424; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-80. - Work requirements and inspections. 
(a)  Any excavation, backfilling, repair and restoration, and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with the City's Manual of Infrastructure Standards as promulgated by the Public Works Director. 
(b)  The permittee shall employ a testing laboratory as approved by the Public Works Director, which shall certify the proper backfilling on any street cut. The permittee shall pay all costs associated with such testing. This provision shall be waived when flowable fill is used as backfill or with the permission of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  The permittee shall notify the office of the Public Works Director upon completion of the authorized work permit. 
(d)  The permittee will notify the Public Works Director to schedule an inspection at the start of backfilling. Upon completion of all right-of-way restoration activities, the permittee will schedule a closeout inspection. 
(e)  When any corrective actions required have been completed and inspected to the Public Works Director's satisfaction, the two (2) year maintenance period will begin. 
(f)  In addition to the required scheduled inspections, the Public Works Director may choose to inspect the ongoing permitted work in the right-of-way at any time to ensure that all requirements of the approved permit are being met by the permittee. 
(g)  At the time of any inspection, the Public Works Director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety, or well-being of the public. The Public Works Director may issue a citation to the permittee for any work which does not conform to the applicable standards, conditions, code or terms of the permit. The citation shall state that failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. 
(Prior Code, § 13-4270; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-81. - Indemnification. 
(a)  A ROW user shall indemnify and hold the City and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by the negligence of the ROW user, any agent, officer, director, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors or representatives, while installing repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the City or any agent from participating in the defense of any litigation by their own counsel at their own expense. Such participation shall not under any circumstances relieve the ROW user from its duty to defend against liability or its duty to pay and judgment entered against the City or its agents. 
(b)  If a ROW user and the City are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of the State without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the City under State or Federal law. This section is solely for the benefit of the City and ROW user and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Prior Code, § 13-429; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-82. - Force majeure. 
    Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other circumstances beyond the ROW user's or the City's control. 
(Prior Code, § 13-430; Ord. No. 1284) 
Secs. 9-83-9-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 9-108. - Requirement. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, no ROW user may excavate any right-of-way or conduct any repair, construction, or reconstruction of facilities located within the right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit. 
(b)  No permit shall be required if: 
(1)  The ROW user is performing routine service operations, which do not require excavation in the right-of-way and which do not disrupt traffic for more than two (2) hours; 
(2)  The Public Works Director determines the work contemplated by the ROW user is of such a nature that requiring a permit would not serve the best interests of the City or its citizens. 
(c)  No person owning or occupying any land abutting on a public right-of-way shall construct, maintain, or permit in or on the portion of the public right-of-way to which such land is adjacent, any fixed structure, material or object without having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit. 
(d)  A right-of-way permit is required for emergency situations. If due to an emergency it is necessary for the ROW user to immediately perform work in the right-of-way, and it is impractical for the ROW user to first get the appropriate permit, the work may be performed, and the required permit shall be obtained as soon as possible during the next City working day. 
(e)  No permittee may excavate the right-of-way beyond the date specified in the right-of-way permit unless the permittee: 
(1)  Makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and 
(2)  A new right-of-way permit or permit extension is granted. 
(f)  Right-of-way permits issued shall be conspicuously displayed by the permittee at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the Public Works Director, other City employees and the public. 
(g)  Prior to the commencement of work in the right-of-way, the permittee shall identify and locate any buried facilities to be spray painted according to the Uniform Color Code required by Kansas One Call. 
(h)  Every permittee shall notify the occupants of all properties within two hundred feet (200') of the work, provided that the Public Works Director may waive or modify this notification requirement in those limited instances where the Director determines the modification or waiver will not adversely impact the public health, safety or general welfare. There shall be a first notification, which shall be in the form of a letter, which letter shall be sent to each such occupant by the date from which that letter would reasonably be expected to be received by those occupants no later than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work in the right-of-way. This letter notification shall include: 
(1)  Scope of project; 
(2)  Construction schedule, including the date of commencement and expected completion of work; 
(3)  Name of the field superintendent; and 
(4)  Telephone numbers (office and mobile) and electronic mail addresses for permittee personnel who can timely provide additional project information as needed. 
In addition, there shall be a second notification to each such occupant, which notification may be in the form of a door hanger and shall be received by each occupant no later than the day before the commencement of work. This second notification shall include the same information as specified in this Subsection (h). 
(i)  All excavations by the permittee shall have a metal marker inserted into the excavation of the restored pavement, which shall identify the ROW user. 
(j)  Before receiving a right-of-way permit, the applicant must show proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the FCC or the KCC. 
(k)  Any ROW user who is found to be working in the public right-of-way without a permit will be directed to stop work until a permit is acquired and properly posted at the work site. The only exception allowed is for emergency repair work. 
(l)  Any permittee found to be working without providing for required safety and traffic control will be directed to stop work until the appropriate measures are implemented in accordance with the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Prior Code, § 13-415; Ord. No. 1284; Ord. No. 1381) 
Sec. 9-109. - Applications. 
(a)  Application for a right-of-way permit shall be submitted to the Public Works Director by either the ROW user or by the person who will do the work and/or excavation in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Right-of-way applications shall contain and be considered complete only upon receipt of the following: 
(1)  Compliance with verification of registration; 
(2)  Submission of a completed permit application form, including all required attachments and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed facilities at such location; 
(3)  A traffic control plan; 
(4)  Payment of all money due to the City for permit fees and costs, for prior excavation costs, for any loss, damage or expense suffered by the City because of the applicant's prior excavations of the right-of-way or for any emergency actions taken by the City, unless the payment of such money is in dispute and timely appealed as provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 13-416; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-110. - Liability insurance, performance and maintenance bond requirement. 
(a)  The permittee shall file with the City evidence of commercial general and automobile liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State. The general liability limit will be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) in aggregate. The automobile liability limit will not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit. The insurance will protect the City from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for loss or damage from personal injury, bodily injury, death, or property damage to the extent caused or alleged to have been caused by the negligent acts or omissions of the permittee. If the permittee is self-insured, it shall provide the City proof of compliance regarding its ability to self-insure and proof of its ability to provide coverage in the amounts provided for in this subsection. 
(b)  The permittee shall at all times during the term of the permit, and for two (2) years thereafter, maintain a performance and maintenance bond in a form approved by the City Attorney. The amount of the bond will be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or the value of the restoration, whichever is greater, for a term consistent with the term of the permit plus two (2) additional years, conditioned upon the permittee's faithful performance of the provisions, terms and conditions conferred by this article. Alternatively, if the permittee anticipates requirements for multiple right-of-way permits, the permittee may choose to meet the bond requirements for the above-prescribed term as follows: 
(1)  Ten (10) permits or less/year: fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) annual bond. 
(2)  Twenty-five (25) permits or less/year: thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) annual bond. 
(3)  Unlimited permits/year: fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) annual bond. 
In the event the City shall exercise its right to revoke the permit as granted in this section, then the City shall be entitled to recover under the terms of said bond the full amount of any loss occasioned. 
(c)  A copy of the liability insurance certificate and performance and maintenance bond must be on file with the City Clerk or his designee. 
(d)  No performance and maintenance bond will be required for permits issued for driveway replacement or landscaping work such as irrigation systems and tree planting. No performance and maintenance bond will be required of any governmental entity. No performance and maintenance bond or liability insurance will be required of any residential property owner working in the right-of-way adjacent to his residence, who does not utilize a contractor to perform the excavation. 
(Prior Code, § 13-417; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-111. - Permit fees and costs. 
(a)  The right-of-way permit fee shall be recommended by the Public Works Director, approved by the Governing Body and listed in the fee schedule as established by ordinance. 
(b)  The right-of-way permit fee may include a permit and inspection fee, and an excavation fee. 
(c)  Fees paid for a right-of-way permit which is subsequently revoked by the Public Works Director are not refundable. 
(d)  Except as provided for in an emergency situation, when a ROW user is found to have worked or is working in the right-of-way without having obtained a permit, the fee for the permit will be double the amount had the ROW user obtained a permit prior to beginning work. 
(e)  The City may also charge and collect any necessary repair and restoration costs. 
(Prior Code, § 13-410; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-112. - Issuance. 
(a)  If the Public Works Director determines that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this article, the Public Works Director shall issue a right-of-way permit. 
(b)  The Public Works Director may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of a right-of-way permit and the performance of the permittee in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. 
(c)  When a right-of-way permit is requested for purposes of installing additional facilities and the performance and maintenance bond for additional facilities is reasonably determined to be insufficient, the posting of an additional or larger performance and maintenance bond for the additional facilities may be required. 
(d)  Issued permits are not transferable. 
(e)  If work is being done for the ROW user by another person, a subcontractor or otherwise, the person doing the work and the ROW user shall be liable and responsible for all damages, obligations, and warranties described in this section. 
(f)  Individual right-of-way permits are limited to a maximum of two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of contiguous work length. 
(Prior Code, § 13-419; Ord. No. 1284; Ord. No. 1381) 
Sec. 9-113. - Permitted work. 
(a)  The permittee shall not make any cut, excavation or grading of right-of-way other than excavations necessary for emergency repairs without first securing a right-of-way permit. 
(b)  The permittee shall not at any one (1) time open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to enable the permittee to complete the project in the most expeditious manner. 
(c)  The permittee shall, in the performance of any work required for the installation, repair, maintenance, relocation and/or removal of any of its facilities, limit all excavations to those excavations that are necessary for efficient operation. 
(d)  The permittee shall not permit such an excavation to remain open longer than is necessary to complete the repair or installation. 
(e)  The permittee shall notify the City no less than two (2) working days in advance of any construction, reconstruction, repair, location or relocation of facilities which would require any street closure or which reduces traffic flow to less than two (2) lanes of moving traffic for more than four (4) hours. Except in the event of an emergency as reasonably determined by the permittee, no such closure shall take place without notice and prior authorization from the City. 
(f)  Non-emergency work on arterial and collector streets may not be accomplished during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., in order to minimize disruption of traffic flow. 
(g)  All work performed in the right-of-way or which in any way impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected at the permittee's expense. Such signage shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, unless otherwise agreed to by the City. 
(h)  The permittee shall identify and locate any underground facilities in conformance with the Kansas Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act "Kansas One Call" system, and notice shall be provided directly to Water District No. 1 and either to Kansas City Power and Light (KCPL) or to the Traffic Operations section of the Public Works Department with respect to any municipal traffic signal and street light systems, as appropriate. 
(i)  The permittee shall be liable for any damages to underground facilities due to excavation work prior to obtaining location of such facilities, or for any damage to underground facilities that have been properly identified prior to excavation. The permittee shall not make or attempt to make repairs, relocation or replacement of damaged or disturbed underground facilities without the approval of the owner of the facilities. 
(j)  Whenever there is an excavation by the permittee, the permittee shall be responsible for providing adequate traffic control to the surrounding area as determined by the Public Works Director. The permittee shall perform work on the right-of-way at such times that will allow the least interference with the normal flow of traffic and the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. In the event the excavation is not completed in a reasonable period of time, the permittee may be liable for actual damages to the City for delay caused by the permittee pursuant to this article. 
(k)  All facilities and other appurtenances laid, constructed and maintained by the permittee shall be laid, constructed and maintained in accordance with acceptable engineering practice and in full accordance with any and all applicable engineering codes adopted or approved by the parties and in accordance with applicable State statutes, as well as the rules and regulations of the Kansas Corporation Commission or any other local, State or Federal agency having jurisdiction over the parties. 
(l)  Following completion of permitted work for new construction, the permittee shall keep, maintain and provide to the City accurate records and as-built drawings, drawn to scale and certified to the City as accurately depicting the location of all utility facilities constructed pursuant to the permit. When available to the permittee, maps and drawings provided will be submitted in AUTOCAD.DXF or AUTOCAD.DWG automated formats if available, or in hard copy otherwise. The Public Works Director may waive this requirement. Such information shall be subject in all respects and shall have the benefit of protection as set forth in Section 9-72. 
(m)  The City may use the as-built records of the service provider's facilities in connection with public improvements. 
(Prior Code, § 13-420; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-114. - Right-of-way repair and restoration. 
(a)  The work to be done under the right-of-way permit and the repair and restoration of the right-of-way as required in this article must be completed within the dates as specified in the permit. However, in the event of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when work was prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the Public Works Director may extend the date for completion of the project upon receipt of a supplementary application for a permit extension. 
(b)  All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossing, utilities, public improvement or improvements of any kind damaged or removed by the permittee shall be fully repaired or replaced promptly by the permittee at its sole expense and the reasonable satisfaction of the City. The Public Works Director has the authority to inspect the repair or replacement of the damage, and if necessary, to require the permittee to do the additional necessary work. Notice of the unsatisfactory restoration and the deficiencies found will be provided to the permittee and a reasonable time not to exceed fifteen (15) days will be provided to allow for the deficiencies to be corrected. 
(c)  After any excavation, the permittee shall, at its expense, restore all portions of the right-of-way to the same condition or better condition than it was prior to the excavation thereof. 
(d)  In addition to repairing its own street cuts, the permittee must restore any area within five feet (5') of the new street cut that has previously been excavated, including the paving and its aggregate foundations. 
(e)  If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Public Works Director, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration the City may, at its option, serve written notice upon the permittee and its surety that, unless within five (5) days after serving of such notice, a satisfactory arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way, the City shall immediately serve notice of failure to comply upon the surety and the permittee, and the surety shall have the right to take over and complete the work; provided, however, that if the surety does not commence performance thereof within ten (10) days from the date of notice, the City may take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise at the expense of the permittee, and the permittee and its surety shall be liable to the City for any and all excess cost assumed by the City by reason of such prosecution and completion. 
(f)  The permittee responsible for the excavation who leaves any debris in the right-of-way shall be responsible for providing safety protection in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and any applicable Federal or State requirement. 
(g)  If an excavation cannot be backfilled immediately and left unattended, the permittee shall securely and adequately cover the unfilled excavation. The permittee has sole responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
(h)  In restoring the right-of-way, the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for twenty-four (24) months following its completion. During the twenty-four (24) months the permittee shall, upon notification from the Public Works Director, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using any method as required by the Public Works Director. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days, of the receipt of notice from the Public Works Director (not including days during which work cannot be done because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as unseasonable or unreasonable). In the event the permittee is required to perform new restoration pursuant to the foregoing guarantee, the Public Works Director shall have the authority to extend the guarantee period for such new restoration for up to an additional twenty-four (24) months from the date of the new restoration, if the Public Works Director determines any overt action by the permittee not to comply with the conditions of the right-of-way permit and any restoration requirements. 
(i)  The twenty-four (24) month guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the pavement surface as well as failure below the pavement surface. 
(j)  Payment of an excavation fee shall not relieve the permittee of the obligation to complete the necessary right-of-way restoration. 
(Prior Code, § 13-421; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-115. - Joint applications. 
(a)  Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. 
(b)  Applicants who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. 
(Prior Code, § 13-422; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-116. - Supplementary applications. 
(a)  A right-of-way permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided in this article. Any permittee who determines that an area greater than that which is specified in the permit must be excavated must do the following prior to the commencement of work in that greater area: 
(1)  Make application for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; 
(2)  Receive a new right-of-way permit extension and pay any additional fees required thereby; and 
(3)  Receive a new right-of-way permit or permit extension. 
(b)  A right-of-way permit shall be valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may commence work before the permit start date or, except as provided in this article, may continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for and receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary application must be submitted to the City prior to the permit end date. 
(Prior Code, § 13-423; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-117. - Denial. 
(a)  The Public Works Director may deny a permit or prohibit the use or occupancy of a specific portion of the right-of-way to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users. The Public Works Director, at his discretion, may consider all relevant factors, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The extent to which the right-of-way space where the permit is sought is available; 
(2)  The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way; 
(3)  The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other right-of-way for the facilities of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicability of any ordinance or other regulations that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way; 
(5)  The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of its franchise, this article, and other applicable ordinances and regulations; 
(6)  The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way; 
(7)  The balancing of costs of disruption to the public and damage to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the construction in the right-of-way; 
(8)  Whether the applicant maintains a current registration with the City; 
(9)  Whether the issuance of a right-of-way permit for the particular dates and/or time requested would cause a conflict or interferes with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. In exercising this discretion, the Public Works Director shall be guided by the safety and convenience of anticipated travel of the public over the right-of-way. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Public Works Director may in his discretion issue a right-of-way permit in any case where the permit is necessary to: 
(1)  Prevent substantial economic hardship to a user of the applicant's service; 
(2)  Allow such user to materially improve the service provided by the applicant. 
(Prior Code, § 13-425; Ord. No. 1284) 
Sec. 9-118. - Revocation. 
(a)  Permittees hold right-of-way permits issued pursuant to this article as a privilege and not as a right. The City reserves its right, as provided in this article, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without refund of the permit fee, in the event of a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any law or the right-of-way permit. A substantial breach shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit; 
(2)  An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the City or its citizens; 
(3)  Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application; 
(4)  The failure to maintain the required bond or insurance; 
(5)  The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; 
(6)  The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article; 
(7)  Repeated traffic control violations; or 
(8)  Failure to repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way. 
(b)  If the Public Works Director determines that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of any law or condition placed on the right-of-way permit, the Public Works Director shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The demand shall state that the continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit, or legal action if applicable. Further, a substantial breach, as stated in this subsection, will allow the Public Works Director, at his discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the right-of-way permit, specifically related to the manner in which the breach is cured by the permittee. Within five (5) calendar days of receiving notification of the breach, the permittee shall contact the Public Works Director with a plan, acceptable to the Public Works Director, for correction of the breach. The permittee's failure to contact the Public Works Director, the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or the permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall be cause for immediate revocation of the right-of-way permit. 
(c)  If a right-of-way permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the City for the City's reasonable costs, including administrative costs, restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection with such revocation. 
(Prior Code, § 13-426; Ord. No. 1284) 
Secs. 9-119-9-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-150. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), provided that each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 13-606) 
Sec. 9-151. - Drainage of water toward streets. 
    All water draining from private property and toward a street right-of-way shall be discharged or caused to flow upon the surface of the street, gutter or drainage ditch, provided that such water may be discharged or caused to flow under the surface of a street, gutter or drainage ditch where adequate underground conduits are installed, and said conduits are approved by the Governing Body. 
(Prior Code, § 13-602) 
Secs. 9-152-9-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GUTTER FILLET PERMIT 

Sec. 9-171. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain an obstruction in the gutters of any street which obstructs or prevents the free flow of water in the gutters or diverts water from the gutter onto or across the street or otherwise interferes with street clearing, except temporary obstructions created in the course of street maintenance and repair, provided that asphaltic concrete gutter fillets may be constructed and maintained at and near points where private driveways connect with gutters and streets in accordance with the specifications set forth in Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this division is derived, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk and incorporated in this division by reference and upon the issuance of a permit by the City thereafter as hereinafter provided. 
(Prior Code, § 13-603; Ord. No. 58, § 1) 
Sec. 9-172. - Application for permit. 
    No permit shall be issued unless an application is made in writing by the person desiring to construct and maintain an asphaltic concrete gutter fillet accompanied by a map or diagram showing the specific location of the proposed gutter fillet, and the house number or legal description of the real estate in front of which the gutter fillet is proposed to be made, and accompanied by a fee as established by ordinance. The diagram or map accompanying the application shall show the dimensions and character of the proposed gutter fillet. 
(Prior Code, § 13-604; Ord. No. 58, § 2) 
Sec. 9-173. - Issuance of permit. 
    Upon the filing of the written application for such permit, the City Clerk shall notify the City Engineer who shall cause the written application with attached map or diagram and the proposed site to be examined to ascertain that the proposed gutter fillet complies with the specifications set forth in Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this division is derived, which is on file in the office of the City Clerk. If the proposed gutter fillet so complies, the City Clerk shall issue a permit for same. 
(Prior Code, § 13-605; Ord. No. 58, § 3) 
Secs. 9-174-9-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-401; Ord. No. 469, § 1) 
Sec. 9-201. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 7-413; Ord. No. 469, § 13) 
Sec. 9-202. - Public conduct during parades. 
    Regulations relating to the conduct of the public during parades in the City shall be as follows: 
(1)  Interference . No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(2)  Driving through parades . No driver of a vehicle, street car or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(3)  Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-411; Ord. No. 469, § 11) 
Secs. 9-203-9-227. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 9-228. - Required; exceptions. 
    Regulations relating to permits for parades shall be as follows: 
(1)  No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police. 
(2)  Exceptions. This article shall not apply to: 
a.  Funeral processions; 
b.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
c.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Prior Code, § 7-402; Ord. No. 469, § 2) 
Sec. 9-229. - Procedure. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer. 
(1)  Filing period . An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police not less than forty-eight (48) hours before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents . The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date the parade is to be conducted. 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
f.  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles that will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles. 
g.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets to be traveled. 
i.  The location of streets of any assembly areas of such parade. 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area. 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
l.  If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
m.  Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(3)  Late applications . The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than forty-eight (48) hours before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee . There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade, a permit fee in the amount established by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 7-403; Ord. No. 469, § 3) 
Sec. 9-230. - Standards for issuance. 
    The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for in this division when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the City. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the City other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of such parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and it is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Prior Code, § 7-404; Ord. No. 469, § 4) 
Sec. 9-231. - Notice of rejection. 
    The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within a reasonable time after the filing thereof. 
(Prior Code, § 7-405; Ord. No. 469, § 5) 
Sec. 9-232. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the City Council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. 
(Prior Code, § 7-406; Ord. No. 469, § 6) 
Sec. 9-233. - Alternative permit. 
    The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within ten (10) days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-407; Ord. No. 469, § 7) 
Sec. 9-234. - Notice to City and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  Mayor. 
(2)  City Clerk. 
(3)  City Attorney. 
(4)  Fire Chief. 
(Prior Code, § 7-408; Ord. No. 469, § 8) 
Sec. 9-235. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-409; Ord. No. 469, § 1) 
Sec. 9-236. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Compliance with permit, laws and ordinances. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Possession of permit . The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Prior Code, § 7-410; Ord. No. 469, § 10) 
Sec. 9-237. - Revocation of permit. 
    The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 7-412; Ord. No. 469, § 12) 
Secs. 9-238-9-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Parks generally, K.S.A. 12-1301 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 9-268. - Parks designated. 
    The public park is hereby designated as follows: Neale R. Peterson Park. Said park shall include any lake, pond, pool, stream or body of water of any nature or description whatsoever located in or upon such park. 
    The Shawnee Indian Mission State Historic Site, though not dedicated as a park, shall be subject to all applicable provisions listed in this article provided that the City is responsible for the management of the site. 
(Prior Code, § 11-101; Ord. No. 1629 , § 3, 9-12-2016) 
Sec. 9-269. - Undeveloped green space. 
    Undeveloped green space is public property owned and maintained by the City and subject to all applicable provisions listed in this article. 
Sec. 9-270. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 11-114; Ord. No. 686) 
Sec. 9-271. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to City employees while in the legal and proper discharge of their duties. 
(Prior Code, § 11-115; Ord. No. 686) 
Sec. 9-272. - Parking vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the grass or on any road or roadway, except on or in such areas as are designated for parking erected by the City or with written approval from the Director or Parks and Recreation or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 11-102) 
Sec. 9-273. - Animals in parks. 
    No owner or person having in his charge or care livestock or domestic animals shall permit same to run at large in the public park of the City, except on a leash or under immediate control and care of the owner (K.S.A. 12-1304). 
(Prior Code, § 11-103) 
Sec. 9-274. - Fireworks prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, fire, discharge or use or cause to be shot, fired, discharged or used fireworks of any nature or kind in or upon the public park of the City; provided that special permission may be granted by the Governing Body for the public display of fireworks when the individual or group sponsoring the display has adequately provided for the supervision of such display. 
(Prior Code, § 11-104) 
Sec. 9-275. - Fires. 
    It shall be unlawful to build or start any fires in any public park of the City, except within containers designed for such purposes. 
(Prior Code, § 11-105) 
Sec. 9-276. - Bill posting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to affix to, post, place or inscribe upon or cause to be affixed to, posted, placed or inscribed upon, any handbill, poster, card, sign or device upon or against any fence, utility pole, structure, tree or property in or on such park or any property without permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 11-106) 
Sec. 9-277. - Injuring park property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any property of any kind in or on any public park of the City. This shall include tramping, painting, staining, writing, printing, stamping or marking upon, breaking, upsetting, cutting, carving or chopping upon, severing, pulling or tearing up, or in any other way or manner injuring, mutilating, defacing, destroying, moving or carrying away structures, fixtures, tables, benches, chairs, seats, or any other property in, upon or about said park. 
(Prior Code, § 11-107) 
Sec. 9-278. - Throwing refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place, deposit or cause to be thrown, placed, or deposited any tin cans, glass bottles, paper, junk, stones, sticks, wood, garbage, rubbish, trash or refuse of any kind or any other thing in, upon or about the public parks of the City, provided that this section shall not apply to rubbish, trash or refuse properly disposed of in containers placed in said parks for the purpose of waste disposal. 
(Prior Code, § 11-108) 
Sec. 9-279. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a disorderly manner in or upon the public parks of the City. Disorderly manner shall include drunkenness, vile language, fighting, personal exposure by changing of clothing in any place where a person is not properly sheltered, or exposure or conduct in any manner offensive to accepted standards of moral decency. 
(Prior Code, § 11-109) 
Sec. 9-280. - Intoxicating liquor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, convey or consume or cause to be dispensed, conveyed or consumed any intoxicating beverages in any of the public parks of the City, except as authorized by Section 3-4. 
(Prior Code, § 11-110; Ord. No. 1558, § 3, 9-9-2013) 
Sec. 9-281. - Sale of merchandise; permit. 
    No person shall sell, dispense or convey or cause to be sold, dispensed or conveyed or erect or place or cause to be erected or placed a stand, building, structure, wagon, tent, vehicle, cart, trailer or any other thing for the purpose of selling, dispensing or conveying merchandise, refreshments, service, food, beverages, sports goods and supplies, or articles or service of any kind in or upon the public parks of the City unless he has been granted permission to do so by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee. Such decisions will be based on whether or not the merchant and/or services provided are in the best interest of the citizens and the merchant and/or services do not compromise the health and welfare of the public. 
(Prior Code, § 11-111; Ord. No. 1362) 
Sec. 9-282. - Hours of park operation. 
(a)  To protect the equipment of the City parks and the health and welfare of those residents in close proximity to the parks, the following hours of use are established: 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. from April 15 to September 15 and 8:00 a.m. to sunset from September 16 to April 14. No person shall enter or remain in the parks outside the established hours unless he is participating in a Parks and Recreation Department program or with written permission from the Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) of this section, access to the tennis courts and Neale R. Peterson Park is permitted until 10:00 p.m. on a year-round basis, provided that said access is for use that is consistent with the intended use of the tennis courts. 
(Prior Code, § 11-112; Ord. No. 686; Ord. No. 1362) 
Sec. 9-283. - Ordinances apply. 
    All ordinances of the City shall apply to the public parks of the City unless otherwise provided in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 11-113; Ord. No. 686) 
Secs. 9-284-9-314. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 9-315. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), provided that nothing in this division shall be construed to deny to the manager of the swimming pool the authority to exclude persons therefrom who shall not conduct themselves in accordance with the rules governing the use of the pool. 
(Prior Code, § 11-209) 
Sec. 9-316. - Management. 
    The administration of the City swimming pool shall be under the control of the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Prior Code, § 11-201; Ord. No. 247, § 3) 
Sec. 9-317. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Parks and Recreation Department will, on an annual basis, publish rules and regulations relating to the use of the City swimming pool. 
(Prior Code, § 11-204; Ord. No. 247, §§ 5-10) 
Chapter 10 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Act Regulating Traffic, K.S.A. 8-1401 et seq.; powers of local authorities, K.S.A. 8-2001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE 

Sec. 10-19. - Incorporating standard traffic ordinance. 
    There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within the corporate limits of the City that certain traffic ordinance known as the "Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities," Edition of 2018, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas, save and except those articles, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed, and with those additions thereto as are made by this article or any other ordinance of the City hereafter adopted; this incorporation being authorized by K.S.A. 12-3009-12-3012 and 12-3301 and 12-3302, inclusive, as amended. At least one (1) copy of this Standard Traffic Ordinance shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1675," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be changed clearly marked to show any change, and to which shall be attached a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and to be available to the public at all reasonable hours. The Police Department, Municipal Judge and all administrative departments of the City, charged with enforcement of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, shall be supplied, at the cost of the City, the number of official copies of this Standard Traffic Ordinance, similarly marked, as it may be deemed expedient. 
(Prior Code, § 14-101; Ord. No. 1239; Ord. No. 1263; Ord. No. 1294; Ord. No. 1321; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1472; Ord. No. 1481; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1531, § 1, 7-9-2012; Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 1, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 1, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 1, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1651 , § 1, 7-10-2017; Ord. No. 1657 , § 1, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 1, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-20. - Traffic infractions and traffic offenses. 
(a)  An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this article that prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by a statutory provision which is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. 8-2118, or amendments thereto. 
(b)  All traffic violations that are included within this article and that are not ordinance traffic infractions as defined in Subsection (a) of this section shall be considered traffic offenses. 
(Prior Code, § 14-102; Ord. No. 1294; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 3, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 3, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 3, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 3, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 3, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 3, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 3, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-21. - Penalty for scheduled fines. 
    The fine for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or any other traffic offense for which the Municipal Judge establishes a fine in a fine schedule shall not be less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). A person tried and convicted for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or other traffic offense for which a fine has been established in a schedule of fines shall pay a fine fixed by the Court not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(Prior Code, § 14-103; Ord. No. 934; Ord. No. 1294; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 5, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 5, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 5, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 5, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 5, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 5, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 5, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-22. - Construction of traffic ordinances. 
    In the event that any provision incorporated by reference by Section 10-19 conflicts with a provision of Article III of this chapter, the provisions of Article III of this chapter shall prevail. 
(Prior Code, § 14-104; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 7, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 7, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 7, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 7, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 7, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 7, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 7, 9-10-2018) 
Secs. 10-23-10-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-48. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or by imprisonment for no more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior Code, § 14-220; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 46, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 45, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 9, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 9, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 9, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 9, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 9, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits, K.S.A. 8-1560. 
Sec. 10-49. - Speed limit on U.S. Highway 56. 
    The State Highway Commission, having determined, upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, that the speed limit as provided by law upon U.S. Highway 56 is greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist, has determined and declared a reasonable and safe speed limit thereon to be thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph) and has erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof, the speed limit on the street for the entire length thereof in the City is hereby set at thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph), unless posted otherwise. 
(Prior Code, § 14-201; Ord. No. 333; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 10, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 9, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 11, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 11, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 11, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 11, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 11, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits, K.S.A. 8-1560. 
Sec. 10-50. - Speed limits on residential streets. 
    The Governing Body, having determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigations that the speed limits permitted under State law are greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon the following residential streets, hereby determines and declares that the following streets and portions of streets in the City are residential in character and the reasonable and safe speed limit on residential streets is twenty-five miles per hour (25 mph), except on the following streets and locations: 
(1)  Suwanee Road and Tahoe Lane, fifteen miles per hour (15 mph). 
(2)  53rd Street from the Mission Road and Reinhardt intersection east to Chadwick Road, thirty miles per hour (30 mph). 
(3)  Roe Avenue from the south boundary of the City to the north boundary of the City, thirty-five miles per hour (35 mph), except from the intersection of 62nd Terrace north to the intersection of 61st Terrace, twenty miles per hour (20 mph) between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.; and 2:45 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when school is in session. 
(4)  Chadwick Road from 53rd Street south to Shawnee Mission Parkway, twenty miles per hour (20 mph). 
(5)  Canterbury Road from 53rd Street south to Shawnee Mission Parkway, twenty miles per hour (20 mph). 
(6)  Falmouth Road from 53rd Street south to Shawnee Mission Parkway, twenty miles per hour (20 mph). 
(7)  53rd Street east from Norwood Road to the dead end, fifteen miles per hour (15 mph). 
(8)  Mission Road from 58th Street south to 63rd Street, thirty miles per hour (30 mph). 
(9)  Neosho Lane from 53rd Street to Shawnee Mission Parkway, twenty miles per hour (20 mph). 
(Prior Code, § 14-202; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 12, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 11, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 13, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 13, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 13, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 13, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 13, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits, K.S.A. 8-1560. 
Sec. 10-51. - Trespass by motor vehicle. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle over private property of another, except on a private road or driveway, as defined in Section 1 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated by reference in Section 10-19, and then only with expressed or implied permission from the owner. 
(Prior Code, § 14-203; Ord. No. 5; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 14, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 13, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 15, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 15, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 15, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 15, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 15, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-52. - Trucks prohibited on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall at any time drive a motor truck of a State licensing rating of one (1) ton or more upon any of the streets of the City except as follows: 
(1)  Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(2)  Belinder Road from Shawnee Mission Parkway to the northern City limits; 
(3)  Norwood Road from Shawnee Mission Parkway to the 53rd Street; 
(4)  The south side of 55th Street between Shawnee Mission Parkway and the westernmost entrance to the Fairway Office Park; 
(5)  Motor trucks constructed for the purpose of carrying passengers; 
(6)  Motor trucks engaged in the repair or construction of streets within the City; 
(7)  Vehicles carrying goods, merchandise or other articles to or from any residential property with an address in the City; 
(8)  Tow trucks or repair vehicles for stalled or damaged motor vehicles located within the City; 
(9)  Pickup trucks; 
(10)  Emergency vehicles (fire trucks and apparatus, mobile command centers and ambulances), regardless of whether en route to an emergency within or without the City; or 
(11)  Motor vehicles carrying goods, merchandise or other articles to or from any commercial property with an address on Mission Road in the City may be driven upon Mission Road. 
(Prior Code, § 14-205; Ord. No. 669; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 16, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 15, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 17, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 17, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 17, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 17, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 17, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Truck routes authorized, K.S.A. 8-1912. 
Sec. 10-53. - Main trafficways. 
    The streets set out in this section as follows are hereby designated as main traffic ways, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-685 and traffic way connections, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-686: 
(1)  Belinder Road - State Park Road to Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(2)  Norwood Road - State Park Road to Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(3)  Fairway Road - State Park Road to 53rd Street; 
(4)  Aberdeen Road - State Park Road to 53rd Street; 
(5)  Chadwick Road - State Park Road to 53rd Street; 
(6)  Canterbury Road - State Park Road to 53rd Street; 
(7)  Falmouth Road - State Park Road to 53rd Street; 
(8)  Pawnee Lane - Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(9)  Mohawk Lane - Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(10)  Neosho Lane - Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(11)  Windsor Drive - Reinhardt Drive to Eastvale Road; 
(12)  Cherokee Drive - Windsor Drive to Eastvale Road; 
(13)  Reinhardt Drive - 63rd Street to Mission Road; 
(14)  Sunrise Drive - Reinhardt Drive to Eastvale Road; 
(15)  Lockton Lane - Reinhardt Drive to 61st Terrace; 
(16)  Howe Drive - Reinhardt Drive to 63rd Street; 
(17)  Eastvale Road - Mission Road to Windsor Drive; 
(18)  61st Terrace - Mission Road to Reinhardt Drive; 
(19)  Glenfield Drive - Howe Drive to 63rd Street; 
(20)  Brookridge Drive - Shawnee Mission Parkway to Sheridan Drive; 
(21)  Buena Vista Street - 58th Street to 56th Street; 
(22)  Sheridan Drive - 58th Street to Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(23)  57th Street - Buena Vista to Mission Road; 
(24)  57th Terrace - Buena Vista to Mission Road; 
(25)  58th Street - Fontana Drive to Mission Road; 
(26)  Neosho Avenue - 57th Street to 56th Street; 
(27)  Granada Lane - 59th Street to Granada Street; 
(28)  South side of 55th Street - Shawnee Mission Parkway to Granada; 
(29)  Fontana Drive - 59th Street to 58th Street; 
(30)  El Monte Drive - 59th Street to Alhambra Drive; 
(31)  Alhambra Drive - 59th Street to 58th Street; 
(32)  State Park Road - Mission Road to Belinder Road; 
(33)  South half of 53rd Street - Buena Vista Drive to Mission Road; 
(34)  South half of 53rd Street - Shawnee Mission Parkway to Mission Road; 
(35)  East half of Buena Vista Drive - Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(36)  North half of 63rd Street - Mission Road to Reinhardt Drive; 
(37)  Alhambra Street - 61st Street to 59th Street; 
(38)  Buena Vista Street - 62nd Street to 59th Street; 
(39)  Catalina Street - 62nd Street to 59th Street; 
(40)  Delmar Street - 62nd Terrace to 59th Street; 
(41)  El Monte Street - 62nd Street to 59th Street, 
(42)  Fontana Street - 62nd Street to 59th Street; 
(43)  Granada Street - 62nd Street to Granada Lane; 
(44)  62nd Terrace - Roe Avenue to cul-de-sac; 
(45)  62nd Street - Roe Avenue to Mission Road; 
(46)  61st Street - Roe Avenue to Mission Road; 
(47)  60th Street - Roe Avenue to Mission Road; 
(48)  59th Street - Roe Avenue to Mission Road; 
(49)  61st Terrace - Roe Avenue to Granada Street; 
(50)  60th Terrace - Roe Avenue to Granada Street; 
(51)  59th Terrace - Roe Avenue to Granada Street; 
(52)  Mission Road, within the City limits; 
(53)  Shawnee Mission Parkway - within the City limits; 
(54)  Windsor Lane - Shawnee Mission Parkway to cul-de-sac; 
(55)  Suwanee Road - Mission Road to cul-de-sac; 
(56)  Tahoe Lane - Suwanee Road to cul-de-sac; 
(57)  Wyncote Lane - Mission Road to cul-de-sac; 
(58)  56th Street - Buena Vista to Neosho Avenue; 
(59)  58th Street - Mission Road to cul-de-sac; 
(60)  57th Terrace - Reinhardt Drive to cul-de-sac; 
(61)  Windsor Circle - Windsor Drive to cul-de-sac; 
(62)  Cherokee Circle - Mission Road to cul-de-sac; 
(63)  Neosho Lane - Shawnee Mission Parkway to cul-de-sac; and 
(64)  North side of 53rd Street - Aberdeen to Belinder. 
(Prior Code, § 14-206; Ord. No. 495; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1374; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1416; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 18, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 17, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 19, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 19, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 19, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 19, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 19, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-54. - Through streets. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 59 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated by reference in Section 10-19, and when signs or signals are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop or yield as the sign directs, at every intersection, before entering any of the following streets or parts of streets hereby designated as through streets: 
(1)  Shawnee Mission Parkway, except at its intersection with Mission Road and Belinder Road. 
(2)  Roe Avenue, except at its intersection with 60th Street. 
(3)  63rd Street. 
(4)  Belinder Road from the north City limits to Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(5)  53rd Street, except at its intersection with Buena Vista Street, Mission Road, Norwood Road and Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(6)  Sheridan Drive, except at its intersection with Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(7)  59th Street, except at its intersection with Roe Avenue and Mission Road. 
(8)  60th Street, except at its intersection with Roe Avenue, Delmar Street and Mission Road. 
(9)  61st Street, except at its intersection with Roe Avenue and Mission Road. 
(10)  Mission Road, except at its intersection with 53rd Street and Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(11)  State Park Road, except at its intersection with Shawnee Mission Parkway, Canterbury Road and Fairway Road. 
(Prior Code, § 14-207; Ord. No. 333; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 20, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 19, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 21, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 21, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 21, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 21, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 21, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate through streets, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(6). 
Sec. 10-55. - No passing on 63rd Street. 
    Motor vehicular passing is hereby prohibited on 63rd Street, and no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway, except when an obstruction exists making it necessary to do so and only then upon yielding the right-of-way to any vehicular traffic traveling in the opposite direction within that distance which is necessary to avoid an immediate hazard. 
(Prior Code, § 14-208; Ord. No. 727; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 22, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 21, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 23, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 23, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 23, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 23, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 23, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish no passing zones, K.S.A. 8-1520. 
Sec. 10-56. - Stop intersections other than on through streets. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the Standard Traffic Ordinance incorporated by reference in Section 10-19, the following intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections and when signs or signals are erected at one (1) or more entrances as stated, the drivers of vehicles shall stop, as provided by Section 59 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, before entering the intersection: 
(1)  Intersection of 61st Terrace and Howe Drive, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(2)  Intersection of 61st Terrace and Granada Street, west entrance; 
(3)  Intersection of Eastvale Road and Reinhardt Drive, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(4)  Intersection of Eastvale Road and Howe Drive, north, south, east and west entrances; 
(5)  Intersection of Reinhardt Drive and Windsor Drive, east entrance; 
(6)  Intersection of Lockton Lane and Eastvale Drive, north and south entrances; 
(7)  Intersection of Granada Street and 62nd Street, north, south, east and west entrances; 
(8)  Intersection of Delmar Street and 62nd Terrace, east and west entrances; 
(9)  Intersection of Granada Street and 62nd Terrace, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(10)  Intersection of Buena Vista Drive and 58th Street, north and east entrance; 
(11)  Intersection of Buena Vista Drive and Sheridan Drive, west entrance; 
(12)  Intersection of Alhambra Drive and 58th Street, south entrance; 
(13)  Intersection of 57th Terrace at Howe Drive, west entrance; 
(14)  Intersection of Buena Vista Drive and 57th Street, north and south entrance; 
(15)  Intersection of Catalina and 61st Street, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(16)  Intersection of State Park Road and Canterbury Road, east and north entrance; 
(17)  Intersection of State Park Road and Fairway Road, east and north entrance; 
(18)  Intersection of 53rd Street and Norwood Road, east, west, and north entrances; 
(19)  Southbound traffic at Norwood Road and Shawnee Mission Parkway intersection; 
(20)  Eastbound traffic at 53rd Street and Shawnee Mission Parkway intersection; 
(21)  Southbound traffic from Belinder Road parking lot at 53rd Street; 
(22)  Eastbound traffic on 61st Terrace at its intersection with Reinhardt Drive; 
(23)  Intersection of El Monte Street and 59th, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(24)  Intersection of Delmar Street and 62nd Street, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(25)  Intersection of Brookridge Drive and Sheridan Drive, east, west, north and south entrances; 
(26)  Intersection of Reinhardt Drive and Sunrise Drive, north, south and west entrances; and 
(27)  Intersection of Reinhardt Drive and Lockton Lane, north, south and west entrances. 
(Prior Code, § 14-209; Ord. No. 590; Ord. No. 660; Ord. No. 726; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No. 841; Ord. No. 876; Ord. No. 973; Ord. No. 1020; Ord. No. 1180; Ord. No. 1213; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1537, § 24, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 23, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 25, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 25, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 25, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 25, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 25, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop streets, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(6), 8-2008. 
Sec. 10-57. - No left turn permitted. 
    No left turn is permitted by traffic proceeding from Brookridge Drive onto Shawnee Mission Parkway. 
(Prior Code, § 14-210; Ord. No. 1556, § 25, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 27, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 27, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 27, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 27, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 27, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit turns, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(9). 
Sec. 10-58. - Stopping, standing and parking; where prohibited. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal: 
(1)  On private property or upon an area privately developed as an off-street parking facility, without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of that private property or facility; 
(2)  On privately developed parking areas, adequate notice shall be given in the immediate area by signs indicating privately developed parking for certain businesses; 
(3)  On lawns or other areas of lots zoned for residential use between the building line and the street, except on established driveways; 
(4)  On either side of Mission Road between Shawnee Mission Parkway and West 63rd Street; and 
(5)  On any street for more than twenty-four (24) hours at any one (1) time. Summons may be issued by the City upon written complaint of the private property owner, lessee or person in charge of any private property or facility. Upon receiving a complaint or finding a vehicle in violation of this section, a police officer may affix written notice to the vehicle stating the date and time of the violation. If after a twenty-four (24) hour period the violation has not been abated a summons may be issued. If the violation still has not been abated after forty-eight (48) hours and a summons has been issued, a police officer is authorized to have the vehicle removed by a licensed towing service approved by the Chief of Police to do business with the Police Department to a secure facility at the cost of the vehicle's owner. Summons may be issued by the City upon written complaint of the private property owner, lessee or person in charge of any private property or facility. 
(b)  The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Emergency public safety vehicles; 
(2)  Emergency activities of or at the direction of the Fire, Police or Public Works Departments; 
(3)  Emergency activities of any utility company; 
(4)  Any commercial vehicle providing a bona fide delivery service; 
(5)  Any activities approved by the Governing Body. 
(Prior Code, § 14-211; Ord. No. 553; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1475; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 28, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 27, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 29, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 29, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 29, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 29, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 29, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(1). 
Sec. 10-59. - Chief of police; removal of vehicle. 
    The Chief of Police or any City Police Officer is hereby authorized to cause the removal of a vehicle from any private property or area developed as an off-street parking facility upon written complaint of the private property owner or facility and following a diligent but unsuccessful effort to locate the owner or person in control of said vehicle. Said vehicle shall be removed to the closest designated storage garage at the cost of the owner. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles so removed, as provided in this article, and shall also keep a record of the designated garages to which these vehicles may be removed. This section, Section 10-61, any other section of this Code, and Section 84 or any other section of the 2018 Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities that authorizes the removal of vehicles shall constitute authority of the Chief of Police or any City Police Officer to cause such vehicle to be towed. The maximum rate for wrecker or towing services and the maximum storage fee shall the reasonable and customary rate and fee for such services in Johnson County, Kansas at the time that the services are rendered. The owner of each vehicle towed shall have access to personal property in that vehicle on or before forty eight (48) hours after the vehicle is towed and the wrecker or towing service shall report the location of the vehicle to the Police Department within two (2) hours of the conclusion of the tow. 
(Prior Code, § 14-212; Ord. No. 553; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 30, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 29, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 31, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 31, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 31, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 31, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 31, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-60. - Parking: traffic hazard, prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall park, stop or leave standing any vehicle in any street, alley or avenue, whether attended or unattended, in a manner or in a position so as to create a traffic hazard or so as to endanger vehicular or pedestrian travel on that street. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle that is disabled to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving that disabled vehicle stopped in that position, who takes reasonable prompt action to have the vehicle removed to a safe place. 
(b)  Parking is prohibited at all times at the following locations: 
(1)  On the north side of 62nd Street from a point thirty feet (30') west of Mission Road to Mission Road and from a point 30 feet east of the entrance to the City park parking lot to the entrance to the City park parking lot; 
(2)  On the east side of Roe Avenue from the south City limits to the north City limits, except in designated marked parking areas; 
(3)  On the west side of Mission Road from Shawnee Mission Parkway north five hundred feet (500'); 
(4)  From 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on the east side of Mission Road from Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(5)  On the east side of Buena Vista from Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(6)  On the south side of 53rd Street from Chadwick to Norwood; 
(7)  On the east side of Belinder from State Park Road to Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(8)  On the north side of 62nd Street from a point approximately eighty-six and eleven one-hundredths feet (86.11') east of Roe Avenue to Roe Avenue; 
(9)  Belinder Road, both sides, north of Shawnee Mission Parkway to the City limit; 
(10)  On the east side of Fairway Road from Shawnee Mission Parkway to 53rd Street; 
(11)  On the south side of 62nd Street from a point approximately thirty-six feet (36') west of Mission Road to Mission Road; 
(12)  On the north side and south side of 60th Street from a point approximately one hundred and fifty feet (150') east of Roe Avenue to Roe Avenue; 
(13)  On the west side of Fairway Road from a point approximately ninety-five feet (95') north of Shawnee Mission Parkway to Shawnee Mission Parkway; 
(14)  On the south side of 55th Street from Shawnee Mission Parkway west five hundred and eighty-seven feet (587'); and 
(15)  On the south side of 62nd Street from Roe Avenue to Granada Street. 
(Prior Code, § 14-213; Ord. No. 974; Ord. No. 990; Ord. No. 1095; Ord. No. 1154; Ord. No. 1159; Ord. No. 1197; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 32, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 31, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 33, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 33, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 33, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 33, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 33, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(1). 
Sec. 10-61. - Removal of any vehicle parked in violation of Section 10-60. 
    Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street, alley or avenue in violation of Section 10-60, that officer is authorized to move that vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of that vehicle to move the vehicle to a position of safety or, if necessary, to be towed away and stored in a garage at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, as set forth in Section 10-59. 
(Prior Code, § 14-214; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 34, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 33, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 35, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 35, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 35, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 35, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 35, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-62. - Abandoned vehicles. 
    No person shall abandon and leave a motor vehicle in any street, alley or avenue, whether attended or unattended, in a manner or in a position so as to create a traffic hazard or so as to endanger vehicular or pedestrian travel on that street. This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle that is disabled to the extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving that disabled vehicle stopped in that position, who takes reasonable prompt action to have the vehicle removed to a safe place. 
(Prior Code, § 14-215; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 36, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 35, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 37, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 37, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 37, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 37, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 37, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-63. - On-street parking in residential areas. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (d) of this section and subject to the additional restrictions contained in Subsection (b) of this section, no person shall, park, stand, or store, for more than twelve (12) hours on any day on any street, alley or avenue in an area zoned for residential use, a trailer, semi-trailer, boat, bus, camper, recreational vehicle, mobile home (self-propelled or otherwise), oversized motor vehicle, tractor or other type of wheeled vehicle, other than passenger vehicles and motorcycles. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "oversized motor vehicle" means any of the following: any motor vehicle exceeding twenty-eight feet (28') in length, any motor vehicle with a licensed gross weight exceeding twelve thousand pounds (12,000 lbs.). 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in Subsection (d) of this section, in areas zoned for residential use, where on-street parking is otherwise permitted, no person shall park, stand or store, on the street, any motor vehicle that exceeds seven and one-half feet (71/2') in width in its widest point. 
(d)  Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be authorized by a permit issued by the Police Department, where the exceptions will not endanger the public safety or welfare of the residents of the area or motorist of the street. No such permit shall be granted for a period exceeding seven (7) days. 
(Prior Code, § 14-216; Ord. No. 774; Ord. No. 1134; Ord. No. 1303; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 38, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 37, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 41, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 39, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 39, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 39, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 39, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, K.S.A. 8-2002(a)(1). 
Sec. 10-64. - Emergency regulations under hazardous conditions. 
    When snow, sleet or freezing rain is causing slippery or hazardous conditions that might lead to serious traffic congestion or safety, the Mayor may declare a traffic emergency, and until that emergency is terminated, no vehicles shall be parked on any streets. All vehicles parked on a street, in this instance, must be removed within two (2) hours after the declaration of an emergency or be considered in violation of this section. 
(Prior Code, § 14-217; Ord. No. 693; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 40, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 39, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 43, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 41, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 41, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 41, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 41, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-65. - Careless driving. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle upon any street or alley or driveway in a careless or heedless manner or without due caution and circumspection or in a manner so as needlessly to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. 
(Prior Code, § 14-218; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 42, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 41, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 45, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 43, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1657 , § 43, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 43, 9-10-2018) 
Sec. 10-66. - Prohibited right turns on red signal lights. 
    The Governing Body, having determined on the basis of engineering and traffic investigations that permitting right turns on a steady red signal is unreasonable or unsafe under the conditions found to exist as certain intersections of the City, hereby determines and declares that right turns on a steady red signal are prohibited at the following locations: Southbound Belinder Road at its intersection with Shawnee Mission Parkway between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Prior Code, § 14-219; Ord. No. 966; Ord. No. 1351; Ord. No. 1386; Ord. No. 1412; Ord. No. 1437; Ord. No. 1460; Ord. No. 1490; Ord. No. 1507; Ord. No. 1512; Ord. No. 1537, § 44, 9-10-2012; Ord. No. 1556, § 43, 9-9-2013; Ord. No. 1583 , § 1, 11-10-2014; Ord. No. 1605 , § 45, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1634 , § 45, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1657 , § 45, 12-11-2017; Ord. No. 1675 , § 45, 9-10-2018) 
Chapter 11 - TREES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 11-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Community tree manager means the City Public Works Director or his designee. 
    Community trees means all street and park trees as a total resource. 
    Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation located in areas shown as parks on the City's official zoning map and at all other green spaces owned by the City. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between the front lot lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the City. 
    Tree topping means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
(Prior Code, §§ 11-401, 11-411; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-20. - Creation and establishment of a City tree board. 
    There is hereby created and established a Tree Board for the City which shall consist of eight (8) members, five (5) of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Four (4) appointed members shall live in the four (4) wards of the City, one (1) from each ward, if possible. A fifth appointed member shall be a member at large living in the City. The other three (3) members shall be the Public Works Director, the Parks and Recreation Director and a member of the City Council appointed by the Mayor. 
(Prior Code, § 11-402; Ord. No. 1399; Ord. No. 1425) 
Sec. 11-21. - Term of office. 
    The term of the five (5) members appointed by the Mayor shall be three (3) years, except the initial term of two (2) of the members of the first Board shall be for one (1) year and the initial term of the other two (2) members of the first Board shall be for two (2) years. 
(Prior Code, § 11-403; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-22. - Compensation. 
    Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation. 
(Prior Code, § 11-404; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-23. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to develop and review annually a written plan for the care, replacement, maintenance and removal of street and park trees. The plan shall be presented annually to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive City Tree Plan. 
(b)  The Tree Board shall choose its own officers from among the Board members, make its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its meetings. A majority of the members (five (5)) shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. Failure of a Board member to attend three (3) consecutive meetings may result in removal from the Board. The Board may elect a vice-chair to serve and preside at meetings when the chairperson is absent. 
(c)  The Tree Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings and recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Prior Code, § 11-405; Ord. No. 1399; Ord. No. 1425) 
Sec. 11-24. - Review by City Council. 
    The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any decision or order of the Tree Board to the City Council who may hear the matter and a render a final decision. 
(Prior Code, § 11-416; Ord. No. 1399) 
Secs. 11-25-11-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate trees on public property, K.S.A. 12-3201. 

Sec. 11-52. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), provided that each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 11-53. - Tree species to be planted. 
    The City shall maintain a list of recommended trees for planting in public areas. This list shall be available to residents of the City upon request to aid in the selection of trees for private properties. The list of recommended community trees shall be updated periodically to reflect new developments or species that will affect the population of the community trees. 
(Prior Code, § 11-406; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-54. - Spacing and distances. 
    Street trees may be planted no closer together than thirty feet (30') from each other except in special plantings approved by the Tree Board or Community Tree Manager. 
(Prior Code, § 11-407; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-55. - Distances and clearance for planting. 
(a)  Street trees may be planted on the street side of the front property lines where there is more than six feet (6') between the street side edge of the sidewalk and the curb of the street. The Tree Board may grant exceptions. 
(b)  No tree shall be planted closer than ten feet (10') to any fireplug. 
(c)  Permission must be obtained from the Tree Board or the Community Tree Manager when planting street trees within ten feet (10') of any point on a line on the ground immediately below any overhead utility wire, or within five lateral feet (5') of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Prior Code, § 11-408; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-56. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The City shall have the right to plant, maintain and remove community trees to ensure public safety and to preserve and to improve the beauty of public grounds. The City shall have the responsibility to remove a dead, diseased, dying or dangerous community tree. Homeowners' associations have responsibility for islands and designated neighborhood gardens. 
(b)  The Tree Board may remove or order removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is seriously affected by any injurious insect or disease. 
(c)  Property owners, at their expense and with permission from the Community Tree Manager, shall have the right to perform normal tree maintenance on all street trees on their property provided it is not potentially detrimental to the health of the tree. 
(Prior Code, § 11-409; Ord. No. 1399; Ord. No. 1638 , § 3, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 11-57. - Permission required. 
    No person shall plant a street tree in their yard as provided in Section 11-56 or on public land without first obtaining permission from the Community Tree Manager. 
(Prior Code, § 11-410; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-58. - Tree topping. 
    No person or City department shall top any community tree, or tree on public property. Trees severely damaged by storm or other causes, or trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempt from this section at the determination of the Tree Board or the Community Tree Manager. Pruning practices shall conform to current ANSI A300 standards. 
(Prior Code, § 11-411; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-59. - Clearances over streets and walkways. 
    Clearance over streets and walkways shall be the responsibility of the property owner. A clearance of eight feet (8') must be maintained over walkways and a clearance of fifteen feet (15') must be maintained over streets. Property owners are responsible for trees on their own property as well as trees on the public way that abut their property. 
(Prior Code, § 11-412; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-60. - Traffic hazard. 
    If the Chief of Police or Community Tree Manager determines that any tree or shrubbery located on any private property abutting any sidewalk, street, avenue or parking constitutes a traffic hazard by dangerously obstructing the view of drivers of vehicles or traffic entering a street from an intersecting street, he shall notify the owner of such abutting property to remove the same, and it shall be the duty of the owner to remove the same. 
Sec. 11-61. - Dead or diseased tree removal. 
    The City may remove or cause to be removed any dead or diseased tree within the City limits. Diseased trees are defined as trees that may be a hazard to life or property or harbor insects or disease which represent a threat to other trees within the City. The Community Tree Manager or his designee will notify the owner by certified mail of the responsibility of the property on which the dead or diseased tree is located to remove the dead or diseased tree. Removal shall be accomplished within ten (10) days from the date notice is mailed. If the owner fails to remove the tree within ten (10) days, the City shall remove that tree and charge the cost to the owner. Payment of such cost is due and payable within thirty (30) days following receipt of a bill from the City for such removal. If the cost is not paid within the thirty (30) day period, the cost, including staff and attorney fees for recovery of the same, shall be assessed as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land on which the tree was removed and the City Clerk, at the time of certifying other City taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land. 
(Prior Code, § 11-413; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-62. - Storage of wood from diseased, infected trees. 
    It shall be unlawful to store or otherwise harbor, on any property in the City, the material from any diseased or infected trees. 
Sec. 11-63. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of community trees shall be ground below the surface of the earth and the area covered with grass seed or sod or other appropriate ground cover. 
(Prior Code, § 11-414; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-64. - Access. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with access by City workers to trees maintained by the City. 
(Prior Code, § 11-415; Ord. No. 1399) 
Sec. 11-65. - Savings clause. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the trimming, cutting or removal of any tree, shrub or growth which endangers persons or property and nothing in this article shall interfere with the suppression of pests or disease, including Dutch Elm disease. 
Secs. 11-66-11-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC TREE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate trees on public property, K.S.A. 12-3201. 

Sec. 11-89. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Community Tree Manager means the Director of Public Works or his designee. 
    Covered property means real property located within the incorporated boundaries of the City that is owned, leased, or rented by the City, including all parkland and green space; and all easements and rights-of-way within the incorporated boundaries of the City that are used, in whole or in part, for a public road or highway. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter in inches of a tree as measured through the main trunk at a point four and one-half feet (4.5') above the natural grade level. 
    Drip line means a vertical line run through the outermost portion of the canopy of a tree and extending down to the ground. 
    Feature tree means any tree that has a DBH of greater than thirty inches (30"). Trees that have received special care provided by the City for the treatment or prevention of disease or infestation may also be considered a feature tree. 
    Owner means the person who has the legal title to the property or lessee, agent or other person acting on behalf of the titleholder with authorization to do so. 
    Protected tree means any tree that has a DBH of thirty inches (30") or less. 
    Protective/temporary fencing means a snow fence, chain-link fence, orange vinyl construction fence or other similar fencing with a minimum four foot (4') height. 
    Replacement tree means a tree from the replacement tree list with a preferred caliper size of two and one-half inches (2.5") but a minimum of two inches (2"), measured twelve inches (12") from the ground and height of not less than seven feet (7') when planted. 
    Tree removal authorization means permission granted by the City to remove a protected tree or a feature tree. 
(Prior Code, § 13-702; Ord. No. 1565, § 2, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 11-90. - Enforcement and penalty. 
    The Community Tree Manager or his designee has the authority to enforce the terms and conditions of this article. Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates any provision of this article shall be assessed an administrative fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each incident. The unlawful injury, destruction or removal of each protected tree shall be considered a separate incident. In addition, all violations shall be required to meet the requirements outlined under tree replacement or the Fairway Tree Fund. If any administrative fine or assessment to the Fairway Tree Fund shall remain unpaid thirty (30) days after receipt of notice of the imposition or assessment, the City may use any and all reasonable means available to collect the funds, including, but limited to, imposing a lien on the property for the amount of the fine or assessment. 
(Prior Code, § 13-707; Ord. No. 1565, § 6, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 1638 , § 5, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 11-90.5. - Appeal process. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof may submit a written appeal of a decision of the Community Tree Manager or designee to the Fairway City Council via the City Administrator's Office within ten (10) days of receipt of notice of the imposition or assessment. The appellant shall appear at a public hearing before the Fairway City Council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. Any imposition or assessment affirmed or amended shall be paid to the City within fourteen (14) days to prevent the City from taking any and all reasonable means available to collect the funds, including, but not limited to, stop work orders or imposing a lien on the property for the unpaid portion of the fine or assessment. 
( Ord. No. 1638 , § 7, 11-14-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1638, § 7, adopted Nov. 14, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as § 11-90a. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 11-90.5. 
Sec. 11-91. - Applicability of article. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all covered property. 
(Prior Code, § 13-701; Ord. No. 1565, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 11-92. - Fairway Tree Fund. 
    There is established a Fairway Tree Fund, which shall be a special account administered by the City. The Fairway Tree Fund shall be used only for purchasing, planning and maintaining trees on covered property. The amount of payment required shall be calculated based on the following: DBH removed minus DBH replaced multiplied by one hundred dollars ($100.00). If approved by the Community Tree Manager, an applicant or owner may make a payment into the Fairway Tree Fund in lieu of planting replacement trees. 
(Prior Code, § 13-703; Ord. No. 1565, § 3, 2-10-2014) 
Sec. 11-93. - Tree protection. 
    Prior to demolition or construction, the following procedures shall be followed on all types of construction projects. It is the responsibility of the developer and/or contractor and his subcontractors to take appropriate action to preserve all protected trees and feature trees during all phases of construction. 
(1)  Protective/temporary fencing. Protective/temporary fencing shall be required for all protected trees and feature trees to prevent infringement on the root system from any construction-related activities. The protective fencing shall be installed according to tree diameter at breast height (DBH) as follows: 
Trees greater than twenty-eight inch (28") DBH must have a fence to encompass a perimeter twenty feet (20') from center or seventy-five percent (75%) of drip line (whichever is lesser); 
Trees between twenty inch (20") and twenty-eight inch (28") inch DBH must have a fence to encompass a perimeter fifteen feet (15') from center of tree or seventy-five percent (75%) of drip line (whichever is lesser); 
Trees less than twenty inch (20") DBH must have a fence to encompass a perimeter ten feet (10') from the center of the tree or seventy-five percent (75%) of the drip line (whichever is lesser); 
Fencing shall exclude any preexisting structures, foundations, slabs, roadways, highways, and driveways. The fencing is to be installed along the edge of the driveways/roadways encompassing the tree to restrict access from the street side. All fencing must appear on construction documents and shall be installed prior to any other construction-related activity. The fencing shall remain in place at all times until all other construction-related activity has been completed or final grade achieved. 
(2)  Prohibited activities. Prohibited activities adjacent to trees shall include the following: 
a.  Material storage. No materials for construction or waste accumulated due to excavation, demolition, or construction shall be placed under the canopy of any protected tree or feature tree. 
b.  Equipment cleaning/liquid disposal. No equipment shall be cleaned or other materials or liquids deposited or allowed to flow over land within the limits of the canopy of a protected tree or a feature tree. This includes, without limitation, paint, old solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or similar materials. 
c.  Tree attachments. No signs, wires or other attachments other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any protected tree or feature tree. 
d.  Vehicular traffic. No vehicular and/or construction equipment traffic or parking shall take place within the limits of the protective fencing. 
e.  Grade changes. No grade changes in excess of two inches (2") (cut or fill) shall be allowed within the limits of the drip line of any protected tree or feature tree. 
f.  New impervious paving. No new paving with asphalt, concrete or other impervious materials in a manner which may, in the reasonable discretion of the Community Tree Manager, reasonably be expected to severely damage or kill a tree shall be placed within the limits of the drip line of a protected tree or a feature tree. 
g.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything contained in this article or in Section 9-76(j) to the contrary, this section shall not prohibit work that is necessary to install, maintain, repair, replace or remove utility lines or to activity that merely disrupts the surface of the ground. 
(Prior Code, § 13-704; Ord. No. 1565, § 4, 2-10-2014; Ord. No. 1638 , § 8, 11-14-2016) 
Sec. 11-94. - Tree removal. 
(a)  Authorization . No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, move or remove, or effectively destroy, any protected tree or feature tree located on covered property without first obtaining tree removal authorization. Generally, if a tree removal authorization is granted, the applicant shall replace the protected trees being removed with replacement trees. A sufficient number of replacement trees shall be planted so that the total caliper of the replacement trees is equal to the caliper of the tree removed as measured at DBH. If, for whatever reason, planting replacement trees is deemed infeasible, the owner shall make payment to the Fairway Tree Fund. 
(b)  Process . Owners must request tree removal authorization in writing to the Community Tree Manager. If the removal is in conjunction with a construction project, the written request must be submitted at the same time as the building permit application. 
(c)  Authority to review; approval . The Community Tree Manager shall be responsible for the review and approval of all requests for tree removal authorizations submitted in accordance with the requirements specified in this article. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Community Tree Manager may take one (1) of the following actions: 
(1)  Deferral of decision . The Community Tree Manager may defer the approval of a tree removal authorization to the Tree Board for any reason. Any decision made by the Tree Board may be appealed to the City Council. All decisions made by the City Council shall be final. 
(2)  Approval . The Community Tree Manager shall issue tree removal authorization provided the owner has agreed in writing to either meet the tree replacement criteria or make payment to the Fairway Tree Fund. 
(d)  Authorization expiration . Tree removal authorization issued in connection with an approved building permit or site plan shall be valid for the period of that building permit's or site plan's validity. A tree removal authorization not issued in connection with an approved building permit or site plan shall become void after one hundred and eighty (180) days after the date of approval. 
(e)  Authorization for removal of a feature tree . A feature tree may only be removed with approval from the City Council provided that one (1) of the following exceptions is met. The burden of qualifying the exceptions is upon the applicant to show that the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The tree is dead. 
(2)  The tree is diseased or dying and constitutes a threat to healthy trees, to property, or to public safety. 
(3)  Removal of the tree is necessary for construction, development, or redevelopment, and: 
a.  All reasonable efforts have been made to avoid removing the tree for construction/development and removal cannot be avoided. 
b.  The presence of the tree places undue financial burden on the applicant. 
c.  No other reasonable accommodations can be made to preserve the tree. 
(Prior Code, § 13-705; Ord. No. 1565, § 5, 2-10-2014) 
Chapter 12 - UTILITIES AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State regulation of wastewater discharges, K.S.A. 65-164 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLID WASTE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Solid waste, K.S.A. 65-3401 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural waste means solid waste resulting from the production of farm or agricultural products. 
    Bulky waste means items of refuse too large to be placed in solid waste containers, including but not limited to furniture, beds, chairs, mattresses and box springs that are not collected as part of a refuse hauler's routine periodic collection service. Bulky waste excludes white goods and hazardous materials. 
    Collection means removal and transportation of solid waste and recyclables from its place of storage to its place of processing or disposal. 
    Commercial solid waste means solid waste excluding recyclables, resulting from the operation of any commercial, industrial or institutional establishment. This category includes, but is not limited to, solid waste originating in stores, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, theaters and schools. 
    Composting or compost means a controlled process of microbial degradation of organic material into a stable, nuisance-free, humus-like product. 
    Construction waste means building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on houses, commercial buildings, other structures and pavements. 
    Disposal means depositing refuse in or at a facility approved for the particular type of refuse being disposed and approved by and complying with all requirements of the County Department of Health and Environment and that meets all applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations. 
    Disposal area or disposal site means any area used for the disposal of refuse from more than one (1) residential premises or one (1) or more commercial, industrial, manufacturing or municipal operations. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, processing, storage, packaging, preparation, sale, cooking and serving of meat, produce and other foods and shall include unclean containers. 
    Hauler means any person or entity who performs the act of collecting, removing and transporting refuse of any type from the generation, storage or collection point, whether on a one-time or ongoing basis; but does not include the transporting of refuse by an individual not otherwise in business as a "hauler" for purposes of this article, where the refuse is generated by the individual, his family or immediate neighbors and the refuse is disposed of in a manner consistent with all applicable laws; nor the transporting of refuse by an individual or person, not otherwise in business as a "hauler" for purposes of this article, where the disposal is made as an incidental or related part of services or work performed by the individual or person, such as landscaping, roofing, remodeling, or similar, and the refuse is properly disposed of in a manner consistent with all applicable laws. 
    Hazardous waste means all waste, regardless of form, which is classified as hazardous waste by the State Department of Health and Environment. 
    Johnson County regulations means regulations adopted by the County for the purpose of governing solid waste management in the County and that are entitled "Johnson County Code of Regulations for Solid Waste Management, 2010 Edition" (as may be amended from time to time). 
    Multifamily residential means a residential building or set of residential buildings that does not receive individual periodic solid waste collection service and that uses a collective solid waste disposal area for the collection of solid waste generated by the occupants. 
    Nuisance means anything that: 
(1)  Is injurious to health or is offensive to the senses or any obstruction to the free use of property so as to materially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; 
(2)  Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal; and 
(3)  Occurs during or as a result of the handling or disposal of solid waste. 
    Occupant means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of any dwelling unit or any other improved real property, either as owner, guest, or as a tenant, either with or without the consent of the owner thereof. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in or has charge, care or control of any dwelling unit or any other improved real property as title holder, as employee or agent of the title holder or as landlord or manager or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder. 
    Processing facility means incinerator, compost plant, transfer station or any other location where refuse is consolidated, temporarily stored or salvaged prior to being transported to a final disposal site. 
    Putrescible waste means waste of a nature that is subject to the progressive chemical decomposition of the organic matter in refuse, with the production of foul-smelling compounds. 
    Recyclable materials means any materials that will be used or reused, or prepared for use or reuse, as an ingredient in an industrial process to make a product, or as an effective substitute for a commercial product. Recyclables include, but are not limited to, paper, glass, plastic, and metal, but do not include yard waste. 
    Refuse means anything discarded as useless or worthless; trash. The term "refuse" includes solid waste, recyclables, yard waste and compost, individually and collectively. 
    Refuse hauler means a person or entity licensed pursuant to this article to haul any type of refuse in the City. 
    Residential customer means every occupant of a residential building or set of residential buildings who receives individual periodic solid waste collection service and who does not use a collective solid waste disposal area for the collection of solid waste generated by the occupants. 
    Residential solid waste means solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of dwelling units. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible and/or noncombustible waste materials from: dwelling units, commercial, industrial, institutional or agricultural establishments, including yard wastes and items commonly referred to as "trash." 
    Service means the useful result; the product of labor and machines in proper and effective management to dispose of solid waste. 
    Solid waste means unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semi-liquid state, including but not limited to refuse, garbage, ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead animals, animal and agricultural wastes, discarded appliances, abandoned vehicles, special wastes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes and digested sludges resulting from the treatment of domestic sewage or a combination thereof. 
    Solid waste utility or utility means the utility created by this article to provide for the collection, storage and transportation of solid waste and recyclables. 
    Storage means keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its production until the time of its collection. 
    Transfer station means a facility used as an adjunct to solid waste collection system. Such a facility may be fixed or mobile and may include recompaction of solid waste. 
    White goods means large appliances, including but not limited to washers, dryers, refrigerators, freezers, and water heaters. 
    Yard waste means grass clippings, leaves, shrub and tree trimmings, but does not include agricultural waste. 
(Prior Code, § 6-102; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-20. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, collect, transport or process any solid wastes in any manner that does not conform to rules and regulations established in this article, or violates practices prohibited by this article. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished for each violation by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-130; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-21. - Findings and purpose. 
    The City Council finds it necessary and desirable to provide a satisfactory system to the citizens of the City for the collection, storage and transportation of solid waste and recyclables that is not in conflict with the Johnson County Code of Regulations for Solid Waste Management. Further, the City Council finds that reducing the volume of solid waste and increasing the volume of recycling in the community is beneficial to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Prior Code, § 6-101; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-22. - Access to premises. 
    Licensed refuse haulers are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting refuse therefrom as required by this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-107; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-23. - Materials collected property of refuse hauler. 
    All refuse collected shall, upon being loaded into collection equipment, become the property of the refuse hauler. 
(Prior Code, § 6-108; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-24. - Refuse disposal requirements. 
    All refuse collected in the City shall be disposed of at a disposal area or processing facility appropriate for the type of refuse to be disposed; comply with all requirements of the County Department of Health and Environment; and meet all applicable local, State and Federal laws and regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-109; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-25. - Refuse collection vehicles. 
    All refuse collection vehicles operated in the City shall be maintained in a safe and clean condition and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of refuse therefrom. 
(Prior Code, § 6-110; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-26. - Collection requirements. 
(a)  Collection frequency . 
(1)  Residential collection. Residential collection shall occur not less than one (1) time for solid waste, one (1) time for recyclables and one (1) time for yard waste each calendar week. 
(2)  Multifamily residential; commercial; and industrial collection . Multifamily residential, commercial, and industrial refuse collection frequency shall be as necessary to prevent overfilling or the creation of fire hazards or health and nuisance conditions and to maintain the premises in a safe and clean condition, but in no circumstance less than one (1) time each calendar week. 
(b)  Hours of collection . Collection within two hundred feet (200') of residential areas shall not commence prior to 7:00 a.m. nor extend beyond 7:00 p.m. 
(Prior Code, § 6-111; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-27. - Office and telephone required. 
    All licensed refuse haulers shall maintain an office with adequate telephone service and/or a website by which it accepts service requests and complaints. The telephone number and/or website address shall be made readily available to its customers. The refuse hauler shall promptly notify the City in writing of any change in website address, telephone or address. 
(Prior Code, § 6-112; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-28. - Inspections. 
    In order to ensure compliance with City, County and State laws and regulations, the City is authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the City and within the property of all licensed refuse haulers. No inspection shall be made on any residential property unless authorized by the owner, occupant or by due process of law. 
(Prior Code, § 6-113; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-29. - City solid waste program. 
(a)  Established. Effective January 1, 2013, the City shall establish a solid waste utility for the collection of residential solid waste, recycling and yard waste in all R-1 zoning districts by establishing a City solid waste program and contracting with a refuse hauler on behalf of residents as deemed to be in the best interests of the City and its residents. 
(1)  The City Council shall provide for the cost of the solid waste utility out of the general fund, by levy of a tax, or by a service charge to be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by a combination of these methods, as authorized by K.S.A. 12-2104. 
(2)  The rate for the solid waste utility tax or service charge shall be set in an ordinance heretofore adopted or hereafter adopted by the City Council, and as thereafter amended. 
(b)  Regulation of nonresidential solid waste collection. 
(1)  The City will not provide solid waste collection services to institutional, commercial, industrial or business establishments, or to apartments, townhouses or condominiums of four (4) units or more. 
(2)  The regulatory and penalty provisions of this article shall apply to nonresidential properties and it shall be the duty of the owner to provide for collection of all solid waste produced upon all these premises at a standard at least equal to that prescribed in this article. 
(Prior Code, § 6-114; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-30. - Solid waste containers. 
(a)  Residential customers. Each refuse hauler must provide each residential customer with a container, equipped with a lid, for solid waste storage and collection. Residential customers may refuse containers provided by the hauler. If a customer refuses containers provided by hauler, the customer must provide sufficient and adequate containers for storage of solid waste in adequate number to serve the residence. Containers and the area around them shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
(b)  Other customers. The owner or occupant of every multifamily residential, institutional, commercial or business, industrial or agricultural establishment producing solid waste within the City shall provide sufficient and adequate containers for the storage of solid waste in adequate number to serve that establishment and shall maintain the solid waste containers, and the area around them, in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. 
(Prior Code, § 6-118; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-31. - Solid waste storage sites. 
(a)  Residential solid waste, recyclable and yard waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste and recyclable containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner shall have been granted written permission from the City to use public property for these purposes. Commercial storage sites shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public officers and fire inspection personnel. All residential and commercial storage containers shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition at all times and shall be screened in such a manner that they are not visible from any street or roadway, except when placed in position for pickup. 
(b)  No person shall place or store any solid waste, recyclable or yard waste container at any place in front of the building line upon any real property or public rights-of-way in a residential area; except that on the day of collection or up to fifteen (15) hours prior to designated weekly pickup time, the containers may be placed at or near the street curb for collection; provided that each type of refuse is stored in suitable containers or disposal bags that are constructed and maintained so as to prevent the dispersal of the refuse stored therein. Containers shall be moved back behind the building line within twenty-four (24) hours following collection. 
(Prior Code, § 6-119; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-32. - Residential bulky waste collection. 
    Each refuse hauler licensed to provide residential solid waste collection shall offer collection of bulky waste to each residential customer a minimum of one (1) time per month. The cost of bulky rubbish and waste collection shall be included in the base service charge and not as an optional service. 
(Prior Code, § 6-120; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-33. - Residential yard waste collection required. 
    Each refuse hauler licensed to provide residential solid waste collection must provide curbside collection of yard waste as a part of the base service. These refuse haulers must collect yard waste weekly and there shall be no limit on the amount of yard waste collected per residence per week. 
(Prior Code, § 6-121; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-34. - Preparation of yard waste and tree limbs for collection. 
(a)  Yard waste. It is the responsibility of the customer to place all yard waste in biodegradable Kraft paper bags or loose in rigid containers not exceeding sixty-five pounds (65 lbs.) when filled with yard waste material. All yard waste shall be stored and maintained so as to prevent the dispersal of wastes placed therein upon the premises served, upon adjacent premises or upon adjacent public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Tree limbs. Tree limbs and brush shall be placed for collection securely tied in bundles not larger than forty eight inches (48") long; eighteen inches (18") in diameter and weighing no more than sixty-five pounds (65 lbs.) each; loose in rigid containers or biodegradable Kraft paper bags not exceeding sixty-five pounds (65 lbs.) when filled with tree limbs and brush. 
(Prior Code, § 6-122; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-35. - Compost material containers. 
    Any person producing compost material within the corporate limits of the City shall provide sufficient and adequate containers or an enclosed area for the storage of that material in adequate number to serve each dwelling unit and/or establishment and shall maintain the containers or enclosed area in good repair at all times. The storage area shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and shall not produce noxious odors. Further, the storage area shall be screened from view by an enclosure, fence, screen or other suitable means. 
(Prior Code, § 6-123; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-36. - Compost storage sites. 
    Residential compost material containers or the enclosed compost area shall be stored or located upon the residential premises; commercial containers or the enclosed compost area shall be stored or located upon private property unless the owner shall have been granted written permission from the City to use public property for these purposes. No person shall place or store any container or enclosed compost area in front of the building line. 
(Prior Code, § 6-124; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-37. - Disposal of hazardous wastes. 
    All hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, State and Federal regulations. 
(Prior Code, § 6-126; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-38. - Public dumpsters for City residents. 
    At the discretion of the Public Works Director, the City shall have the authority to periodically provide for temporary public dumpster locations within the City for the benefit of the City residents to permit the disposal of yard waste and bulky waste. Residents shall not place material in permanent City dumpsters without the consent of the Public Works Director or his designee. 
(Prior Code, § 6-126; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-39. - Nonresident use prohibited. 
    Nonresidents of the City are hereby prohibited from depositing any type of solid waste within public dumpsters. 
(Prior Code, § 6-127; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-40. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Violate any provision of this article. 
(2)  Deposit refuse in any refuse container other than that owned by them or under their control without the written consent of the owner or party responsible for such container. 
(3)  Interfere in any manner with refuse collection equipment or with refuse haulers in the lawful performance of their duties. 
(4)  Burn refuse, except as specifically permitted in Chapter 5. 
(5)  Dispose of refuse at a facility that does not meet the requirements of Section 12-24. 
(6)  Deposit any refuse upon any City street or upon any other public property or upon private property not owned or legally controlled by the person depositing that refuse. 
(Prior Code, § 6-128; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Secs. 12-41-12-68. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REFUSE HAULER LICENSE 

Sec. 12-69. - License required. 
(a)  City license required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting or transporting solid waste, recyclables or compost in the City without having first obtained a refuse hauler license from the City. All persons desiring to collect and transport residential solid waste within the City shall also be required to collect recyclables and yard waste as more particularly set forth in this article. 
(b)  County hauler license required. No City refuse hauler license shall be issued to any person who has not first obtained any necessary or applicable license or permit from the County in accordance with the County regulations. In addition, the expiration, revocation or other termination of a County license or permit shall have the effect of terminating any City refuse hauler license provided for in this division. 
(c)  Licenses not required. Licenses shall not be required for the removal, hauling or disposal of construction material, earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities or yard waste by a person performing yard maintenance for a resident of the City; however, all such wastes shall be conveyed in vehicles, trucks or receptacles, so constructed and maintained to prevent the material being transported from spilling upon the public highways. 
(Prior Code, § 6-103; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-70. - Application for refuse hauler license; approval. 
(a)  Application. Application for a refuse hauler license shall be made in writing. 
(b)  Approval and issuance. A refuse hauler license shall be issued upon submission of a complete and accurate application; payment of the applicable annual license fee and the provision of insurance as required by Section 12-72. 
(c)  Additional information. All refuse haulers, as a condition of licensure, agree to respond to any and all additional, reasonable requests for information from the City to the best of their ability. Any refuse hauler failing to provide the required documentation or otherwise comply with reasonable requests for information from the City will be found in violation of this division and may have its license revoked by the City. 
(Prior Code, § 6-104; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-71. - License fees. 
    All persons engaged in refuse hauling in the City shall pay the applicable license fee as set forth by the fee schedule as adopted by ordinance. 
(Prior Code, § 6-105; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-72. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  No refuse hauler license shall be issued unless the refuse hauler secures and maintains throughout the term of its license insurance coverage of the types and minimum liability limits as set forth in this division and files with the City a certificate of liability insurance confirming that coverage and listing the City as a certificate holder. 
(1)  Commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis in an amount no less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) bodily injury and property damage per occurrence. Coverage shall include independent contractors and subcontractors. 
(2)  Automobile liability insurance in an amount no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) bodily injury and property damage combined single limit, including all owned (if any), hired and non-owned autos. 
(b)  The City shall be given thirty (30) days' advance written notice, by registered mail, of policy cancellation. Failure to maintain the insurance coverage required in this division shall be grounds for revocation of a refuse hauler license. 
(Prior Code, § 6-106; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-73. - License revocation. 
    The City may revoke any refuse hauler license issued to a refuse hauler under this division when it is determined that there has been substantial noncompliance by the refuse hauler with any standard or requirement of this division. The City, before revoking any refuse hauler license, shall give the licensee at least ten (10) days' written notice of the basis for the revocation and the opportunity for a hearing before the City Administrator at which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question. The City Administrator may uphold the revocation; rescind the revocation; and if applicable, specify certain conditions and stipulations associated therewith. All revocations affirmed by the City Administrator may be appealed to the City Council upon written notice of appeal, filed with the Assistant City Clerk, within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice of revocation. 
(Prior Code, § 6-129; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Secs. 12-74-12-104. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECYCLING 

Sec. 12-105. - Mandatory unlimited residential recycling. 
    Each refuse hauler licensed to provide residential solid waste collection, pursuant to Section 12-69(a), must provide, for each residential customer as a part of its basic service charge and not as an optional service, curbside collection of an unlimited volume of recyclables. All recyclables properly placed for collection by the residential customer shall be collected as least weekly. 
(Prior Code, § 6-115; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-106. - Residential recyclable container specifications. 
    Each such refuse hauler must provide each residential customer with a container for recyclables. 
(Prior Code, § 6-116; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Sec. 12-107. - Preparation of recyclables for collection. 
    The owner or occupant of any dwelling unit that recycles shall separate recyclable materials from all other solid waste and place the recyclable materials at curbside for collection and shall maintain the recyclable containers and the area surrounding it in a neat and clean condition at all times. 
(Prior Code, § 6-117; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 6-11-2012) 
Secs. 12-108-12-127. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWERS 

Sec. 12-128. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse so to connect any building with the sanitary sewer system as provided for in this article more than ten (10) days after being notified in writing by the Building Inspector to do so shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that said failure, neglect or refusal to so connect shall exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Prior Code, § 12-104; Ord. No. 210) 
Sec. 12-129. - Sewer connections may be required. 
    Whenever it may be necessary in the judgment of the Building Inspector, for the protection of the health of the public, persons and property owners owning dwelling houses or buildings within the City, which buildings are, or shall be located near a sewer, or in a block within any sewer district in said City through which a sewer extends, shall make connections with said sewer system of the City for the purpose of disposing of all substances from any such building affecting the public health which may be lawfully and properly disposed of by means of such sewer. 
(Prior Code, § 12-101; Ord. No. 210) 
Sec. 12-130. - City may connect. 
    If any person fails, neglects or refuses to connect any building with the sewer system of the City as provided for in this article, for more than ten (10) days after being notified in writing by the Building Inspector to do so, the City Council may cause the premises and building to be connected with the sewer system. 
(Prior Code, § 12-102; Ord. No. 210) 
Secs. 12-131-12-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 12-159-12-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY 

Sec. 12-185. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bonds means revenue or general obligation bonds or notes heretofore or hereafter issued to finance the costs of stormwater management. 
    Building permit means a permit issued by the Building Inspector/Codes Administrator which permits construction on a structure. 
    Costs of capital improvement means costs incurred in providing capital improvements to the stormwater management system or any portion thereof, including, without limitation, alteration, enlargement, extension, improvement, construction, reconstruction, and development of the stormwater management system; professional services and studies connected thereto; principal and interest on bonds heretofore or hereafter issued, including payment of delinquencies of principal and interest due on bonds that are otherwise payable from special assessments; studies related to the operation of the system; costs of the stormwater management service fee study, performed to establish stormwater management service fees for the stormwater utility and to determine other start-up costs of the stormwater utility; costs related to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit study, application, negotiation and implementation, as mandated by Federal and State laws and regulations; acquisition of real and personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation or otherwise, for the stormwater management system or for its protection; and costs associated with purchasing equipment, computers, furniture, etc., necessary for the operation of the system or the utility. 
    Debt service means an amount equal to the sum of all interest payable on bonds during a fiscal year, and any principal installments payable on the bonds during such fiscal year. 
    Developed property means real property, other than undisturbed property. 
    Director means the person appointed by the City to be the Director of the City's Public Works Department or the Director's designee. 
    Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms designed, used or intended for living quarters for one (1) family, with a kitchen, sleeping and sanitary facilities in a single-family, duplex, multifamily or condominium residential property. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) means a unit of measure, established by a Governing Body resolution or ordinance, that is equal to the average impervious area of single-family residential property with a single-family detached dwelling unit located thereon within the City's limits. 
    Equivalent dwelling unit rate or EDU rate means a stormwater management service fee, established by Governing Body ordinance, charged for each EDU. 
    Exempt property means public right-of-way, public trails, public streets, public alleys, public sidewalks, and public lands and/or easements upon which the public stormwater management system is constructed and/or located. 
    Fiscal year means a twelve (12) month period commencing on January 1 of any year. 
    Impervious area means the total number of square feet of hard surface area on a given property that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil matrix, or causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow, than it would enter under natural conditions as undisturbed property. The term "impervious area" includes, but is not limited to, roofs, roof extensions, driveways, pavement and athletic courts. 
    Nonresidential developed property means developed property other than residential developed property. 
    Operating budget means the annual stormwater utility operating budget adopted by the City for the succeeding fiscal year. 
    Operations and maintenance means, without limitation, the current expenses, paid or secured, for operation, maintenance and repair and minor replacement of the system, as calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices, and includes, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, insurance premiums, administrative expenses including professional services, equipment costs, labor costs, and the cost of materials and supplies used for current operations. 
    Public stormwater management system means all elements of the stormwater management system that have been officially dedicated to and accepted by the City. 
    Residential developed property means developed property used for single-family detached dwelling units and/or up to and including four (4) attached dwelling units. 
    Revenues means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals, charges or other income received by the stormwater utility in connection with the management and operation of the stormwater management system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account, as calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices. 
    Stormwater management service fee means a fee authorized by Charter Ordinance 18 and this division, as set forth in a resolution or an ordinance adopted or amended by the Governing Body, established to pay operation and maintenance, costs of capital improvements, debt service associated with the stormwater management system and other costs included in the operating budget. 
    Stormwater management system, sewer system or system means storm sewers that exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or that are hereafter established, and all appurtenances necessary in maintaining and operating the same, including, but not limited to, pumping stations; enclosed storm sewers; outfall sewers; surface drains; street, curb and alley improvements associated with storm or surface water improvements; natural and manmade wetlands; channels; ditches; rivers; streams; wet and dry bottom basins; and other flood control facilities and works for the collection, transportation, conveyance, pumping, treatment, control, management, and disposal of stormwater or surface water or pollutants originating from or carried by stormwater or surface water. 
    Stormwater utility or utility means the utility created by this division to operate, maintain and improve the stormwater management system and for all other purposes, as set forth in this division. 
    Undisturbed property means real property that has not been altered from its natural condition in a manner such that the entrance of water into the soil matrix is prevented or retarded. 
(Prior Code, § 12-201; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-186. - Creation of a stormwater utility. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3101 et seq., as modified by City Charter Ordinance No. 18, the City's general home rule authority, nuisance abatement authority, police powers and all other authority, the Governing Body does establish a stormwater utility and declares its intention to operate, construct, maintain, repair and replace the public stormwater management system and operate the stormwater utility. 
(Prior Code, § 12-202; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-187. - Findings and determinations. 
    The Governing Body finds, determines, and declares that the elements of the stormwater management system providing for the collection, conveyance, detention, retention, treatment and release of stormwater benefit and provide services to real property within the incorporated City limits. The benefits of the stormwater management system include, but are not limited to, the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention, retention, treatment and release of stormwater; the reduction of hazards to property and life resulting from stormwater runoff; improvement in general health and welfare through reduction of undesirable stormwater conditions; improvement of water quality in the stormwater and surface water system and their receiving waters; and appropriate balancing between development and preservation of the natural environment. 
(Prior Code, § 12-203; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-188. - Administration. 
    The stormwater utility, under the supervision of the Director, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Administer the acquisition, design, construction, maintenance, operation, extension and replacement of the stormwater management system, including any real and personal property that is, will become a part of, or will protect the system; 
(2)  Administer and enforce this division and all regulations, guidelines and procedures relating to the design, construction, maintenance, operation and alteration of the stormwater management system, including, but not limited to, the flow rate, volume, quality and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed thereby; 
(3)  Advise the Governing Body on matters relating to the stormwater management system; 
(4)  Review plans concerning the creation, design, construction, extension and replacement of the stormwater management system and make recommendations to the Governing Body; 
(5)  Make recommendations to the Governing Body concerning the adoption of ordinances, resolutions, guidelines and regulations in furtherance of this division and/or to protect and maintain water quality within the stormwater management system, in compliance with water quality standards established by State, County, Regional and/or Federal agencies, as now adopted or hereafter adopted or amended; 
(6)  Analyze the cost of services and benefits provided by the stormwater management system and the structure of fees, service charges, fines and other revenues of the stormwater utility at least once each year; 
(7)  Make recommendations to the Governing Body concerning the cost of service and benefits provided by the stormwater management system and the structure of fees, service charges, fines and other revenues of the stormwater utility; and 
(8)  Administer programs established pursuant to this division or pursuant to ordinances, resolutions, regulations or guidelines hereafter adopted by the Governing Body that provide for credits and/or incentives which reduce stormwater management service fees imposed against properties. 
(Prior Code, § 12-204; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-189. - Operating budget. 
    The City shall, as part of its annual budget process, adopt an operating budget for the stormwater utility for the next following fiscal year. The operating budget shall conform with State budget law (K.S.A. 79-2925 through 79-2937), City policy and generally accepted accounting practices. 
(Prior Code, § 12-205; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-190. - Stormwater management service fee. 
(a)  Service fee established . Subject to the provisions of this division, there is imposed on each and every residential developed property and nonresidential developed property, other than property that is not serviced by the stormwater management system or is exempt property, a stormwater management service fee. This stormwater management service fee shall be determined and set by the provisions of this division in accordance with the EDU and the EDU rate. The fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the Governing Body and may be amended from time to time by the Governing Body. 
(b)  Stormwater management service fee for residential developed property . The stormwater management service fee for residential developed property shall be the EDU rate multiplied by the number of individual dwelling units existing on the property. In the event of a newly constructed dwelling unit, the charge for the stormwater management service fee attributable to that dwelling unit shall commence upon the issuance of the building permit for that dwelling unit. The minimum stormwater management service fee for any residential developed property shall be equal to one (1) EDU rate. 
(c)  Stormwater management service fee for nonresidential developed property . 
(1)  The stormwater management service fee for nonresidential developed property shall be the EDU rate multiplied by a numerical factor calculated by dividing the total impervious area of the property by the number of square feet in one (1) EDU. In performing this calculation, the numerical factor shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. The minimum stormwater management service fee for any nonresidential developed property shall be equal to one (1) EDU rate. In the event of newly developed nonresidential developed property, the charge for the stormwater management service fee attributable to that development shall commence upon the issuance of the building permit. In the event of additional development to property that is already developed property, the charge for the stormwater management service fee attributable to that additional development shall commence upon the issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  For nonresidential developed property with joint users of common impervious areas, the Director shall calculate and allocate the pro rata stormwater management service fee among the users. 
(d)  Dwelling unit and impervious surface calculation . The Director shall initially, and from time to time, determine the number of dwelling units located on residential developed property to establish the stormwater management service fee, as provided for in Subsection (b) of this section. Nonresidential developed property in the City shall have its square footage of impervious area calculated to establish the stormwater management service fee, as provided for in Subsection (c) of this section. The Director shall make the initial calculation with respect to existing nonresidential developed property and may from time to time change this calculation from the information and data deemed pertinent by the Director. With respect to property proposed to be nonresidential developed property, the applicant for development approval shall submit square footage impervious area calculations, in accordance with the submission requirements, as set forth in the applicable section of Chapter 15. 
(Prior Code, § 12-206; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-191. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Owners of residential or nonresidential developed property, with respect to which a stormwater management service fee has been imposed, who disagree with the calculation of the stormwater management service fee; or with whether their property is served by the stormwater utility may appeal the calculation or finding to the Governing Body. The owner/appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days following the determination of the Director from which the appeal is being taken. The appealing party, by the date set in writing by the Director, which shall not be less than seven (7) days, shall provide information concerning the basis of the appeal, including a land survey prepared by a registered surveyor showing dwelling units, total property area, type of surface material and impervious area, as appropriate, and any other information that the Director shall request in writing to the appellant. The Director may waive the submission of a land survey, if the Director determines that the survey is not necessary to make a determination on the appeal. Based on information provided, the Governing Body shall make a determination as to whether the stormwater management service fee should be adjusted or eliminated for the subject property. The City Administrator shall notify the appellant in writing of the decision. 
(b)  In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate, by clear and convincing evidence, that the determination of the Director, from which the appeal is being taken, is erroneous. 
(c)  The filing of a notice of appeal shall not stay the imposition, calculation or duty to pay the fee. The appellant shall pay the stormwater management service fee, as stated in the billing, to the County Treasurer. If the Governing Body determines that the appellant should not pay a fee, pay a fee amount less than the amount appealed from, or receive a credit, the City shall issue a check to the appellant in the appropriate amount within ten (10) business days of the date of the applicable written decision, which in no event shall be more than the amount of the fee paid by the appellant as of the date the check is issued. If the credit is larger than the amount paid and additional fees are due for the same tax year, the City will issue the remaining credit within ten (10) business days after the remaining fees have been paid in full. 
(d)  The decision of the Governing Body shall be final. 
(Prior Code, § 12-207; Ord. No. 1346) 
Sec. 12-192. - Stormwater management service fee collection. 
(a)  The stormwater management service fee shall be billed by the County Clerk and collected by the County Treasurer. The stormwater management service fee shall be shown as a separate item on the County's annual ad valorem property a tax statement, in accordance with the procedures established in an inter-local cooperation agreement, pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2908, between the City and the County, as hereby authorized. The payment of stormwater management service fee bills for any given property shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property that is provided service by the stormwater system. 
(b)  Stormwater management fees shall be subject to interest and penalties for late payment, which interest and penalties shall be the same as that imposed for late payment of ad valorem property taxes collected by the County, and, as and to the extent permitted by applicable law, shall be assessed, shall constitute a lien and be collected by the County in the same manner as late charges are assessed and collected by the County for ad valorem property taxes, regardless of whether the stormwater management service fees were incurred when a property owner was in possession of the property or a non-owner was in possession of the property. 
(Prior Code, § 12-208) 
Sec. 12-193. - Stormwater utility fund. 
    Stormwater management service fees collected by the City shall be paid into a fund that is hereby created and shall be known as the Stormwater Utility Fund. This fund shall be used for the purpose of paying costs of capital improvements, administration of the stormwater utility, operation, maintenance and debt service of the stormwater management system, and to carry out all other lawful purposes of the utility. In addition, fund transfers from this fund to the bond and interest fund may be made to pay debt service on bonds issued by the City to fund the City's stormwater management activities. 
(Prior Code, § 12-209) 
Sec. 12-194. - EDU rate. 
    The EDU and the EDU rate that is used to determine the charge for each residential developed property and nonresidential developed property shall be as established in an ordinance or a resolution heretofore adopted or hereafter adopted by the Governing Body, and as thereafter amended. 
(Prior Code, § 12-210) 
Secs. 12-195-12-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 12-212. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The purpose of this division shall be to prevent the discharge of pollutants from land and activities within the City into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and/or into surface waters. 
(b)  The Governing Body hereby finds that pollutants are discharged into surface waters, both through inappropriate non-stormwater discharges into the MS4 or the surface waters directly, and through the wash off and transport of pollutants found on the land and built surfaces by stormwater during rainfall events. 
(c)  Further, the Governing Body hereby finds that such discharge of pollutants may lead to increased risks of disease and harm to individuals, particularly children, who come into contact with the water; may degrade the quality of this water for human uses, such as drinking, irrigation, recreation, and industry; and may damage the natural ecosystems of rivers, streams, lakes and wetlands, leading to a decline in the diversity and abundance of plants and animals. 
(d)  Further, the Governing Body hereby finds that this division will promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the storm drainage system. 
(e)  Further, the Governing Body hereby finds that these discharges are inconsistent with the provisions and goals of the Clean Water Act, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), and other Federal and State requirements for water quality and environmental preservation. 
(f)  Further, the Governing Body hereby finds that a reasonable establishment of restrictions and regulations on activities within the City is necessary to eliminate or minimize these discharges of pollutants, to protect the health and safety of citizens, to preserve economic and ecological value of existing water resources within the City and within downstream communities, and to comply with the provisions of the City's responsibilities under the Clean Water Act and the NPDES program. 
(Prior Code, § 12-302; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-213. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations when used in this act shall have the designated meanings: 
BMP Best Management Practice CFR Code of Federal Regulations EPA Environmental Protection Agency HHW Household Hazardous Waste KDHE Kansas Department of Health and Environment MS4 Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System PST Petroleum Storage Tank  
(Prior Code, § 12-303; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-214. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good-house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Car means any vehicle meeting the definition for passenger car, passenger van, pickup truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or motor home. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Director means the Director of Public Works or the Director's authorized representative. 
    Discharge means the addition or introduction, directly or indirectly, of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance into the MS4 or surface waters. 
    Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, retail and commercial establishments, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste. 
    Extremely hazardous substance means any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR 355, Emergency Planning and Notification. 
    Fertilizer means a substance or compound that contains a plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two (2) or more fertilizers. 
    Hazardous household waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261 or K.A.R. 28-29-23b. 
    Hazardous substance means any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR 302. 
    Hazardous waste means any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR 261. 
    Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances, (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, private streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    NPDES means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements under Sections 307, 402, 318 and 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or the State, which authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to: petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, bio-fuel, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
    Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or migrate any pest, or substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant. 
    Petroleum product means a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle, boat or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil and #1 and #2 diesel fuel. 
    Pollutant means any substance or material that contaminates or adversely alters the physical, chemical or biological properties of the waters, including changes in temperature, taste, odor, turbidity, or color of the water. This substance or material may include, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, spoil waste, incinerator residue, sewage, pet and livestock waste, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil, yard waste, hazardous household wastes, oil and petroleum products, used motor oil, antifreeze, litter, pesticides, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Property owner means the named property owner as indicated by the records of the County Records and Tax Administration. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the MS4 and/or surface waters. 
    Sanitary sewer means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances that carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to a sewage treatment plant and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to a sewage treatment plant for treatment. 
    Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Surface waters means any body of water classified as surface waters by the State, including streams, rivers, creeks, brooks, sloughs, draws, arroyos, canals, springs, seeps, cavern streams, alluvial aquifers associated with these surface waters, lakes, manmade reservoirs, oxbow lakes, ponds, and wetlands, as well as any other body of water classified by the Federal government as a "water of the United States." 
    Waste means any garbage, refuse, sludge or other discarded material that is abandoned or committed to treatment, storage or disposal, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, commercial mining, community and agricultural activities. The term "waste" does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or irrigation return flows or solid or dissolved materials or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permits under the State. The Federal definition of solid waste is found at 40 CFR 257.2. 
    Water quality standard means the law or regulation that consists of the beneficial designated use or uses of a water body, the numeric and narrative water quality criteria that are necessary to protect the use or uses of that particular water body and an anti-degradation statement. 
(Prior Code, § 12-304; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-215. - General prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall release or cause to be released into the MS4, or into any surface water within the City, any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater that is free of pollutants, except as allowed in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Unless identified by the City or KDHE as a significant source of pollutants to surface water, the following non-stormwater discharges are deemed acceptable and not a violation of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Diverted stream flow; 
(3)  Rising groundwater; 
(4)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined under 40 CFR 35.2005(20) to separate storm sewers; 
(5)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(6)  Contaminated groundwater if authorized by KDHE and approved by the City; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(10)  Irrigation waters; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Water from crawlspace pumps; 
(13)  Footing drains; 
(14)  Individual residential car washing; 
(15)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(16)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, excluding filter backwash; 
(17)  Street wash waters (excluding street sweepings which have been removed from the street); 
(18)  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; 
(19)  Heat pump discharge waters (residential only); 
(20)  Treated wastewater or other discharges meeting requirements of an NPDES permit; and 
(21)  Other discharges determined not to be a significant source of pollutants to waters of the State, a public health hazard or a nuisance. 
(c)  Discharges specified in writing by the Director, as being necessary to protect public health and safety are permitted. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (b) of this section, any discharge shall be prohibited by this section if the discharge in question has been determined by the Director to be a source of a pollutants to the MS4 or to surface waters, written notice of such determination has been provided to the property owner or person responsible for these discharges and the discharge has occurred more than ten (10) days after that notice is provided. 
(Prior Code, § 12-305; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-216. - Specific prohibitions and duties. 
    The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in Section 12-215, but are provided to address specific discharges that are frequently found or are known to occur: 
(1)  No person shall release or allow to be released any of the following substances into the MS4: 
a.  Any new or used petroleum product or oil; 
b.  Any industrial waste; 
c.  Any hazardous substance or hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste; 
d.  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap or grease interceptor waste, holding tank waste, or grit trap waste; 
e.  Any garbage, rubbish or other waste; 
f.  Any new or used paints, including latex-based paints, oil-based paints, stains, varnish, and primers, as well as cleaning solvents and other associated products; 
g.  Any yard wastes which have been moved or gathered by a person; 
h.  Any wastewater that contains soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or surfactant based cleaner from a commercial motor vehicle wash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used motor vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment; 
i.  Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent or any surfactant based cleaner; 
j.  Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug or carpet cleaning; 
k.  Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant or other cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement, where any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all those materials have been previously removed; 
l.  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emission filter or the blowdown from a boiler; 
m.  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or discharge resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying that material; 
n.  Any runoff, washdown water or waste from any animal pen, kennel, fowl or livestock containment area or any pet wastes generally; 
o.  Any filter backwash from a swimming pool or fountain, except that nothing in this division shall be construed as to require the alteration of the filter discharge plumbing of an existing swimming pool, fountain or spa if such plumbing was compliant with applicable State, Federal, and local regulations at the time of construction; 
p.  Any swimming pool, fountain or spa water containing a harmful level of chlorine (greater than zero (0) parts per million), muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the water or during cleaning of the facility; 
q.  Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination, if it contains a harmful level of chlorine (greater than zero (0) parts per million) at the point of entry into the MS4 or surface waters; 
r.  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking or storage yard; 
s.  Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4; 
t.  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST) or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by leaking PST; or any discharge of pumped, confined or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge has received an NPDES permit from the State; or 
u.  Any other discharge that causes or contributes to causing the City to violate a State water quality standard, the City's NPDES stormwater permit or any State-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(2)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures. 
(3)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4. No property owner shall allow this type of connection to continue in use on his property. 
(4)  No person shall use pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers, except in accordance with manufacturer recommendations. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be stored, transported and disposed of in a manner to prevent release to the MS4. 
(5)  No person shall tamper with, destroy, vandalize or render inoperable any BMPs that have been installed for the purpose of eliminating or minimizing pollutant discharges, nor shall any person fail to install or fail to properly maintain any BMPs that have been required by the City or by other local, State, or Federal jurisdictions. 
(Prior Code, § 12-306; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-217. - Inspection and detection program. 
    The Director is authorized to develop and implement a plan to actively detect and eliminate prohibited discharges and connections to the MS4 or surface waters within the City. This plan may include, but is not limited to, periodic and random inspections of facilities and businesses, particularly those most associated with potentially prohibited discharges; visual surveys of exterior practices; inspection, sampling and analyses of discharges from outfalls of the MS4, particularly during dry weather periods; manhole and pipe inspections to trace discharges through the system to point of origin; education on pollution prevention; and receipt of complaints and information from the public regarding known or suspected discharges. 
(Prior Code, § 12-307; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-218. - Release reporting and cleanup. 
(a)  Any person responsible for the release of any prohibited material that may flow, leach, enter or otherwise be introduced into the MS4 or surface waters shall take all necessary steps to ensure the containment and cleanup of that release. 
(b)  In the event of a release of hazardous materials, the person responsible shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. 
(c)  In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person responsible shall notify the Director in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the Director within three (3) business days of the phone notice. 
(Prior Code, § 12-308; Ord. No. 1384) 
Sec. 12-219. - Enforcement; designation of officer; abatement. 
    The Director or his appointed representative shall be designated as the public officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this division. The public officer shall authorize the investigation of violations of this division. If it is determined that a violation of this division exists, the officer shall declare that condition a nuisance, and is authorized to pursue abatement and enforcement procedures as specified in Article II of Chapter 6. 
(Prior Code, § 12-309; Ord. No. 1384) 
Secs. 12-220-12-246. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 12-247. - Purpose and intent. 
    To promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City, these stormwater management regulations are hereby enacted for the general purpose of assuring the proper balance between man's use of land and the preservation of a safe and beneficial environment. More specifically, the provisions of these regulations, as amended from time to time, are intended to reduce property damage and human suffering and to minimize the hazards of personal injury and loss of life due to flooding, to be accomplished through erosion and sediment control standards and the approval of stormwater management plans, pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, which: 
(1)  Establish the stormwater management systems; 
(2)  Define and establish stormwater management practices and use restrictions; 
(3)  Establish guidelines for handling increases in volume and peak discharges of runoff; 
(4)  Protect all habitable structures from flooding; 
(5)  Designate the City Board of Zoning Appeals as the technical review committee to review decisions of the Public Works Director; 
(6)  Balance and promote the coexistence of the natural environment and quality, planned development; 
(7)  Assist in the City's efforts to comply with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase 2 Post Construction Stormwater Management regulations issued by the Environmental Protection Agency and administered by the State Department of Health and Environment; 
(8)  Provide effective stormwater management; manage areas prone to flooding to protect human life and property from damage due to flooding and erosion; 
(9)  Improve water quality and reduce water pollution; 
(10)  Reduce the percentage of imperviousness, peak flows and velocity of stormwater runoff discharged into the stormwater system; 
(11)  Control construction site impacts on stormwater; prevent non-stormwater discharges into the storm sewer system; protect natural stream assets; 
(12)  Protect and, where possible, enhance valuable natural water resources; 
(13)  Incorporate, where possible, multiple uses into stormwater management facilities; 
(14)  Regulate land disturbance, filling, stripping and soil storage in connection with the clearing and grading of land for construction-related or other purposes and require best management practices when these activities are undertaken; and 
(15)  Encourage responsible development and minimize the costs of development. 
(Prior Code, § 12-401; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-248. - Applicability. 
    Any person proposing new development or re-development within the City shall apply to the Public Works Director for approval of a stormwater management plan as specified in this division. No land shall be developed except upon approval of this plan. Any person disturbing a area greater than one (1) acre, whether singularly or cumulative or in one (1) or multiple phases, shall comply with the erosion and sediment control standards of the provisions of Section 12-249. 
(Prior Code, § 12-402; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-249. - Erosion and sediment control standards. 
(a)  Authority . The Public Works Director is authorized to adopt erosion and sediment control standards for construction within the City. 
(b)  Contents and principles . Standards include design criteria, standard drawings and specifications. Standards are based on the following principles: 
(1)  Fit the development to existing site conditions; 
(2)  Minimize the extent of exposure; 
(3)  Minimize duration of exposure; 
(4)  Break work activities into phases when possible; 
(5)  When possible, protect disturbed areas from any unnecessary run-on of stormwater from adjacent sites, at least during the construction period; 
(6)  Stabilize disturbed areas; 
(7)  Keep runoff velocities low; 
(8)  Retain sediment on the site; 
(9)  Inspect and maintain control measures; 
(10)  Use performance measures and outcomes; and 
(11)  Timely employ and maintain all measures. 
(c)  Design criteria . Division V - Design Criteria, Section 5100 - Erosion and Sediment Control (Section 5100) of the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria, published by the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association (KC-APWA), is hereby adopted by reference as the design criteria for the City, except as amended below. This adoption shall apply to the revision of Section 5100 adopted and approved by KC-APWA on August 13, 2003. Any future revisions of Section 5100 shall not be in force until adopted by the City in writing. The following exception shall apply: 
(1)  Section 5102, "Education, Training, and Certification" shall not apply. 
(2)  Section 5103 "Plan Requirements," add the following: 
The erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan shall be on separate plan sheets from other construction plans. Except when waived by the City for simple or limited construction, separate ESC plan sheets shall be provided for the following stages of construction: 
a.  Initial BMP installation and perimeter controls prior to land disturbance; and 
b.  BMP installations after completion of all site improvements and site grading but prior to final stabilization. Additionally, this plan must show staging/phasing of construction either on separate plan sheets or with a "staging chart" during the following project stages (when applicable): 
1.  Sanitary sewer installation. 
2.  Mass grading. 
3.  Storm sewer installation. 
4.  Street construction. 
5.  During construction of buildings on the site.. 
(3)  Section 5103.3 "Verification of Design Performance" shall not apply. 
(4)  Section 5104.1 "Single-Family Residential Lot"; Template 5104-1; and the "Single-Family Residential Standard Design Booklet" shall not apply. The guidance provided in the City of Overland Park publication "Single-Family Residential Erosion and Sediment Control Standards," January 2004, is hereby adopted by reference as Template 5104-1. Any future revisions of such provisions shall not be in force until adopted by the City in writing. One copy of this document shall be stamped or marked "Official Copy" and filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. 
(5)  Section 5108.1 "Straw Bale Barrier," add the following paragraph: 
    Straw bales are discouraged for general use and are prohibited for use as ditch checks. 
(6)  Section 5108.3 "Sediment Fence," delete Table 5108-1 and add the following: 
a.  Site perimeter and protection of paved areas. Perimeters of all construction sites and all paved areas must be adequately protected from erosion by use of silt fences or other equivalent perimeter controls. Controls at the site perimeter and at edge of pavement shall meet minimum requirements indicated in Table 5108-1A below. 
Table 5108-1A
Silt Fence Protection for Paved Areas and Site Perimeters Maximum Flow 
Path Length (4) Average Ground Slope <3% 3% to 5% >5% <20 feet No control required (1) Single row (1) Single row 20-100 feet Single row Single row Single row 100-200 feet Single row Single row Double row (2) 200-300 feet Single row Double row (2) Double row (2) 300+ feet Double row (2) Double row (2) Double row (2)  
Notes: 
(1)  When perimeter of the site is a developed yard or a stream corridor, a silt fence or other barrier shall always be provided. 
(2)  A wire reinforced silt fence in accordance with APWA Standard Detail ESC-12 may be substituted for a double row of standard silt fence. 
(3)  The requirements in this table are minimums. If silt fence indicated in this table do not satisfactorily control erosion, the City may require additional controls. 
(4)  Flow path length is measured from the top of the watershed for each silt fence location. Do not reduce length due to intermediate silt fence placed on the slope. 
In addition to site perimeters and paved areas, interior portions of the site must be protected through use of silt fence or alternative BMPs in accordance with the following: 
b.  Interior site silt fence placement . Silt fence or equivalent controls shall be installed on all disturbed sites at the following maximum intervals: 
Average Ground Slope Spacing <3% 150 feet 3%-5% 100 feet 5%-10% 75 feet 10%-20% 50 feet >20% N/A*  
*For slopes exceeding 20%, provide silt fence at the toe of slope, but use alternative controls along the slope. 
(7)  Section 5108.12 "Temporary Sediment Basin," add the following paragraph: 
a.  Applicability . Temporary silt basins are required for all site discharges from sites with disturbed areas exceeding ten (10) acres in any sub-basin or watershed. The City may waive this requirement on a case-by-case basis when installation of this type of basin is not feasible due to construction or site constraints. Phased construction shall generally not be considered a constraint that will relieve this requirement. For residential subdivision development, temporary withholding or phased release of one (1) or more residential lots may be necessary to allow adequate area for sediment basin facilities. When existing lakes, other water bodies or sensitive areas are located immediately downstream from a construction site, the City may require silt basins for discharges from sub-basins smaller than ten (10) acres. Additionally, any earthen stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to act as a sediment basin during the construction period unless waived by the City. 
b.  Design requirements, in general. 
1.  Maximum drainage area. Maximum drainage area to a single sediment basin shall be forty (40) acres unless approved by the City. Basins serving greater than forty (40) acres shall require hydrograph routing computations. 
2.  Design inflow/outflow. Design inflow/outflow for sediment basins serving less than forty (40) acres may be computed without considering hydrograph attenuation due to storage. Rational method flow computations are acceptable for basins serving forty (40) or less acres. 
3.  Construction drawings. The construction drawings shall indicate all of the following design data. It may be included in a table or shown on the plan/profile of the basin: 
(i)  Hydrology/hydrologic data. 
A.  Tributary area to basin. 
B.  Fifty percent (50%) (two (2) year) design flow to basin. 
C.  Four percent (4%) (twenty-five (25) year) design flow to basin. 
D.  Fifty percent (50%) (two (2) year) design stormwater surface elevation. 
E.  Four percent (4%) (twenty-five (25) year) design stormwater surface elevation. 
(ii)  Sediment basin data. 
A.  Required sediment storage volume. 
B.  Sediment basin bottom elevation. 
C.  Sediment basin cleanout elevation. 
D.  Permanent pool elevation (if not a dry pond). 
E.  Dewatering device connection to riser pipe elevation. 
F.  Top of principal spillway riser elevation. 
G.  Emergency spillway elevation. 
H.  Top of dam elevation. 
(iii)  Basin shape data. 
A.  A = Area at normal pool (or at bottom of dewatering device if dry pond). 
B.  L = Flow path length for all discharges into pond. 
C.  We = Effective Width = A/L. 
D.  Length to width ratio = L/We (if less than two (2), baffles are required). 
(iv)  Principal spillway data. 
A.  Riser pipe diameter. 
B.  Barrel (outflow) pipe diameter. 
(v)  Dewatering device. 
A.  Type of dewatering device. 
B.  Size and spacing of perforations (See Table 5108.12A below for additional design guidance). 
(vi)  Emergency spillway data. 
A.  Four percent (4%) design storm depth in spillway. 
B.  Four percent (4%) design storm discharge velocity. 
Table 5108.12A
Drawdown Mechanism Sizing Chart Tributary Drainage Area Perforated Riser Hole Diameter (1) Single Column Riser (inches) 4-Column Riser (inches) 12-Column Riser (inches) Skimmer (inches) 3 to 5 acres 1.0 N/A N/A 2.0 5.1 to 10 acres 1.3 0.5 N/A 2.6 10.1 to 15 acres N/A 0.7 N/A 3.3 15.1 to 20 acres N/A 0.8 0.5 4.0 20.1 to 25 acres N/A 0.9 0.5 4.4 25.1 to 30 acres N/A 1.0 0.6 4.8 30.1 to 35 acres N/A 1.1 0.6 5.1 35.1 to 40 acres N/A 1.2 0.7 5.5  
Notes: 
(1)  Perforated riser hole diameters based on 6-inch on center spacing vertically. 
(2)  Minimum diameter :1/2 inch; Maximum diameter: 11/2 inch. 
(3)  Source of data: Interpolated from Penn State University Fact Sheet #F253: "Controlling Dewater of Sediment Basins." 
(4)  Drawdown based on 134 CY/acre storage volume and 49 hour target drawdown period. 
4.  Storage design requirements. 
(i)  If the length to width ratio is less than two (2), interior silt fence baffles shall be provided to reduce short circuiting of the basin. 
(ii)  The storage volume shall be one hundred and thirty-four (134) cubic yards per tributary acre to the basin. The tributary area shall include all areas that drain to the basin, including any offsite areas or undisturbed areas. 
(iii)  All storage shall be considered "dry" storage. A permanent pool may be allowed on a case-by-case basis when the sediment basin will become a permanent water feature for the site, or if adequate safety measures are employed. 
5.  Interior basin slopes. Interior basin slopes shall not exceed three to one (3:1). Outside embankment slopes shall not exceed two and one-half to one (2.5:1). 
6.  Principal spillway requirements. 
(i)  The principal spillway shall be designed to pass the fifty percent (50%) (two (2) year) storm without overtopping the emergency spillway. 
(ii)  For drainage basins less than ten (10) acres, a rock check dam around a horizontal discharge pipe may be used in lieu of a riser pipe. 
(iii)  The principal spillway shall include a drawdown device designed to empty the silt basin in not less than twenty-four (24) hours and not more than forty-eight (48) hours. Acceptable devices include a floating skimmer (preferred) to draw water from the surface, a perforated riser, and perforated drainage tube attached to the principal spillway riser. 
(iv)  The principal spillway shall include a trash rack or other device to prevent clogging. 
(v)  The principal spillway riser pipe, and outflow pipe shall be a minimum diameter of fifteen inches (15"). 
(vi)  The principal spillway riser pipe shall include a Red Painted line to delineate the storage level when sediment storage has reduced the sediment storage to seventy-five percent (75%) of the design volume. (Typically, one hundred (100) cubic yards per acre for a basin designed for one hundred and thirty-four (134) cubic yards per acre). The line shall be clearly marked "Cleanout Level." 
7.  Emergency spillway design. 
(i)  Emergency spillways shall be located in a non-fill location when feasible and shall be lined with a non-erodible material, such as rip-rap or turf reinforcement mat. 
(ii)  The emergency spillway shall be located a minimum of one foot (1') above the principal spillway overflow elevation. 
(iii)  The emergency spillway shall be designed for the four percent (4%) (twenty-five (25) year) storm. A minimum of one foot (1') freeboard must be provided from the four percent (4%) (twenty-five (25) year) design storm elevation to the top of dam. 
(iv)  Emergency spillways can be omitted with approval of the City if the primary spillway is designed for the four percent (4%) storm and the tributary area is less than twenty (20) acres. If the emergency spillway is omitted, a minimum of two feet (2') of freeboard must be provided from the four percent (4%) design storm elevation to the top of dam. 
8.  Maintenance/safety considerations. 
(i)  The permit holder or contractor shall clean out deposited sediment when the sediment storage exceeds the level of the cleanout mark. 
(ii)  Sediment basins shall be fenced using construction fencing or other material for safety reasons and include warning signs reading "Danger, Keep Out." 
(8)  Section 5108.7 "Check Dams," add the following: 
All swales or concentrated drainages exceeding two (2) acres in tributary area must be adequately protected with check dams and/or lining material capable of withstanding concentrated flows. Protection must be installed within fourteen (14) days of grading. Silt fences may not be used across concentrated flow for tributary drainage areas exceeding two (2) acres. 
(9)  Section 5108.9 "Culvert Inlet Protection," delete paragraph entitled "Sediment Fence Culvert Inlet Protection." Silt fence as inlet or outlet protection for culverts is not permissible. 
(10)  Section 5108.8 "Drop or Curb Inlet Protection," add the following: 
Silt fence for area inlet protection must be reinforced with a supporting frame structure or with wire reinforcement. 
(11)  Where there is a contradiction between specific materials or installation requirements included in Section 5100 and the Standard Drawings and Specifications which follow in this document, the Standard Drawings and Specifications shall govern. Any item discussed in Section 5100 which is prohibited for use by the Standard Drawings and Specifications is not allowed. 
(12)  Additional guidance for design of erosion and sediment control found in the following documents may be considered, subject to City approval: 
EPA. Stormwater Management for Construction Activities - Developing Pollution Prevention Plans and Best Management Practices. (EPA 832-R-92-005). Sept. 1992. 
Missouri Department of Conservation and the St. Charles County Soil and Water Conservation District, with revisions by the Mid America Association of Conservation Districts (MAACD). Protecting Water Quality. 
(13)  Section 5100 may contain errors and omissions. Final approval of specific erosion and sediment control designs lies with the City. Professional judgment shall be used in applying these design standards. 
(d)  Standard drawings. 
(1)  The following standard drawings, available from the City, are hereby adopted: 
a.  Curb inlet sediment filter. 
b.  Concrete block curb inlet sediment filter. 
c.  Area inlet protection. 
d.  Rock dam ditch check. 
e.  Silt basin (two (2) sheets). 
f.  Sediment fence layout. 
g.  Sediment fence. 
h.  Straw bale drop inlet protection. 
i.  Temporary diversion. 
(2)  Standard Drawings for Temporary Water Pollution Control approved by the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT) are also acceptable for use in appropriate situations. 
(3)  Standard Drawings for Erosion and Sediment Control approved by the KC-APWA and bound in Division III of the KC-APWA Standard Specifications and Design Criteria, Volume III are also approved, except as follows: 
ESC-02, ESC-13, ESC-19, ES 28, and ES-31 are not applicable. 
(e)  Specifications. 
(1)  The basic specification for all erosion and sediment control work performed within the City shall be the KDOT Standard Specifications for State Road and Bridge Construction, current edition, as modified by the following Special Provisions (latest versions): 
a.  90P-151-R8 "Temporary Erosion and Pollution Control." 
b.  90P-138-R1 "Fertilizers." 
c.  90P-152-R2 "Seeds." 
d.  90P-153-R3 "Mulching, Slope Protection and Erosion Control." 
e.  90P-177-R02 "Silt Fence." 
f.  90P-193-R03 "Erosion Control Materials." 
(2)  In addition, all projects or plans must contain the following requirements: 
a.  Concrete washout. Concrete wash or rinse water from concrete mixing equipment, tools and/or ready-mix trucks, tools, etc, may not be discharged into or be allowed to run directly into any existing water body or storm inlet. One or more locations for concrete washout will be designated on site, so that discharges during concrete washout will be contained in a small area where waste concrete can solidify in place and excess water evaporated infiltrated into the ground. 
b.  Chemical handling. Chemicals or materials capable of causing pollution may only be stored on site in their original container. Materials stored outside must be in closed and sealed waterproof containers and located outside of drainageways or areas subject to flooding. Locks and other means to prevent or reduce vandalism shall be used. Spills will be reported as required by law and immediate actions taken to contain them. 
(3)  Specifications for items not covered by these specifications or covered completely by the Standard Drawings shall be developed by the Engineer for each project specifically. Information relevant for these specifications may be taken from manufacturer's information and may be supplemented by guidance given in other publications and standards, subject to approval by the City. 
(f)  Performance standard and innovation. This ultimate standard of the City is that practices used in the field perform without failure, and work together as part of integrated systems to prevent sediment from leaving the construction zone and to prevent sediment from contaminating downstream waterways. Practices that fail to perform in the field shall be replaced with more effective substitutes, regardless of prior City reviews. Innovations that engineers or contractors propose which have a high likelihood of improving performance are encouraged and will be considered by the City. All these innovations require City approval for use. 
(Prior Code, § 12-403; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-250. - Post-construction stormwater runoff management system. 
    This division establishes the post-construction stormwater runoff management system of the City, which shall be composed of all natural and manmade watercourses and drainage structures, both public and private, located in the City, as well as management controls and management practices as established in this article. These controls and practices shall limit any activity that will adversely affect the hydraulic function of detention facilities, open channels, drainage swales or enclosed stormwater conveyance systems. 
(Prior Code, § 12-404; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-251. - Public and private responsibilities. 
(a)  Public responsibilities . 
(1)  Administration . The administration of this division shall be the responsibility of the Public Works Director, who shall review and approve stormwater management plans as provided in this division. 
(2)  Operation and maintenance of publicly-owned facilities . The City Public Works Department shall be responsible, during and after construction, for the operation and maintenance of all drainage structures and improved courses that are part of the stormwater runoff management system under public ownership and that are not constructed and maintained by or under the jurisdiction of any State or Federal agency. 
(b)  Private responsibilities . 
(1)  Each developer of land within the City has the responsibility to provide on the developer's property all approved stormwater runoff management facilities to ensure the adequate drainage and control of stormwater on the developer's property both during and after construction of such facilities. 
(2)  Each developer or owner has the responsibility and duty before and after construction to properly operate and maintain any on-site stormwater runoff control facility that has not been accepted for maintenance by the public. This responsibility is to be transmitted to subsequent owners through appropriate covenants or maintenance agreements as detailed in this division. 
(3)  At the sole discretion of the City, the City may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided that the facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for regular inspection and maintenance. 
(Prior Code, § 12-405; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-252. - Procedures for submittal. 
    No development shall increase the quantity and rate of stormwater emanating from land areas, except in accordance with an approved stormwater management plan, as provided in these regulations. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in the State. No building permits shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Prior Code, § 12-406; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-253. - Submission of preliminary stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The purpose of the preliminary stormwater management plan is to determine whether City stormwater requirements will be met with the proposed stormwater management system. The preliminary stormwater management plan for any proposed development shall be submitted with the development plan. 
(b)  The submission requirements in this division are not intended to be duplicative of other provisions of this article or this Code as they correspond to development-related activities. Accordingly, the relevant submission requirements may be included in or with any other development applications or submissions otherwise required by this article or this Code. Therefore, to the extent that the proposed development activities require compliance with multiple sections and, consequently, require the submission of application components pursuant to different sections, these sections should allow for the substitution of similar application materials, regardless of presentation format, and should otherwise be interpreted in a light conducive to facilitating the application process; provided that all the information required therein is in a form that can reasonably be evaluated by the designated decision maker. The decision concerning the form of the information submitted shall be made in the Public Works Director's sole discretion. In addition, the primary decision maker has authority to waive submission requirements determined not to be necessary to the evaluations that are required by this division. 
(Prior Code, § 12-407; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-254. - Review of preliminary stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Following receipt of the preliminary stormwater management plan and information to be included with this plan, the general drainage concepts and planning proposals will be reviewed by the Public Works Director. A review meeting then may be scheduled by the Public Works Director with representatives of the developer, including the developer's engineer, to review the overall concepts included in the preliminary stormwater management plan. The preliminary stormwater management plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat or development plan and shall not: 
(1)  Cause flooding outside of the existing floodplain boundary during a one percent (1%) frequent flood that would not have occurred without the proposed improvements; 
(2)  Cause or increase flooding of existing structures; 
(3)  Contribute to unacceptable channel erosion as predicted using criteria established by the City. Unacceptable erosion will include: erosion outside the one percent (1%) floodplain, erosion encroachment close to existing structures, erosion encroachment into roads and infrastructure, threats to designated stream assets, and rapid progression of the channel erosion upstream; 
(4)  Contribute sedimentation to the channels or detention areas (the developer will be responsible for the removal and disposal of all sedimentation that occurs from failure of an approved erosion plan that has been contributed by the proposed development in the joint-use detention basins downstream of the proposed improvements); and 
(5)  Create or contribute adverse impacts to water quality. 
(b)  The City shall consider the impacts to existing structures and other property downstream of the proposed project. This consideration shall extend to immediate impacts on adjacent properties and to the point where the proposed facility drainage area is ten percent (10%) or less of the basin area. The impacts from the flow rate, the velocity and the quality of the runoff shall be considered. The velocity shall not erode or deposit sediments in designated stream assets. The runoff should not contain excessive sediment concentrations, biological oxygen demand, dissolved oxygen, nutrient, organic, total dissolved solid, heavy metal or pathogen levels that threaten the viability and health of the designated stream assets or the joint-use or regional retention system. The threshold of acceptable limits shall be based on the limits set by KDHE in Article 16, Water Pollution Control, Surface Water Quality Standards, K.A.R. 28-16-28e. 
(c)  In addition, the City's review and approval process shall involve the consideration of the applicant's use of alternative design methods to reduce imperviousness, peak flows, and velocities to minimize erosion and sedimentation and to protect the water quality of the stormwater runoff discharged into the stormwater system. 
(d)  Finally, the City shall consider the applicant's incorporation of multiple uses into the stormwater management facility/system. To the extent that recreational use, trails, open space, are utilized, the level of imperviousness may be increased at the discretion of the City. 
(Prior Code, § 12-408; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-255. - Final stormwater runoff management plan. 
    Following review of the preliminary stormwater management plan and general approval of the preliminary stormwater management plan by the Public Works Director, a final stormwater management plan shall be prepared for each phase of the proposed project as each phase is developed and prior to the issuance of any building permit. A professional engineer, registered in the State, shall sign and properly seal the plan. The final plan shall constitute a refinement of the concepts approved in the preliminary stormwater management plan and shall include the information required in Section 12-253. 
(Prior Code, § 12-409; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-256. - Review and approval of final stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Final stormwater management plans shall be reviewed by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may, based on review of the submittal, approve the plan if the proposed development will provide management of stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes, design criteria and performance standards of these regulations and the City's watershed management program and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. The Public Works Director may approve the stormwater management plan or conditionally approve the stormwater management plan, setting forth the conditions thereof. If it is determined that the proposed development will not properly manage stormwater runoff in accordance with these regulations, the Public Works Director shall reject the final stormwater management plan. If rejected, the application and data shall be returned to the applicant for resubmittal. 
(b)  The Public Works Director shall have the authority to waive the requirement of a stormwater management plan meeting all of the requirements in those individual cases that involve the construction of a single building or an addition to an existing building or otherwise have no significant effect on the drainage characteristics of the watershed. 
(Prior Code, § 12-410; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-257. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Generally . The following documents shall jointly govern the design of improvements with respect to managing stormwater: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided, Section 5600, Storm Drainage Systems and Facilities of the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria of the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association, dated February 15, 2006, is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating the design of improvements with respect to stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Sections 5601.5 and 5608.4 of the Storm Drainage Systems and Facilities of the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria of the Kansas City Metropolitan Chapter of the American Public Works Association, dated February 15, 2006, are hereby repealed and new Sections 5601.5 and 5608.4 are added to read as follows. Additions are denoted with double asterisks (**). 
(b)  General guidelines. 
(1)  Natural channels are to be preserved to the maximum extent practicable as site conditions permit. Design standards for natural channels are addressed in Section 5605. Engineered channels, the next highest priority system component, shall be designated and coordinated with the design of building lots and streets in accordance with the design criteria and performance standards addressed in Section 5607. 
(2)  To the maximum extent possible, drainage systems, street layout and grades, lot patterns and placement of curbs, inlets and site drainage and overflow swales shall be concurrently designed in accordance with the design criteria and performance standards set forth in this document. Curb and gutter may be omitted or modified where approved by the City/County Engineer and deemed feasible in conjunction with other stormwater management practices including water quality BMPs. 
(3)  Enclosed conveyance systems consisting of inlets, conduits and manholes may be used to convey stormwater runoff where site conditions and open space requirements will not permit the use of natural or engineered channels. Where used, these systems must be designed in accordance with design criteria and performance standards addressed in Section 5606. 
(4)  Generally, a public storm drainage system is constructed when the peak discharge is greater than eight (8) cfs for the ten percent (10%) design storm and the drainage is generated by more than one (1) lot or the drainage area is greater than two (2) acres.** 
(c)  Open systems . Where feasible, open systems consisting of open or engineered channels shall be used if all of the following design criteria and the conditions of Section 5601.8 are met: 
(1)  The channel slope is less than or equal to five percent (5%) or where appropriate armoring techniques are used to prevent erosion; or 
(2)  The fifty percent (50%) design storm velocity is less than or equal to five feet per second (5 fps) or where appropriate armoring techniques are used to prevent erosion. 
(d)  Enclosed systems . Enclosed systems consisting of underground pipes, culverts and similar underground structures shall be used to convey stormwater at all locations whenever one (1) of the following design criteria and the conditions of Section 5601.8 are met: 
(1)  Where natural channels or open systems are not feasible per the requirements set forth in Section 5605 and Section 5601.5-A1; or 
(2)  Within the right-of-way of streets with curbs, regardless of system design capacity. 
(e)  Stormwater management . 
(1)  New development or redevelopment as defined in Section 5601.2 shall incorporate stormwater management measures to control runoff from the site. The allowable runoff is defined by the volume, timing, and peak rate of runoff and is dependent on the watershed characteristics. Allowable runoff may be limited by the need to minimize flood damage, prevent erosion, and/or minimize impacts to the ecology and water quality of the downstream drainage system. 
(2)  Stormwater management for site development may include structural facilities and/or non-structural solutions. The developer shall evaluate the site development plan according to the flowchart in Figure 5601-1. This chart provides decision criteria for determining the potential impacts of the site on the watershed. Beginning with the hexagon-shaped dialog box in the upper left of the chart, check the requirements as indicated, then proceed to the next dialog box to the right. Determine the "yes" or "no" answer to the question in the dialog box, and continue to next box to the right or below, according to the answer. Where runoff controls are required, low-impact development practices or off-site control of runoff in addition to or instead of the standard wet or dry bottom basins may be used. See Section 4-5-E-15(B). 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is the opinion of the City that any development will degrade water quality, cause stream erosion and contribute to adverse ecological impacts. Therefore, at the discretion of 
(4)  Flood problems are defined as one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Homes, buildings, or other structures downstream from a proposed development are flooded in a one percent (1%) or more frequent flood; 
b.  Flood damage problem areas for the one percent (1%) or more frequent flood have been identified, or an engineering study indicated the proposed development would cause or increase such flooding; 
c.  Street flooding as defined in section 5601.5-A-4-b or as defined by the City/County; and 
d.  To identify existing local flooding problems, the stormwater management study for a development project shall include an analysis of the existing downstream drainage system to the point the development's land mass is less than ten percent (10%) of the total watershed, unless waived by the City/County. The City/County may require additional analysis of the downstream drainage system to identify flooding problems, especially in sensitive areas or where flooding has occurred downstream. 
(5)  If flooding problems will occur, as defined in Subsection (e)(4) of this section, runoff from the development shall be controlled by limiting the stormwater release rates for the one percent (1%), ten percent (10%) and one hundred percent (100%) design storms to the predevelopment peak flow rates for the one percent (1%), ten percent (10%) and one hundred percent (100%) storms, respectively. If flooding problems will not occur, detention of the one percent (1%) storm will not be allowed.** 
(6)  Additionally, the City/County may require a study to verify downstream predevelopment peak flow rates are not increased at specific downstream locations due to the development. Some communities may also establish more stringent release rates in sensitive watersheds. 
(f)  Overflow systems. Each conveyance element of the stormwater drainage system (whether open, enclosed, or detention) shall include an overflow element. When the in-system capacity defined in Sections 5601.8 and 5608 is exceeded, the overflow element shall be designed to route the surcharge downstream. Types of overflow systems are site-dependent and may include streets, channels, overland surfaces, redundant piping, or spillways, or combinations thereof. The in-system capacity combined with the overflow system capacity shall be sufficient to convey the peak discharge generated by the one percent (1%) design storm without flooding problems. The maximum water surface elevation of the one percent (1%) storm stage at any point along the drainage system shall be no greater than: 
(1)  One foot (1') below the lowest elevation at which water may enter any proposed or existing building or structure; and 
(2)  A depth of seven inches (7") at the lowest point of the traveled roadway. This may be the curb flowline, the road centerline, or somewhere in between, depending on the site. 
(Prior Code, § 12-411; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-258. - Performance criteria. 
(a)  Computational methods. 
(1)  Time of concentration and travel time. Refer to Section 5602 for acceptable hydrology methods. 
(2)  Temporary storage volume. A preliminary value of the storage requirement may be obtained through methods outlined in (SCS, 1986, Chapter 6) or other acceptable methods. The storage shall be checked during routing or design hydrographs through the basin and adjusted appropriately. 
(3)  Hydrograph routing. The storage indication method (Modified Puls) of routing a hydrograph through a detention basin may be utilized. (Reference: Chow, 1964.) 
(b)  Release rate. The maximum release rate from any development for the one percent (1%), ten percent (10%), and one hundred percent (100%) storms shall be limited according to Section 5601.5-A-4 and the decision flowchart in Figure 5601-1, "Guide to Stormwater Management for Site Development." 
(c)  Detention basin size. Owners/engineers may utilize methodology outlined in (SCS, 1986). A Type II rainfall distribution shall be the required storm hyetograph. Hydrologic simulation models shall be based on not less than Antecedent Moisture Condition II (see Section 5602.2). Maximum detention storage shall be based upon the allowable release rate and upon the developed condition for the site. Basin volume shall be sized for the largest applicable, twenty-four (24) hour design storm. Cities and Counties may establish additional standards for other storm sizes in order to provide stream channel and water quality protection. 
(d)  Primary outlet works . The primary outlet shall be designed to meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The outlet shall be designed to function without requiring attendance or operation of any kind or requiring use of equipment or tools, or any mechanical devices. 
(2)  All discharge from the detention facility when inflow is equal or less than the (largest applicable design storm) inflow shall be via the primary outlet. 
(3)  The design discharge rate via the outlet shall continuously increase with increasing head and shall have hydraulic characteristics similar to weirs, orifices or pipes. 
(4)  For dry detention basins, the design shall allow for discharge of at least eighty percent (80%) of the detention storage volume within twenty-four (24) hours after the peak or center of mass of the inflow has entered the detention basin. 
(5)  Ponds shall be designed with a non-clogging outlet such as a reverse-slope pipe, or a weir outlet with a trash rack. A reverse-slope pipe draws from below the permanent pool extending in a reverse angle up to the riser and established water elevation of the permanent pool. Because these outlet draw water from below the level of the permanent pool, they are less likely to be clogged by floating debris. 
(6)  All opening shall be protected by trash racks, grates, stone filters, or other approved devices to ensure that the outlet works will remain functional. 
(7)  If a detention basin is to be used as a water quality BMP, the basins must be sized to detain the entire water quality storm such that the entire water quality storm leaves the basin no sooner than forty (40) hours after the start of the rainfall event. 
(e)  Emergency spillways. The emergency spillway may either be combined with the outlet works or be a separate structure or channel meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Elevation. Emergency spillways shall be designed so that their crest elevation is one-half foot (0.5') or more above the maximum water surface elevation in the detention facility attained by the largest applicable design storm.** 
(2)  Capacity . In cases where the impoundment/emergency spillway is not regulated by either State or Federal agencies, the emergency spillway shall be designed to pass the one percent (1%) storm with one foot (1') of freeboard from the design stage to the top of the dam, assuming zero (0) available storage in the basin and zero (0) flow through the primary outlet. This design provides and added level of protection in the event of a clogged primary outlet or a subsequent one percent (1%) storm event that occurs before the flow pool from the initial storm even recedes to the principal outlet elevation. 
(f)  Draw down provision. Drain works consisting of valves, gates, pipes, and other devices as necessary to completely drain the facility in seventy-two (72) hours or less when required for maintenance or inspection shall be provided. 
(g)  Erosion control . Primary outlet works, emergency spillways, and drain works, as well as conveyance system entrances to detention basins, shall be equipped with energy dissipating devices as necessary to limit shear stresses on receiving channels. See Tables 5605-1 and 5606-2 for shear stress criteria. 
(h)  Detention basins. **Detention basins designed to accommodate the one percent (1%) storm event shall not be combined with bio-retention.** 
(i)  The Manual of Best Management Practices for Stormwater Quality. The Manual of Best Management Practices for Stormwater Quality, dated September 2003 and published by the Mid-America Regional Council and the American Public Works Association is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of providing guidance for planning and implementing best management practices that will control volumes and quality of stormwater discharges and thereby provide crucial assistance in protecting human life and property, maintaining overall water quality and for creating more environmentally sensitive site design. 
(j)  Official copy filed. One copy of this document shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy" and filed with the City Clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The selected BMP(s) must be properly integrated into the overall landscape design, providing aesthetic value in addition to the desired function. It is understood that required planting areas may need to be increased to accommodate stormwater management practices. 
(k)  Applicability of these standards . These standards shall apply to all development occurring in the City after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived; provided, however, that the standards shall not apply to: 
(1)  Land which is covered by an approved development plan or final plat where approval was given on or before August 13, 2007, and where construction of any approved detention facility was begun on or before that date; or 
(2)  Land which is covered by an approved preliminary plan or preliminary plat, where approval was given on or before August 13, 2007, and where construction of any approved detention facility was not yet begun on that date, shall only be required to comply with such standards by modifying said detention basin to provide fifty percent (50%), ten percent (10%) and one percent (1%) storm protection and appropriate clean stormwater BMP's, but only to the extent that the modification does not change the lot count or significantly alter the character of any lots shown on the approved preliminary plan or plat. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any development plan or plat covering land exempted pursuant to Subsections (e)(1) and (2) of this section is amended to a substantial or material degree, compliance with these standards shall be required. 
(Prior Code, § 12-412; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-259. - Performance bonds and other assurances for completion of stormwater management improvements. 
    Upon approval of the final stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of the engineering permit, the Public Works Director shall require the applicant to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check or other acceptable form of performance guaranty for the amount of the work to be done pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan. 
(Prior Code, § 12-413; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-260. - Maintenance bond. 
    A two (2) year maintenance bond against defects in material and workmanship may be required by the City for any portion of the stormwater management improvements dedicated to the public. 
(Prior Code, § 12-414; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-261. - Inspection and maintenance. 
    The Public Works Director shall be responsible for determining whether the stormwater management plan is in conformance with requirements specified in Section 12-258 and whether development is proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(1)  Inspection. 
a.  Inspection during construction. 
1.  The Public Works Director, or third party inspector hired by the developer, shall inspect the stormwater management systems during all critical phases of construction. These phases may include grading, installation of pipes and structures, and planting/landscaping. 
2.  Stormwater management system components and/or grading are part of public improvements and shall be inspected as such, even if the system will be owned and maintained by private entities. All system components shall be substantially complete prior to issuing any building permits, unless otherwise stated in the developer agreement or plans. 
b.  Periodic inspection by city. The Public Works Director shall be authorized to inspect all stormwater management systems during the first year of operation and at least once every three (3) years thereafter. The Public Works Director shall notify in writing any property owner of any violations that are found during the inspections pursuant to the criteria set forth in this division. 
c.  Annual inspection by private owner. The owners of the property containing private stormwater management systems installed pursuant to this division shall have all stormwater management systems inspected on an annual basis. On or before May 1 of each year, the owner of each stormwater management system shall furnish certification by an engineer, licensed by the State, to the City Engineer that all stormwater management systems are functioning in accordance with the approved plans. All certifications and inspections shall be on forms provided by the City. The certification shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the landowner; 
2.  The recorded book and page number of the lot of each stormwater management system; 
3.  A statement that an inspection was made of all stormwater management systems; 
4.  The date the inspection was made; 
5.  A statement that all inspected stormwater management systems are performing properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the stormwater management plan required by this division; and 
6.  The original signature and seal of the Engineer. 
(2)  Maintenance. 
a.  Responsibility for maintenance. The owners of the property containing private stormwater management systems shall be responsible for maintenance of those systems. In the cases where there is joint maintenance provided by the City and the property owner, the City shall be responsible for structural maintenance only as specified on the plans and in the developer/maintenance agreement for the specific systems. 
b.  Maintenance agreement. Whenever a stormwater management plan is required for property pursuant hereto, no building permit shall be issued until the owner of the private stormwater management system executes a maintenance agreement to be recorded in the land records and binding upon all subsequent owners of the property, providing that: 
1.  The property owner shall maintain all stormwater management systems in accordance with the establishment and maintenance plan. 
2.  The property owner shall permit the City to inspect the stormwater management systems at any time. 
3.  The property owner shall correct any violations in the system. 
4.  If the City intends to make corrections as a result of violations at the property owner's expense, as allowed under this division, the property owner will provide access to the stormwater management system. 
(Prior Code, § 12-415; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-262. - Action upon noncompliance. 
(a)  Enforcement during construction. 
(1)  If it is determined through inspection that development is not proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan, the Public Works Director shall issue written notice to the developer and the surety of the nature and location of the alleged noncompliance, specifying what remedial work is necessary to bring the project into compliance, and setting forth the time period allowed to correct the noncompliance. The written notice shall be accompanied by documentary evidence demonstrating noncompliance. The developer so notified shall, unless weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the permittee prevent immediate remedial action, commence the recommended remedial action and shall complete the remedial work within the time allotted by the City. Upon satisfactory completion of the remedial work, the Public Works Director shall issue a notice of compliance and the development may proceed. 
(2)  If the permittee or landowner fails to make the required corrections within the time period allotted by the City, the Public Works Director may post a stop work order at the site directing that all construction activity cease immediately. For the purposes of this section, a stop work order is effective upon posting a copy of the stop work order on the site. A person must not continue or permit the continuance of work in an area covered by a stop work order, except work required to correct violations under this division. No inspections shall be performed and no additional permits will be issued by the City for the site while a stop work order is in effect. Any person who shall continue to work after a stop work order has been posted, except such work as that person is directed by the City to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is guilty of a public offense and may be subject to penalties as prescribed in this article. 
(3)  The City must provide written notice to the permittee or a representative of the permittee when a stop work order is issued. A copy of the order, in the case of work for which there is a permit, shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed by the permittee on the permit. In the case of work for which there is no permit, a copy of the order shall be mailed to the person listed as owner of the property by the County land records. That notice must specify the extent to which work is stopped and the conditions under which work may resume. The permittee is responsible for the actions of agents of the permittee and must notify those agents when a stop work order is issued that will affect an area within which the agents are to work. In this regard, the term "agent" is defined as any person who acts at the instruction, with the permission, or to the benefit of the permittee. 
(4)  Failure of the permittee to make the necessary corrections within ten (10) days after a stop work order is posted shall constitute a public offense and is punishable as prescribed in this division. Upon such failure, the City may: 
a.  Issue a notice to appear, setting a date and time for appearance in Municipal Court. The Public Works Director and the Public Works Director, and their designees, shall have authority to issue a notice to appear under this division. The City may seek all criminal and civil penalties allowed by this chapter, as well as any injunctive relief that may be appropriate; and/or 
b.  Correct or abate the violation. 
(5)  If the City performs work to correct a violation of this division, the costs incurred by the City to perform this work shall be paid by the owner or permittee out of the performance guaranty required by Section 12-259. If the cost of the work necessary to correct the violation exceeds the amount of the performance guaranty, the permittee shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all excess costs and expenses incurred by the City. The cost of necessary work in excess of the performance guaranty shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk, and shall, to the extent authorized by law, become a lien upon all property and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay that cost. The cost of necessary work shall be listed on the tax bill and be collected in the manner of ordinary taxes to the extent authorized by law. In the event no performance guaranty was posted, the cost, plus interest at the rate authorized by the City, plus a reasonable administrative fee shall be billed to the owner. If in any event the amount due is not paid, the City Clerk shall certify the amount due to the County Clerk, and it shall, in accordance with law, become a lien upon all property and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the amount due. This amount shall be listed on the tax bill and be collected in the manner of ordinary taxes as authorized by law. 
(6)  The Public Works Director and his designee shall have authority, but not the obligation, to issue additional notices and extend the time given to a permittee to perform any action required under this section. 
(b)  Enforcement of maintenance requirements. 
(1)  When a property owner violates the maintenance requirements of this section, the Public Works Director or his designee shall notify the property owner in writing of the nature and location of the violation, describe the required corrective action, and the time period to have the violation corrected. Failure of the property owner to make the necessary corrections within the specified timeframe shall constitute a public offense and is punishable as prescribed in this division. 
(2)  If, after receiving notice of a violation of maintenance requirements, a property owner fails to perform the required corrective action within the time prescribed in the notice of violation, the City may: 
a.  Issue a notice to appear, setting a date and time for appearance in Municipal Court. The Public Works Director and the Public Works Director's designees, shall have authority to issue a notice to appear under this division. The City may seek all criminal and civil penalties allowed by this chapter, as well as any injunctive relief that may be appropriate; and/or 
b.  Correct or abate the violation. 
(3)  If the City performs work to correct a violation of this division, the property owner shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to perform this work. Within thirty (30) days after performing the work necessary to correct the violation, the City shall issue a written notice containing the nature of the work performed, the date the work was performed, the cost of such work, and a statement that the property owner must pay for the cost of the work within thirty (30) days to avoid having a lien filed against the property. The cost to correct the violation, plus interest at the rate authorized by the City, plus a reasonable administrative fee shall be billed to the property owner. If in any event the amount due is not paid, the City Clerk shall certify the amount due to the County Clerk, and it shall, in accordance with law, become a lien upon all property and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the amount due. This amount shall be listed on the tax bill and be collected in the manner of ordinary taxes as authorized by law. 
(c)  Enforcement against homes associations. 
(1)  For purposes of this division, the term "homes association" shall mean an organization representing property owners within a planned development that is responsible for the ownership and maintenance of a stormwater management system. 
(2)  If a homes association fails to correct a violation within the time period identified in this section, then the City may choose any of the remedies provided in this section. If the City performs work to correct a violation of this division, the homes association shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the City to perform this work. Within thirty (30) days after performing the work necessary to correct the violation, the City shall issue a written notice containing the nature of the work performed, the date the work was performed, the cost of such work, and a statement that the association must pay for the cost of the work within thirty (30) days to avoid having a lien filed against the property. If the homes association fails to pay for the cost of the work within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice, the City shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of determining how the cost of the work shall be assessed against the properties within the planned development. All property owners represented by the homes association shall be given notice of such hearing. After determining how the cost of work shall be assessed, the City Clerk shall certify the amount due by each property owner within the planned development to the County Clerk and it shall, in accordance with law, become a lien upon all property and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the amount due. This amount shall be listed on the tax bill and be collected in the manner of ordinary taxes as authorized by law. 
(d)  Offenses. Any person who violates a provision of this division, fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or fails to comply with a directive of the City as authorized by this division is guilty of a public offense and shall be subject to penalties as provided in Section 8-209. In addition, the City may seek such additional remedies as are allowed by law. 
(Prior Code, § 12-416; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-263. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Public Works Director may appeal any order, requirement, decision or determination as set forth below: 
(1)  A written request shall be submitted within ten (10) working days to the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall notify the person, in writing, of his decision within a reasonable time after receiving the appeal. 
(2)  Decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the Mayor or his designee as follows: 
a.  A written request shall be submitted to the Mayor within fourteen (14) working days of the Public Works Director's decision. 
b.  The Mayor may: 
1.  Accept the request and direct the Public Works Director to issue an approval; or 
2.  Deny the request and accept the decision of the Public Works Director. 
c.  The Mayor shall act on the appeal within a reasonable time after receiving the appeal. 
(3)  The decision of the Mayor shall be considered final. No further appeal will be permitted. 
(Prior Code, § 12-417; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-264. - Minimum standards. 
    The performance standards and design criteria set forth in this division establish minimum requirements which must be implemented with good engineering practice and workmanship. Depending upon the individual circumstances, additional design criteria and performance standards may be necessary. Use of the requirements contained in this division shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the City or its officers and employees of the adequacy or safety or any stormwater management structure or use of land, nor shall it constitute approval of damages caused by stormwater runoff. The degree of protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on historical records, engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger storms may occur or stormwater runoff heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This division, therefore, shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer with respect to any legislative or administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Prior Code, § 12-418; Ord. No. 1409) 
Sec. 12-265. - Violation and penalties. 
    Unless otherwise provided, penalties for violations of this article shall be assessed as provided in Section 8-209. 
(Prior Code, § 12-419; Ord. No. 1409) 
Chapter 15 - ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning and zoning, K.S.A. 12-741 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Fairway Development Ordinances. It is organized according to generally applicable provisions (Article I), planning provisions (Article II), land division provisions (Article III), zoning provisions (Article IV), and building provisions (Article V). The Fairway Development Ordinances is inclusive of all future amendments as provided in this chapter or otherwise provided by law. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-101) 
Sec. 15-2. - Authorization. 
    The Governing Body hereby provides for the adoption or amendment of plans, planning and zoning laws and regulations, and building regulations in the manner provided for in this chapter and in the state statutes. The Governing Body may divide the City into districts of such number, shape, area and of such different classes, according to the use of land and buildings and the intensity, character, and appearance of such use or buildings. This chapter is adopted under the authority of the state statutes and any amendments thereto, and other applicable authority. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-102) 
Sec. 15-3. - General purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens by: 
(1)  Making or causing to be made a comprehensive plan for the development and redevelopment of the City. 
(2)  Developing regulations that provide for the: 
a.  Efficient and orderly location of streets; 
b.  Reduction of vehicular congestion; 
c.  Reservation or dedication of land for open spaces; 
d.  Off-site and on-site public improvements; 
e.  Recreational facilities which may include, but are not limited to, the dedication of land area for park purposes; 
f.  Flood protection; 
g.  Building lines; 
h.  Compatibility of design; 
i.  Stormwater runoff, including consideration of historic and anticipated 100-year rain and snowfall precipitation records and patterns; and 
j.  Any other services, facilities and improvements deemed appropriate. 
(3)  Developing zoning regulations that restrict, regulate, and specify: 
a.  The height, number of stories and size of buildings; 
b.  The percentage of each lot that may be occupied; 
c.  The size of yards, courts and other open spaces; 
d.  The density of population; the location, use and appearance of buildings, structures and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other purposes; the conservation of natural resources, including agricultural land; and 
e.  The use of land located in areas designated as floodplains and other areas, including the distance of any buildings and structures from a street or highway. 
(4)  Adopting zoning regulations which may: 
a.  Provide for planned unit developments; 
b.  Permit the transfer of development rights; 
c.  Preserve structures and districts listed on the local, State or National Historic Register; 
d.  Control the aesthetics of redevelopment or new developments; 
e.  Provide for the issuance of special use or conditional use permits; and 
f.  Establish overlay zones. 
(5)  Adopting any other standards and regulations relating to planning, zoning, and building in the City that bring about the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-103) 
Sec. 15-4. - General applicability and interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes which are hereby found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare, and convenience. These regulations and the standards and procedures set out herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of health, safety and welfare of the public. The regulations in this chapter supplement and are in addition to all other laws, ordinances, or regulations in effect or which may be adopted subsequently on any subject matter in this chapter. When the conditions imposed by this chapter on any building, structure or parcel of land are overlapping or contradictory with any other law, ordinance, regulation, or rule, the more restrictive provision shall govern. When conditions imposed by this chapter on any building, structure or parcel of land are overlapping or contradictory with any other provision in this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall apply; provided, it is determined that the more restrictive provision is most consistent with the general purpose of this chapter. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-104) 
Sec. 15-5. - Applicability to the City. 
    All buildings, structures or uses owned or operated by the City shall be exempted from the regulations of this chapter and shall be permitted in any zoning district; provided that the plans are submitted and approved in accordance with site plan procedures of Article IV, Division 1 of this chapter or where applicable the development plan procedures in Article IV, Division 4, and plans are determined to be consistent with the purposes of this chapter; and further provided that the Planning Commission makes any required review for any public improvement, public facility or public utility in accordance with the comprehensive plan provisions set out in this chapter. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-105) 
Sec. 15-6. - Private agreements. 
    This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul or void any easement, covenant, restriction or other private agreement; provided, when the regulations herein impose a higher standard on any property within the City, then these regulations shall control. This chapter is separate and apart from any such easement, covenant, restriction or other private agreement, and the City shall have no obligation or authority to enforce such easement, covenant, restriction or other private agreement unless the City is a party or beneficiary of the same. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-106) 
Sec. 15-7. - Fees. 
(a)  With respect to the provisions, applications and permits related to this chapter, the Governing Body may establish by resolution a schedule of fees. Such schedule may be revised from time to time in the same manner as deemed necessary. In the event the schedule of fees indicates that a fee is required for any application, permit or other request with regard to any provision or regulation of this chapter, such application or request shall not be deemed complete unless accompanied by the requisite fee. All such fees shall be made payable to the City and submitted to the City Clerk. 
(b)  No fee shall be required for any application filed in the public interest by members of the Governing Body, Planning Commission, Board of Zoning Appeals or City staff. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-107) 
Sec. 15-8. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  Any violation of any provision contained in this chapter is a public offense and shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The City shall have the authority to maintain civil suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof. In the event that any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter, or any building, structure or land is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter, the City may, in addition to any other remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-108) 
Sec. 15-9. - Savings clause. 
    The repeal of any prior ordinance provisions by the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or any subsequent repeal or amendment of any provisions of this chapter shall not affect any violations, fines, penalties, forfeitures, or liabilities in effect at such time. Said provisions repealed are hereby continued in force and effect after the passage, approval and publication of this chapter or any subsequent amendment thereof for the purposes of such violations, fines, penalties, forfeitures, liabilities, and actions therefor, and the City shall have the same authority to secure any necessary civil remedies for or prosecution of the same. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-109) 
Sec. 15-10. - Severance clause. 
    Should any section, clause or provision of this chapter be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so invalid or unconstitutional. Should any section, clause or provision of this chapter be held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction to a particular building, structure or parcel of land, such determination shall not affect the application of said section, clause or provision to any other building, structure or parcel of land, unless specifically determined by said court. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-1-110) 
Secs. 15-11-15-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 15-39-15-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Planning commission, K.S.A. 12-744 et seq. 

Sec. 15-65. - Membership. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and with the consent of the City Council. The members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years each; provided that appointments shall be so staggered that no more than three (3) members' terms shall expire in any given year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council or upon a motion by a member of the City Council that is adopted by a two-thirds (?) majority vote of the City Council. Members shall remain in office until their successor takes office. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-101; Ord. No. 1616 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-66. - Powers and duties. 
    The Planning Commission shall have the powers granted and duties delegated to it by this chapter and by statute, including the making or causing to be made the comprehensive plan, and making recommendations on plat approval, subdivision regulations, site plans, zoning regulations, and rezonings. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-102) 
Sec. 15-67. - Officers; bylaws; and meetings. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall elect one (1) member as Chairperson and one (1) member as Vice-Chairperson who shall serve one (1) year and until their successors have been elected. A Secretary also shall be elected who may or may not be a member of the Planning Commission. 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business and hearing procedures. Except as otherwise provided in this division, all action by the Planning Commission shall require a quorum of the membership and a majority vote of those present. A record of all proceedings of the Planning Commission shall be kept. 
(c)  The Planning Commission shall meet regularly at such time and place as it may fix in its bylaws. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson, or in the Chairperson's absence, by the Vice-Chairperson. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-103) 
Secs. 15-68-15-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan, K.S.A. 12-747, 12-748. 

Sec. 15-93. - Authorization of comprehensive plan. 
    The City Planning Commission is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made a comprehensive plan for the development and redevelopment of the City. The comprehensive plan, as amended from time to time, shall constitute the basis or guide to ensure a coordinated and harmonious development or redevelopment of the City which will best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the City as well as wise and efficient expenditure of public funds. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-201) 
Sec. 15-94. - Plan contents. 
    In the preparation of the plan, the Planning Commission shall make or cause to be made comprehensive surveys and studies of past and present conditions and trends relating to land use, population, and building intensity, public facilities, transportation and transportation facilities, economic conditions, natural resources and may include any other element deemed necessary to the comprehensive plan. The proposed plan shall show the Planning Commission's recommendations for the development or re-development of the City, including: 
(1)  The general location, extent and relationship of the use of land for agriculture, residence, business, industry, recreation, education, public buildings and other community facilities, major utility facilities, both public and private and any other use deemed necessary; 
(2)  The population and building intensity standards and restrictions and the application of the same; 
(3)  Public facilities including transportation facilities of all types whether publicly or privately owned which relate to the transportation of persons or goods; 
(4)  Public improvement programming based upon a determination of relative urgency; 
(5)  The major sources and expenditure of public revenue including long range financial plans for the financing of public facilities and capital improvements, based upon a projection of the economic and fiscal activity of the community, both public and private; 
(6)  Utilization and conservation of natural resources; and 
(7)  Any other element deemed necessary to the proper development or redevelopment of the City. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-202) 
Sec. 15-95. - Adoption and amendments. 
(a)  The Planning Commission may adopt and amend the comprehensive plan as a whole or in parts by a single resolution or by successive resolutions. The resolution shall identify specifically any written presentations, maps, plats, charts or other materials made a part of the plan. 
(b)  Before adopting or amending any plan or part of a plan, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least once in the official City newspaper at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Upon the adoption or amendment of any plan or part of a plan by a majority vote of all members of the Planning Commission, a certified copy of the plan or part, together with a written summary of the hearing, shall be submitted to the Governing Body. No comprehensive plan shall be effective unless approved by the Governing Body. The Governing Body may approve such recommendation by ordinance; override the Planning Commission's recommendations by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote; or return the plan to the Planning Commission for further consideration, together with a statement specifying the basis for the Governing Body's failure to approve or disapprove. If the Governing Body returns the Planning Commission's recommendations, the Planning Commission after considering the Governing Body's statement may resubmit its original recommendations giving the reasons therefore or submit new and amended recommendations. Upon the receipt of the recommendations, the Governing Body by a simple majority may adopt or may revise or amend and adopt such recommendations by Ordinance, or take no further action thereon. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendations to the Governing Body following the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after receipt of the Governing Body's report, the Governing Body shall consider the inaction on the part of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original recommendations and proceed accordingly. The comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto shall become effective upon publication of the respective adopting ordinance. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-203) 
Sec. 15-96. - Copies to be sent. 
    An attested copy of the comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto shall be sent to all other taxing subdivisions in the planning area which request a copy of such plan. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-204) 
Sec. 15-97. - Review of plan. 
    At least once each year, the Planning Commission shall review or reconsider the plan and may propose amendments, extensions or additions to the plan. The procedure for the adoption of any amendment, extension or addition to any plan or any part of the plan shall be the same as that required for the adoption of the original plan. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-205) 
Sec. 15-98. - Public improvements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the Planning Commission has adopted and certified a comprehensive plan for one (1) or more major sections or functional subdivisions of the City, no public improvement, public facility or public utility of a type embraced within the recommendations of the comprehensive plan shall be constructed without first being submitted to and being approved by the Planning Commission as being in conformity with the plan. If the Planning Commission does not make a report within sixty (60) days, the project shall be deemed to have been approved by the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission finds that any such proposed public improvement, facility or utility does not conform to the plan, the Commission shall submit in writing to Governing Body the manner in which such proposed improvement, facility or utility does not conform. The Governing Body may override the plan and the report of the Planning Commission, and the plan for the area concerned shall be deemed to have been amended. 
(b)  Whenever the Planning Commission has reviewed a capital improvement program and found that a specific public improvement, public facility or public utility of a type embraced within the recommendations of the comprehensive plan is in conformity with the plan, no further approval by the Planning Commission is necessary under this section. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-2-206) 
Secs. 15-99-15-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAND DIVISION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, K.S.A. 12-749 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 15-125-15-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATS AND PLATTING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Plats, K.S.A. 12-752. 

Sec. 15-147. - Plats and platting. 
(a)  The owner or owners of any land located within the City, for the purpose of laying out any subdivisions, suburban lots, building lots, tracts or parcels; or any owner of any land establishing any street, alley, park or other property intended for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, shall have a plat drawn. Such plat shall accurately describe the subdivision, lots, tracts or parcels of land giving the location and dimensions thereof and the location and dimensions of all streets, alleys, parks or other properties intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. All these lots, tracts or parcels shall front upon a public street or an approved private street. All plats shall be verified by the owner or owners thereof; and, when complete, be submitted to the Planning Commission. 
(b)  Plats shall be considered at a public meeting of the Planning Commission; provided that, any plat proposing an exception to the standards in this division shall require a public hearing. If a public hearing is required, notice of the time, place and subject of the hearing shall be published once in the official city newspaper at least twenty (20) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. Additionally, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, the owner shall mail by registered mail, return receipt request, written notice of the hearing and the nature of the request to all owners of record of real property located within two hundred feet (200') of the affected land. When the notice has been properly addressed and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive that notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Planning Commission or the Governing Body. 
(c)  The Planning Commission may approve the plat, if it finds that the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  The plat satisfies the requirements of this chapter, the applicable zoning district regulations and any other applicable provisions of the City Code, subject only to acceptable rule exceptions. 
(2)  The subdivision represents an overall development pattern that is consistent with the comprehensive plan and the official street map. 
(3)  The plat contains a sound, well-conceived parcel(s) and land subdivision layout that is consistent with good land planning and site engineering design principles 
(4)  The arrangement, character, width, and locations of all lots and streets on the plat shall be considered in their relation to existing lots and streets, to reasonable traffic circulation, to topographic conditions, to runoff and stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and to public services and utilities. 
(5)  No single family lot shall have less width, depth or area than is set out in the appropriate lot size regulations for District R-1, except as may be approved in the planned zoning process of Article IV, Division 2, Sub-division III. 
(6)  All lots, whether by subdivision plat, lot split or lot merger, shall be as near rectangular as is practical, due consideration being given to lots fronting on curved streets and cul-de-sac turnarounds. Lot lines shall generally be at right angles to abutting streets and radial to curved streets and cul-de-sac turnarounds. Vehicular access to residential lots from arterial streets is discouraged and will be permitted only when other access is not available. All lots shall have the full lot width exposed to a public or private street. 
(7)  All submission requirements have been satisfied. 
(d)  If this determination is not made within sixty (60) days after the first meeting of the Planning Commission following the date of the submission of the plat to the Planning Commission, the plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate so verifying shall be issued by the secretary of the Planning Commission upon demand. If the Planning Commission finds that the plat does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall notify the owner or owners of that fact. If the plat conforms to the requirements of the regulations, there shall be endorsed on the plat the fact that the plat has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. 
(e)  The Governing Body shall accept or refuse the dedication of land for public purposes within thirty (30) days after the first meeting of the Governing Body following the date of the submission of the plat to the Planning Commission. The Governing Body may defer action for an additional thirty (30) days for the purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the requirements established by the Governing Body. No additional filing fees shall be assessed during that period. If the Governing Body defers or refuses that dedication, it shall advise the Planning Commission of the reasons thereof. 
(f)  Any replatting of any existing plat shall follow and be subject to the requirements and procedures herein for a plat. 
(g)  The Governing Body may establish a scale of reasonable fees to be paid by the applicant for the review of each plat or replat filed with the Planning Commission. 
(h)  No building or zoning permit shall be issued for the use or construction of any structure upon any lot, tract or parcel of land located within the City that has been subdivided, or replatted after the date of this Chapter, as may be amended, unless the plat has been approved in the manner provided herein. 
(i)  The register of deeds shall not file any plat or replat until it bears the endorsement of the Planning Commission, and the land dedicated for public purposes has been accepted by the Governing Body. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-101; Ord. No. 1554, § 1, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 1582 , § 1, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-148. - Vesting of development rights. 
(a)  For the purpose of single-family residential developments, development rights in such land use shall vest upon recording of a plat or replat of such land. If construction is not commenced on such land within five (5) years of recording, the development rights in such shall expire. 
(b)  For all purposes other than single-family developments, the right to use land for a particular purpose shall vest upon the issuance of all permits required for such use by the City and construction has begun and substantial amounts of work have been completed under a validly issued permit. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-102) 
Sec. 15-149. - Lot splits. 
(a)  A platted lot may be divided into not more than two (2) lots without having to replat the original lot; provided that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without replatting. All resulting lots must meet all minimum standards of this chapter and any other applicable City codes, and must make provisions for any needed right-of-way, easements and improvement of public facilities. Furthermore, all resulting lots must meet the greater of the minimum front lot width and minimum square area requirements of the applicable zoning district or the average front lot width and square area of all similarly zoned lots within two hundred feet (200') of either resulting lot. 
(b)  An exception to this requirement may be made by the Planning Commission for a proposed corner lot; provided the proposed corner lot meets the minimum zoning district requirements and it is determined that the proposed corner lot will not have a dramatic impact upon the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Applications for a lot split will be referred to the Planning Commission. All costs resulting from any such application shall be born by the applicant. The application shall include a survey of the proposed lots and improvements certified by a registered engineer or surveyor in order to evidence that the details contained on the survey are true and accurate. The survey shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The dimension and location of each lot, including a metes and bounds description; 
(2)  The location and character of all proposed and existing easements and public and private utility lines, including sewers (storm and sanitary), water, gas, telecommunications, cable and power lines; 
(3)  Building setback lines with dimensions; 
(4)  The location of proposed or existing streets and driveways providing access to said lots; 
(5)  Physical property survey, including typography with contour intervals not more than five feet (5'), and including the location of watercourses, ravines existing significant trees, permanent structures and proposed drainage structures; and 
(6)  Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning Commission. 
(d)  No building or zoning permit shall be issued for a lot produced by nonplatted lot split until such lot split has been approved in the manner provided in this section. Any structure existing at the time of the lot split must continue to comply with this division and any other applicable City code. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-103) 
Sec. 15-150. - Lot mergers. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved and provided for by this chapter, no construction of any structure shall be allowed across existing property or exterior lot lines. No building permit shall be issued for construction on any property or lot that has been merged, whether by common ownership, deed, or administrative action, without complying with the requirements of this article. Multiple lots may be replatted in accordance with the provisions of this article and any other applicable city regulation. 
(b)  No applications for a lot merger on residential lots shall be approved that would result in the following situations: 
(1)  Lot mergers resulting in double frontage lots. For purposes of this section "double frontage" shall mean a property having frontage on two (2) or more intersecting, parallel or nearly parallel streets. 
(2)  Lot mergers resulting in a merged lot being separated or bisected by a public street. 
(3)  Lot mergers resulting in the new lot width being fifty percent (50%) larger than the average lot width of the properties within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed lot merger. 
(4)  Lot mergers resulting in the total square footage of the new lot being fifty percent (50%) larger than the average square footage of the properties within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed lot merger. 
For purposes of calculating the percentages of Subsections (b)(3) and (4) above, the lots that are the subject of the application for lot merger and the largest and smallest lots within the two hundred feet (200') area shall not be considered. 
(c)  Exception. The Planning Commission may grant an exception to Subsections (3) and (4) above where: 
(1)  The resulting merged lot is one hundred thirty feet (130') wide or less; 
(2)  The resulting merged lot is less than eighteen thousand (18,000) square feet; 
(3)  The resulting lot, and application of the development standards to the lot will not have an adverse impact on the character of the surrounding neighborhood, and in particular the intent statements of the R-1 site design standards; and 
(4)  The resulting lot, and application of development standards to the lot will not have an adverse impact on the property owners within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed merged lot. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-104; Ord. No. 1554, § 3, 8-22-2013; Ord. No. 1582 , § 3, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 15-151-15-168. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TEMPORARY USES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 15-169. - Statement of intent. 
    Certain uses of land or buildings are not appropriate on a permanent basis, but may be appropriate or acceptable on a temporary basis where adequate precautions are taken to ensure the temporary nature of the use in order to limit any detrimental impact of the use upon the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. As further provided for by the specific provisions of this division, these allowed temporary uses may be authorized through either the approval of a temporary use permit or by general regulations establishing and regulating the time, place and manner in which the temporary use will be allowed (hereafter "temporary use"). 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.201; Ord. No. 1487) 
Sec. 15-170. - Portable storage units. 
(a)  Allowed temporary use . A single portable storage unit may be temporarily placed without a permit upon any real property within the City for a time period not to exceed thirty (30) days, no more than two (2) times per calendar year. If a person or entity seeks additional time or frequency for such use, upon showing of good cause, the Building Official/Codes Administrator is hereby authorized to extend this time period up to an additional thirty (30) days (for a maximum time period of sixty (60) days), or to increase the allowed frequency to three (3) times per calendar year. In addition, upon showing of good cause, the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to extend the time period up to a maximum time period of six (6) months, to increase the allowed frequency to up to four (4) times per calendar year, or to permit a second portable storage unit upon the real property at any one (1) time; provided, the Planning Commission may establish any reasonable conditions upon any such approval. The City may establish a fee, approved by the Governing Body, for any such authorization by either the Building Official/Codes Administrator or the Planning Commission. 
(b)  With building permit . 
(1)  Notwithstanding the time restrictions set forth in Subsection (a) of this section, when used in conjunction with a building permit, a permittee can temporarily place a single portable storage unit upon the real property subject to the building permit for the duration of the initial building permit period plus ten (10) days before and ten (10) days after the building permit period; provided, however, the Building Official/Codes Administrator has the discretion to shorten or otherwise limit this time period for a portable storage unit based upon his evaluation of the scope of the permitted project. The Building Official/Codes Administrator may also exercise this discretion when work on the permitted project is no longer active and ongoing, or because the use of the portable storage unit no longer appears to be necessary for the ongoing activities of the permitted project; provided that in such event the permittee shall first be allowed a reasonable opportunity to provide any evidence or explanation to the contrary. 
(2)  In the event the building permit period is extended by the Building Official/Codes Administrator or the Governing Body, as provided for by the building provisions of Article V of this chapter, the Building Official/Codes Administrator, or when applicable the Governing Body, shall have the discretion to extend the time period for the portable storage unit for some or all of the extension period for the building permit; provided that the Building Official/Codes Administrator, or when applicable the Governing Body, may establish any reasonable conditions upon any such extension. 
(c)  Additional requirements . Any allowed portable storage unit is subject to the following: 
(1)  Must be maintained in a safe and clean manner, and in good condition and repair. 
(2)  Must be placed on a concrete or asphalt surface; provided that the Building Official/Codes Administrator may waive this requirement for good cause shown. 
(3)  Cannot be placed in the right-of-way, in a manner blocking any sidewalk, fire department access or the line-of-sight of traffic, or in any other manner creating any peril or danger to persons or property. 
(4)  May only be used to store nonhazardous personal property that is directly related to or accessory to the use of the real property upon which the portable storage unit is placed or to the occupants or owners therein, and may not be used to store the personal property of any other person or entity who is not an owner or occupant of said real property. 
(5)  When on any residential property on which a single-family dwelling or duplex has been or is being constructed, the portable storage unit must be placed in front of the dwelling or duplex, but no closer than ten feet (10') from the front property line; provided the Building Official/Codes Administrator may waive this requirement for good cause shown. 
(6)  Cannot contain any commercial personal property or be used for any commercial purpose, except to the extent used by a contractor in conjunction with any allowed construction or remodeling on or related to said property. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.202; Ord. No. 1487) 
Sec. 15-171. - Temporary dumpsters. 
(a)  Allowed temporary use . A single dumpster may be temporarily placed without a permit upon any real property within the City for a time period not to exceed thirty (30) days, no more than two (2) times per calendar year. If a person or entity seeks additional time or frequency for such use, upon showing of good cause, the Building Official/Codes Administrator is hereby authorized to extend this time period up to an additional thirty (30) days (for a maximum time period of sixty (60) days), or to increase the allowed frequency to three (3) times per calendar year. In addition, upon showing of good cause, the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to extend the time period up to a maximum time period of six (6) months, to increase the allowed frequency to up to four (4) times per calendar year, or to permit a second dumpster upon the real property at any one (1) time; provided that the Planning Commission may establish any reasonable conditions upon any such approval. The City may establish a fee, approved by the Governing Body, for any such authorization by either the Building Official/Codes Administrator or the Planning Commission. 
(b)  With building permit . 
(1)  Notwithstanding the time restrictions set forth in Subsection (a) of this section, when used in conjunction with a building permit, a permittee can temporarily place a single dumpster upon the real property subject to the building permit for the duration of the initial building permit period plus ten (10) days before and ten (10) days after the building permit period; provided, however, that the Building Official/Codes Administrator has the discretion to shorten or otherwise limit this time period for a dumpster based upon his evaluation of the scope of the permitted project. The Building Official/Codes Administrator may also exercise this discretion when work on the permitted project is no longer active and ongoing, or because the use of the dumpster no longer appears to be necessary for the ongoing activities of the permitted project; provided that in such event the permittee shall first be allowed a reasonable opportunity to provide any evidence or explanation to the contrary. 
(2)  In the event the building permit period is extended by the Building Official/Codes Administrator or the Governing Body, as provided for by the Building Provisions of Article V of this chapter, the Building Official/Codes Administrator, or when applicable the Governing Body, shall have the discretion to extend the time period for the dumpster for some or all of the extension period for the building permit; provided that the Building Official/Codes Administrator, or when applicable the Governing Body, may establish any reasonable conditions upon any such extension. 
(c)  Additional restrictions . Any allowed dumpster is subject to the following: 
(1)  Must be maintained in a safe and clean manner, and in good condition and repair. 
(2)  Must be placed on a concrete or asphalt surface; provided that the Building Official/Codes Administrator may waive this requirement for good cause shown. 
(3)  Cannot be placed in the right-of-way, in a manner blocking any sidewalk, fire department access or the line-of-sight of traffic, or in any other manner creating any peril or danger to persons or property. 
(4)  May only be used to store nonhazardous personal property that is directly related to or accessory to the use of the real property upon which the dumpster is placed or to the occupants or owners therein, and may not be used to store the personal property of any other person or entity who is not an owner or occupant of said real property. 
(5)  When on any residential property on which a single-family dwelling or duplex has been or is being constructed, the dumpster must be placed in front of the dwelling or duplex, but no closer than ten feet (10') from the front property line; provided that the Building Official/Codes Administrator may waive this requirement for good cause shown. 
(6)  Cannot contain any commercial personal property or be used for any commercial purpose, except to the extent used by a contractor in conjunction with any allowed construction or remodeling on or related to said property. 
(d)  Exemptions . Any dumpster that is not used on a temporary basis, but is instead approved by the Governing Body for ongoing use, in accordance with Chapter 12, Article II (applicable to permanent or long-term dumpsters on public, institutional, or commercial real property or on any residential property with a dwelling or dwellings of four (4) units or more), shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.203; Ord. No. 1487) 
Sec. 15-172. - Violations and abatement. 
(a)  Notice of violation . If the Building Official/Codes Administrator determines that a temporary use is being maintained in violation of any applicable section or subsection of this division or of any other City ordinance, notice shall be given to the property owner or his agent to remove or to otherwise bring the temporary use into proper compliance. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  A description of the real property sufficient for identification; 
(2)  A statement of the violation and why the notice is being issued; 
(3)  A correction order allowing a reasonable time to remove or bring the temporary use into proper compliance; 
(4)  A statement of the property owner's right to appeal the notice and order within five (5) days after notice was served; 
(5)  A statement that the failure to comply shall result in the City's right to abate the temporary use at the owner's expense, and that failure to thereafter pay the assessment within thirty (30) days of the notice of costs shall result in the filing of a tax lien against the property, or the filing for judgment against the recipient, or both; and 
(6)  A statement that the violation is subject to prosecution. 
Provided that the City may immediately take any action as is reasonably necessary to abate the temporary use without notice and at the owner's expense when it is placed: in the right-of-way, public park or other public property without City authorization; in a manner blocking any sidewalk, fire department access or the line-of-sight of traffic; or in any other manner creating any peril or danger to persons or property. 
(b)  Abatement . If the property owner or agent fails to take appropriate action in response to the notice of violation, then the City may take any action as is reasonably necessary to abate the violation at the owner's expense. In doing so, neither the City nor its agent shall be responsible for damage to property due to reasonable methods of gaining entrance onto the property or for damages to property in the reasonable exercise of the abatement of the violation. The City may use the City's employees or contract for such services. 
(c)  Notice and collection of costs . If the City takes action to abate the violation, the City shall give to the owner or agent a notice of costs providing: 
(1)  A description of the real property sufficient for identification; 
(2)  The nature of the violation; 
(3)  The nature of the work performed to abate the violation; 
(4)  The abatement costs incurred; 
(5)  A demand for payment within thirty (30) days from the date of notice; 
(6)  A statement that the failure to pay within thirty (30) days shall allow the City to file a tax lien against the property and/or to pursue litigation for the recovery of costs; and 
(7)  A statement that any interest, and any City costs necessary to recover any amounts due, including court costs, attorney's fees and administrative costs, shall be added to the outstanding balance due. 
Included as part of the abatement costs incurred are the costs for City staff time and expenses, postage, and any necessary court costs and attorney's fees. If unpaid after thirty (30) days of service of the notice of costs, these amounts shall be assessed as a special assessment against the property, and the City Clerk shall at the time of certifying other City taxes certify the Unpaid portion of these costs, and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the County against the lot or parcel of ground, and it shall be collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and paid. Assessments made under this section shall be superior to all liens except general tax liens. Provided further, that the City may collect such costs in the manner provided at K.S.A. 12-1,115 by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal debt, and the City may pursue both assessment and collection at the same time until the full cost, including applicable interest, court costs, and administrative costs have been paid in full. 
(d)  Service of notices . The notice of violation and the notice of costs shall be deemed to be properly served if a written copy thereof is delivered personally; sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or if the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.204; Ord. No. 1487) 
Sec. 15-173. - No limitation of action. 
    Nothing within the provisions of this division concerning temporary uses and permits shall be construed to be a waiver or shall otherwise prevent the City from exercising any applicable legal or equitable right or authority, or from taking any appropriate action under any other applicable statute, ordinance, policy or other regulatory power, including, but not limited to, the City's nuisance ordinance (codified as Chapter 6, Article II of this Code, and amendments thereto) or the City's building code provisions (codified as Article V of this chapter, and amendments thereto). 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.205; Ord. No. 1487) 
Secs. 15-174-15-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UTILITY FACILITIES 

Sec. 15-200. - In general. 
(a)  Applicability . This division shall apply to all facilities located within the City. 
(b)  Purpose . By virtue of its police powers, the City hereby establishes the following regulations on the placement and maintenance of facilities for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens in order to: 
(1)  Protect the public from hazards associated with facilities, including, but not limited to, damages, injuries and service outages due to vehicle accidents, inclement weather, adjacent property maintenance and other causes; 
(2)  Improve and ensure the operational safety and integrity of City streets; 
(3)  Minimize disruption to the City and the public; 
(4)  Maintain or improve City aesthetics and protect the environmental landscape; and 
(5)  Recognize, protect and address issues related to incumbent facility users, while encouraging competition on an equitable basis. 
(c)  Administration . The Public Works Director is the principal City official responsible for the administration of this division, and may delegate any or all of the duties therefor. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-301) 
Sec. 15-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aerial facilities means facilities located primarily above grade on poles, and includes the poles, pole supports, foundations, attached wires, cable and other facilities, and any appurtenances thereto. 
    City ROW ordinance means the ordinance adopted for managing the use and excavation of the public right-of-way, codified at Chapter 9, Article III (as amended). 
    Construct/construction means to install, erect, build, attach or place any facility. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or of a significant loss of property; or requires immediate repair or replacement in order to restore service to a user. 
    Facility/facilities means all lines, pipes, wires, cables, fiber, conduit (including inner ducts), poles, utility structures, appliances, antennae, transmitters, gates, meters or other equipment or appurtenances used for the transmission or distribution of utility services. 
    Facility user means any person or entity owning, leasing or operating facilities within the City. 
    Public improvement means any project undertaken by the City for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of any public infrastructure, and including without limitation, streets, alleys, bridges, bikeways, parkways, sidewalks, sewers, drainage facilities, traffic control devices, street lights, public facilities, public buildings or public lands. 
    Right-of-way means the area on, below or above streets, alleys, bridges, and parkways. 
    Utility easement means any public or private easement dedicated for the placement of facilities over, on or underground. 
    Utility structure means aboveground facilities (other than aerial facilities and towers) that are cabinets, boxes, vaults, pedestals, buildings, or other structures and equipment or appurtenances thereto necessary for the operation of utility service, including the supports and foundations, condensing units, and generators for the same. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-302) 
Sec. 15-202. - Location of facilities-Generally. 
(a)  In general . Facilities shall be permitted in any zoning district, but must be constructed within the right-of-way or within a utility easement (except for drop lines to residences and businesses), unless the facility user owns the real property in fee. As appropriate and provided for herein, facilities may be constructed within setbacks. This provision shall not be construed to exempt a facility user from any other applicable ordinances, authorizations, regulations or other requirements of the City, including, but not limited to, a franchise, other zoning regulations or building codes. 
(b)  Existing facilities . Except as provided for in this division, facilities in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived that have been properly maintained and meet any and all applicable technical or safety requirement are permitted in their current configuration without further requirement of screening or change. Said facilities may be replaced with similar facilities of comparable or lesser size; provided that any relocation or extensions of aboveground facilities shall abide by the requirements for new facilities hereafter. 
(c)  New facilities . Any new facilities (including the relocation or extension of existing aboveground facilities) shall be: 
(1)  Placed underground, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this division; and 
(2)  Placed at a location that will not block or unduly interfere with the passage or placement of public improvements or facilities by other existing or potential facility users, as reasonably determined by the Public Works Director. The facility user shall also consider any request made by the City concerning placement of facilities in utility easements in order to limit or eliminate future public improvement relocation expenses. 
(d)  Non-interference and protection of facilities . Facility users shall construct, operate, repair, and maintain their facilities so as to reasonably minimize interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of the public and any property owners. It shall be the responsibility of the facility user to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities from harm and damage. 
(e)  Exclusion of certain locations . The Public Works Director may in his reasonable discretion designate certain locations to be excluded from location of (additional) facilities, including but not limited to historical or scenic locations, or where (additional) facilities location is deemed unsuitable due to engineering, technological, proprietary, legal, public health, safety or welfare concerns; provided that such discretion shall be in accordance with any applicable statutory provisions. The City will cooperate in good faith with the facility user to attempt to find suitable alternative location; provided the City shall not be required to incur financial cost or to acquire new locations for a facility user. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-303) 
Sec. 15-203. - Same-Underground facilities. 
(a)  Accessibility to underground facilities . Any facility user placing facilities in subsurface conduits, pipes or such other suitable and acceptable method or type of underground installation meeting any and all existing technical and safety standards shall, subject to any applicable requirements herein, have the right to place such necessary manholes and appliances for affording access to such facilities and making connections therefrom to subscribers and stations. 
(b)  Depth requirement . A minimum depth of forty-eight inches (48") shall be maintained from the street surface to the top of any boring. No facilities shall be installed less than forty-eight inches (48") below the street surface of any right-of-way. The minimum depth for any facilities installed underground outside the street surface is twenty-four inches (24"); provided that underground telecommunications or cable drop lines are exempt from this requirement, but shall be buried at a reasonably safe depth. Any facilities installed less than forty-eight inches (48") under the street surface or twenty-four inches (24") outside of the street surface is done so at the risk of the facility user, and the City shall not be responsible for any damage to the same. These minimum depth requirements are not intended to supersede any building code depth requirement greater than the minimums prescribed in this section. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-304) 
Sec. 15-204. - Same-Utility structures. 
    Utility structures may be installed only where alternative underground facilities are not reasonably feasible, taking into account industry practices, costs, technological considerations and other relevant factors. Utility structures shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Required approval for small utility structures . Utility structures with a footprint of twelve (12) square feet or less, a pad of fifteen (15) square feet or less, and a height of four and one-half feet (41/2') or less may be permitted upon approval by the Public Works Director, provided a utility structure located within a utility easement behind the established building line with a footprint of one and one-half (11/2) square feet or less, a paid of two (2) square feet or less, and a height of three feet (3') or less shall be subject to the requirements of this division, but shall not require any specific City approval or permit. 
(2)  Required approval for large utility structures . Utility structures with a footprint of greater than twelve (12) square feet, a pad greater than fifteen (15) square feet, or a height greater than four and one-half feet (41/2') may be permitted upon approval of a special use permit by the Governing Body, which may be limited by any appropriate conditions or term established by the Governing Body. The special use permit may only be issued by the Governing Body after notification of adjacent and abutting property owners; a public hearing; and recommendation of the Planning Commission. Consideration of the special use shall be in accordance with established need for the proposed facilities at the proposed location; design, lighting, landscaping, screening and noise of the proposed facilities; suitable location providing for minimal, if any, interference with adjacent properties; affect on surrounding property values; and impact on the health, safety and welfare of surrounding properties. The impact of the proposed facilities on nearby or adjacent properties (especially residential properties) shall be carefully considered. The design, lighting, landscaping, screening and noise of the proposed facilities shall be considered with the intent to impose the least amount of impact on nearby or adjacent properties. While large utility structures may be permitted in any zoning district, the City preference is for such structures to be located in existing business districts. 
(3)  Location . Within residential districts, utility structures shall be placed in the rear yard wherever practical. If, as determined by the Public Works Director, rear yard locating is not practical or appropriate, then the facility user will work with City staff to determine a pad size and location that is most appropriate and compatible with adjacent uses, including adjacent property owners' uses. Within all districts, utility structures located within the right-of-way shall be placed behind the sidewalk and are subject to approval by the Public Works Director. 
(4)  Landscaping and screening . Any utility structure larger than a footprint of one and one-half (11/2) square feet, a pad of two (2) square feet, or a height of three feet (3') that is located within the right-of-way or between the right-of-way and the established building line shall be substantially screened from public view. Any large utility structure in any location shall be substantially screened from public view. Where landscaping is used for screening, a landscape plan shall be submitted with an application for a building permit. The landscape plan is subject to approval by the City. In their discretion, either the Public Works Director or the Planning Commission may require the landscape plan to be sealed by a landscape architect registered in the State. The expense and maintenance of all screening and landscaping shall be the responsibility of the facility user, unless written acceptance of such responsibility is provided from the property owner or homes association. The responsibility of the facility user for maintaining screening that consists of landscaping shall only extend for twelve (12) months from the date such landscaping is planted, after which time such landscaping shall be considered part of the natural habitat of the surrounding environs. 
(5)  Noise . The utility structure shall not emit any unnecessary intrusive noise. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-305) 
Sec. 15-205. - Same-Aerial facilities. 
(a)  New and replacement aerial facilities . No facility user shall: 
(1)  Construct new aerial facilities. 
(2)  Install a replacement pole that: increases the diameter of the existing pole by more than twelve inches (12"); adds more than one (1) additional cross bar or brackets; or is taller than forty feet (40') as measured from ground level to the tip of any facility on the pole; provided that an existing pole taller than forty feet (40') may be replaced with a pole of equal or lesser height; and further provided, upon a showing of good cause, the Public Works Director may extend this height requirement to forty-five feet (45'). No cross bar or bracket shall exceed the current size. Any replacement pole shall be of like material to the existing pole. 
(b)  Existing aerial facilities . 
(1)  In the event a current pole owner decides to relocate its aerial facilities underground, all other facility users using such pole shall also relocate their aerial facilities at such time; provided that this requirement shall not apply if only drop lines are being relocated. 
(2)  Where reasonable and appropriate, aerial facility users shall place aerial facilities underground when required to relocate said facilities in conjunction with public improvement projects. 
(3)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting necessary repairs to any existing aerial facilities properly in use within the City. 
(c)  Drop lines . New drop lines to residences and businesses shall be constructed underground; provided that aerial drop lines connecting to aerial facilities may be allowed when other utilities have already legally utilized aerial drop lines or when otherwise authorized by the Public Works Director. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-306) 
Sec. 15-206. - Same-Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
(a)  In recognition of the inherent danger thereof, high voltage electrical transmission lines shall be exempt from the requirements of this division regarding placing facilities underground and pole height restrictions. Instead, all high voltage electrical transmission lines Constructed within the City shall be placed on a case-by-case basis with prior siting approval by the City Council upon the Planning Commission's recommendation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the Public Works Director may grant special permission on a temporary basis (not to exceed six (6) months) for an exception to the requirements of this division on such terms as the Public Works Director may deem appropriate in cases of emergency, unusual circumstances, physical impracticality or impossibility, extreme economic hardship or lack of existing technology without discrimination as to the person or entity, to construct, maintain, use or operate facilities. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the City Council, upon the Planning Commission's recommendation, may grant special permission on a permanent basis for an exception to the requirements of this division on such terms as the City Council may deem appropriate in cases of emergency, unusual circumstances, physical impracticality or impossibility, extreme economic hardship or lack of existing technology without discrimination as to the person or entity, to construct, maintain, use or operate facilities. 
(d)  If there is an emergency necessitating response work or repair, a facility user may begin that repair or emergency response work or take any action required under the circumstances, provided that the facility user notifies the City promptly after beginning the work and timely thereafter meets any permit or other requirement had there not been such an emergency. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-307) 
Sec. 15-207. - Construction requirements. 
    All facilities shall be constructed and maintained to a suitable degree of safety and appearance as established in this chapter and by any other applicable code, statute, ordinance, law, regulation or standard, including all technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing use, maintenance and dismantling of such facilities promulgated by national trade associations commonly associated with the service provided by the facility user. Facilities not properly constructed or maintained will be considered a nuisance and will be either timely upgraded or removed at the facility user's expense. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-308) 
Sec. 15-208. - Requirements on work in utility easements. 
    A facility user constructing, repairing, replacing or maintaining facilities in a utility easement must comply with any applicable zoning or building code requirements. If working in a utility easement on or immediately adjacent to residential property, the facility user shall either directly notify the property owner in person or leave notice on the door of the appropriate residence stating the time and date work is to be done, the name and telephone number of the facility user, and, if applicable, the name of facility user's contractor. For planned projects requiring work in excess of five (5) hours, such notice shall be provided at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of the work. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-309) 
Sec. 15-209. - Abandoned or unusable facilities. 
    Any facility not operated for a period of six (6) months or more shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the facility user and the site returned to its original condition; provided that this requirement shall not apply to drop lines. Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon request of the facility user, the City may allow underground facilities to be left in place when such removal is not practical or desirable in accordance with the public interest. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-310) 
Sec. 15-210. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Appeals process . Whenever a facility user deems itself aggrieved by any decision or action taken by the Public Works Director, the facility user may file an appeal with the City under the same format as provided by the City ROW Ordinance. If a facility user still deems itself aggrieved after such appeal to the City, such facility user shall have thirty (30) days after the effective date of the City's final decision to institute an action in the County District Court. 
(b)  Federal, State and City jurisdiction . This division shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws. The facility user's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The facility user shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances and amendments thereto enacted pursuant to that power. 
(c)  Exemption . Governmental facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(d)  Other ordinances. This division is not intended to replace or supersede the provisions of the City's right-of-way ordinance or any City ordinance governing cell towers, wireless facilities, dishes or HAM radios. 
(e)  City's failure to enforce . The City's failure to enforce or remedy any noncompliance of the terms and conditions of this division shall not constitute a waiver of the City's right or a waiver of the facility user's obligation as herein provided. 
(f)  Reservation of rights . The City shall have the right to waive any provision of this division, except those required by Federal or State law, if the City determines as follows that it is in the public interest to do so; and that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the facility user. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the City. Further, the City hereby reserves to itself the right to intervene in any suit, action or proceeding involving the provisions herein. Additionally, the City, in additional to any other remedies, shall have the authority to maintain civil suits or actions in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing or preventing the violation of the provisions of this division. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this division, the provisions of this division shall not infringe upon the rights of any person or entity pursuant to any applicable State or Federal statutes, including, but not limited to, the right to occupy the right-of-way. 
(g)  Penalties . Any person or entity violating any provision violation of this division is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, if said violation can be cured by a facility user, said facility user shall first have a reasonable period of time (not to exceed sixty (60) days) after written notice to cure said violation. Every day that this division is violated shall constitute a separate offense. Prior to prosecution for a violation of this division, which violation can be cured by a facility user, the facility user shall first have a reasonable period of time (not to exceed sixty (60) days) after written notice to cure said violation. 
(h)  Repeal of other ordinances . All other ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof inconsistent or in conflict with the terms hereof shall be canceled, annulled, repealed, and set aside; provided that it is not the intent of this division to supersede, cancel, annul, repeal or set aside any requirement of the City's right-of way ordinance or any City ordinance governing cell towers, wireless facilities, dishes or HAM radios. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-3-311) 
Secs. 15-211-15-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning, K.S.A. 12-753 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-229. - Zoning districts established. 
    The following zoning districts are established according to the use of land and buildings and the intensity of such use and the Governing Body may divide the City into these districts in order to bring about the general purpose of this chapter. The districts shall have the intent, standards, and regulations given in specific sections for each district. 
(1)  R-1 Single-Family Residential (see Division 2, Subdivision II of this article). 
(2)  R-2P Planned Residential (see Division 2, Subdivision III of this article). 
(3)  B-1 Neighborhood Business (see Division 2, Subdivision IV of this article). 
(4)  B-2 Office (see Division 2, Subdivision V of this article). 
(5)  B-3P Planned Business/Mixed Use (see Division 2, Subdivision VI of this article). 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-102) 
Sec. 15-230. - Transitional provisions. 
    The provisions in this article shall result in the following transitions from zoning regulations in effect prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Current Zoning District Prior to Adoption of the Ordinance from which this Article is Derived New Zoning District/Treatment Subsequent to Adoption of the Ordinance from which this Article is Derived A Residential District R-1 district. B Business District B-1 district (except for property that is specifically rezoned to the B-2 district according to formal rezoning procedures). C Cluster Dwelling District R-2P district upon formal procedure to re-designate all current C district property on the zoning map. Existing building locations, uses, and site conditions are deemed to be the initial development plan for the conversion to R-2P. Any future development shall require a development plan under the R-2P procedures. Evaluation of all R-2P development plans on property converted from the current C district shall take into account existing conditions as a "deemed approved" development plan and seek to develop consistency between the existing conditions and the intent, planning criteria, and standards of the R-2P district to the extent practical.  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-103) 
Sec. 15-231. - Zoning map. 
    The City is hereby divided into districts, the classifications treatment of which are provided in Section 15-229. The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the "Official Zoning District Map," which together with all explanatory matter thereon shall be incorporated into the ordinance from which this article is derived as if it were all fully described in this article. The Official Zoning District Map shall be marked "official copy of Zoning District Map incorporated into zoning regulations by adoption of an Ordinance by the Governing Body on the 14 day of February 2005." The map, and all subsequent amendments to the map, shall also be on file at the Office of the City Clerk and made available to the public. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-104) 
Sec. 15-232. - Adoption of zoning regulations. 
(a)  Planning Commission review. Upon the development of proposed zoning regulations, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once in the official City newspaper at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing providing the time and place for the hearing and describing the proposal in general terms. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time as necessary. Approval of a recommendation for the proposed zoning regulations shall be by an affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the Planning Commission. Upon such approval, the proposed zoning regulations together with the written summary of the hearing shall be submitted to the Governing Body. 
(b)  Governing Body review. Upon its review of the Planning Commission recommendations the Governing Body may: 
(1)  Adopt such recommendations by ordinance; 
(2)  Override the Planning Commission's recommendations by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of the membership of the Governing Body; or 
(3)  Return the same to the Planning Commission together with a statement specifying the basis for the Governing Body's failure to approve or disapprove. If the Governing Body returns the Planning Commission's recommendations, the Planning Commission, after considering the statement, may resubmit its original recommendations giving the reasons therefore or submit new and amended recommendations. Upon the receipt of the recommendations, the Governing Body, by a simple majority, may adopt or may revise and amend and adopt the recommendations by ordinance, or take no further action. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendations to the Governing Body following the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after the receipt of the Governing Body's report, the Governing Body shall consider the inaction on the part of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original recommendations and proceed accordingly. 
(c)  Effective date. The proposed zoning regulations shall become effective upon publication of the adopting ordinance, unless a different date is specifically expressed in the ordinance. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-105) 
Sec. 15-233. - Amendment of zoning regulations. 
    A proposal for an amendment to supplement, change or revise the existing general zoning regulations may be initiated by the Governing Body or the Planning Commission. Such proposed amendment shall be first submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation, who shall conduct a public hearing thereon, and cause an accurate written summary to be made of the proceedings. Notice of the hearing shall be given in like manner as that required for recommendations on the original zoning regulations and shall describe the proposed changes. A majority of the members of the Planning Commission present and voting at the hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of the amendment to the Governing Body. The Governing Body's review of the amendment shall follow the same procedure as its review of the original zoning regulations. The amendment shall become effective upon publication of the adopting ordinance, unless a different date is specifically expressed in the ordinance. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-106) 
Sec. 15-234. - Rezoning. 
    A proposal for an amendment to supplement, change or revise the boundaries of the Official Zoning District Map in or to affect specific property ("rezoning") may be initiated by the Governing Body or the Planning Commission, or upon application of the owner of the property affected or the owner's agent. 
(1)  Application requirements . An application for a rezoning shall be accompanied by the applicable fee and contain the following: 
a.  Legal description of the property; 
b.  A statement of the reasons for the rezoning, including how the request conforms with the comprehensive plan and the purposes, intent, and standards of the City's zoning regulations; 
c.  A preliminary site plan. In the case of a request to rezone to the R-2P or B-3P districts, the application shall also be accompanied by a development plan; 
d.  Assurances that adequate public facilities are available; and 
e.  Any additional studies or information as may reasonably be requested by the City to demonstrate compliance with the comprehensive plan, the zoning regulations, or any other applicable law or regulation. 
(2)  Planning Commission review . A proposed rezoning shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation. 
a.  Hearing. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing regarding the proposed rezoning, and shall cause an accurate written summary to be made of the proceedings. At any public hearing held to consider a proposed rezoning, an opportunity shall be granted to interested parties to be heard. 
b.  Published notice. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the same manner as that required for recommendations on the original zoning regulations and shall describe the proposed changes in the restrictions or in the boundary or classification of any zone or district. Since the proposed rezoning affects specific property, the property shall be designated by legal description or a general description sufficient to identify the property under consideration. If the legal description is not published, the notice shall include a statement that a complete legal description is available for public inspection at Fairway City Hall located at 4210 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Suite 100, Fairway, Kansas. 
c.  Written notice. Written notice of the proposed rezoning shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the hearing to all owners of record of real property located within the area to be altered and to all owners of record of real property located within at least two hundred feet (200') of the area proposed to be altered. An applicant shall immediately deliver an affidavit to the City evidencing that such notice has been made. When the notice has been properly addressed and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Planning Commission or the Governing Body. 
d.  Exceptions to written notice requirement. 
1.  Whenever five (5) or more property owners of record owning ten (10) or more contiguous or noncontiguous lots, tracts or parcels of the same zoning classification initiate a rezoning of their property from a less restrictive to a more restrictive zoning classification, such proposed rezoning shall not require written notice as provided for above, and shall not be subject to any protest petition. 
2.  Whenever the City initiates a rezoning from a less restrictive to a more restrictive zoning classification of ten (10) or more contiguous or noncontiguous lots, tracts or parcels of the same zoning classification having five (5) or more owners of record, the written notice shall be required to be mailed to only owners of record of the properties to be rezoned and only such owners shall be eligible to initiate a protest petition. 
e.  Scope of review. The required notice in Subsection (2)d of this section is sufficient to permit the Planning Commission to recommend a rezoning which affect only a portion of the land described in the notice or which gives all or any part of the land described a zoning classification of lesser change than that set forth in the notice; provided that a recommendation of a zoning classification of lesser change than that set forth in the notice shall not be valid without republication and, where necessary, remailing. 
f.  Review and recommendation. A majority of the members of the Planning Commission present and voting at the hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of the rezoning to the Governing Body. If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation on a rezoning request, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have made a recommendation of disapproval. 
(3)  Governing Body review . The Governing Body's review of the proposed rezoning shall follow the same procedure as its review of the original zoning regulations. 
(4)  Effective date . The proposed rezoning shall become effective upon publication of the adopting ordinance, unless a different date is specifically expressed in the ordinance. 
(5)  Record of amendment . The adopting ordinance shall describe the boundaries as amended, or, if provision is made for the fixing of the same upon the Official Zoning District Map, the ordinance shall: define the change or the boundary as amended; order the official map to be changed to reflect the rezoning; and appropriately amend the zoning regulation incorporating the map. 
(6)  Review criteria . The following factors shall be considered in approving or disapproving a proposed rezoning: 
a.  The character of the neighborhood; 
b.  The zoning and uses of nearby property; 
c.  The suitability of the property for uses allowed by current zoning; 
d.  The suitability of the property for uses allowed by the proposed rezoning; 
e.  The extent that a change will detrimentally affect neighboring property; 
f.  The length of time that the property has been vacant; 
g.  The relative gain to public health, safety and welfare from the current restrictions on the property as compared to the hardship on individual landowners; 
h.  Recommendations of professional staff; 
i.  Conformance of the proposed rezoning with the comprehensive plan; and 
j.  Other specific factors that are relevant to the proposed rezoning and impact the benefit or harm to the community at large, including all interested parties. 
(7)  Protest petition . Whether or not the Planning Commission approves or disapproves a proposed rezoning, if a protest petition against such proposed rezoning is filed in the office of the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing, signed by the owners of record of twenty percent (20%) or more of any real property proposed to be rezoned or by the owners of record of twenty percent (20%) or more of the total real property within the area required to be notified of the proposed rezoning of a specific property, excluding streets and public ways, the ordinance adopting such rezoning shall not be passed except by at least a three-fourths (3/4) vote of all of the members of the Governing Body; provided, if the rezoning was requested by the owner of the specific property subject to the rezoning or the owner of the specific property subject to the rezoning does not oppose in writing such rezoning, such property shall be excluded when calculating the total real property within the area required to be notified. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-107) 
Sec. 15-235. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Applicants. The following development activities shall require a site plan review subject to the procedures and criteria contained in the zoning regulations. No building permit shall be issued until the required review and approval of a site plan has occurred. 
Development Activity Preliminary Final In the R-1 district, any construction activity that either: 
 Adds to or replaces a portion of the structure on more than fifty percent (50%) of existing building footprints; 
 Adds more than six-hundred (600) square feet of building footprint; 
 Adds an entirely new principal building to a lot; 
 Alters the massing or facade design on more than twenty-five percent (25%) of any street-facing or side elevation; or 
 Any application, regardless of the size or impact of the project, that requests and exception to the Dimension Standards in Section 15-296 or the Site Design Standards in Section 15-297. No Yes In the R-2P or B-3P districts, a proposed development plan, and any subsequent development according to an approved development plan, requires a site plan as a component of the development plan as specifies in Article IV, Division 4. Yes Yes In the B-1 and B-2 district: 
 Any exterior structural construction activity, alteration or replacement of a structure, except activities that may be considered ordinary maintenance; or 
 Any site construction activity, such as landscaping, parking, drive aisles, or similar site elements, the extent of which alters or impacts traffic patterns on or around the site, except activities that may be considered ordinary maintenance. Yes Yes Any request for rezoning or a Special Use Permit Yes Yes  
(b)  Submittal requirements. 
(1)  Preliminary site plan . Nine copies of the preliminary site plan shall be submitted to the City Clerk in support of the application for preliminary site plan approval. The preliminary site plan shall contain the information: 
a.  A small key map indicating the location of the property within the City, a north arrow and scale. 
b.  A title block including: 
1.  Name and address of the landowner; 
2.  Name and address of the architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer, surveyor, contractor, or other persons or entities involved in preparation of the preliminary site plan; 
3.  Original date and date of latest revisions to the preliminary site plan. 
c.  With regard to the subject property only: 
1.  Existing topography with contours at two (2) foot intervals, and delineating any land areas within the one-hundred-year flood plain. 
2.  Proposed location of buildings, building setback lines and other structures, parking areas, drives, walks, screening, drainage patterns, public streets and any existing easements. 
3.  Sufficient dimensions to indicate relationship between buildings, property lines, parking areas and other elements of the preliminary site plan. 
4.  General extent and character of proposed landscaping. 
5.  A description of the proposed use, including information regarding proposed hours of operation. 
d.  With regard to areas within two-hundred feet (200') of the subject property: 
1.  Any public streets which are of record. 
2.  Any drives which exist or which are proposed to the degree that they appear on plans on file with the City, including those serving residential buildings. 
3.  Any buildings which exist or are proposed to the degree that their location and size are shown on plans on file with the City. Residential buildings may be shown in approximate location and general size and shape. 
4.  The location and size of any drainage structures, such as culverts, paved or earthen ditches or stormwater sewers and inlets. 
e.  Preliminary sketches depicting the general style, size and exterior construction materials of the buildings proposed. Where several building types are proposed on the preliminary site plan, such as apartments and commercial buildings, a separate sketch shall be prepared for each type. Such sketches shall include elevation drawings, but detailed drawings and perspectives are not required. 
f.  A schedule indicating total gross floor area, land area, parking spaces and other quantities relative to the submitted preliminary site plan in order that compliance with requirements of this article can be determined. 
(2)  Additional information required in support of preliminary site plan . 
a.  In addition to the information listed in the previous section, the Planning Commission or Governing Body may also require applicants for preliminary site plan approval to submit and/or pay the cost of such technical studies as may be necessary to enable the Planning Commission or Governing Body to evaluate the application. Examples of technical studies that may be required shall include, but not be limited to, traffic studies, engineering studies, geologic or hydrogeologic studies, flood studies, environmental impact assessments, noise studies, market studies or economic impact reports. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the cost of all such studies, and the person or firms preparing the studies must be approved in advance by the entity requiring such study. The City may require that the applicant post a deposit in the amount of the estimated cost of such studies, and if the applicant refuses to post the deposit, the City shall be under no obligation to proceed with consideration of the preliminary site plan. Notwithstanding the fact that the Planning Commission did not require submission of any such technical study in support of the application, the Governing Body may require the submission of such studies prior to taking action on the application for preliminary site plan approval. In such case, the persons or firms selected to perform the studies shall be subject to the approval of the Governing Body. If during the public hearing on the application, the Planning Commission determines the need for such studies, the public hearing shall be continued until such time as such studies have been completed and submitted. If the Governing Body determines the need for such studies, its consideration and approval of the preliminary site plan shall be continued until such time as such studies have been completed and submitted. 
b.  The Planning Commission or Governing Body shall have authority to require that the applicant for preliminary site plan approval submit proof of having reviewed the preliminary site plan with applicable water, sewer, fire, police, gas and electric utility officials. Proof of such review shall be provided on forms furnished by the City Clerk. The forms shall provide an opportunity for applicable water, sewer, gas and electric officials to provide comments on the existing and future availability and timing of services provided by their respective districts or agencies to the subject property. In order to obtain approval of a preliminary site plan, the applicant must show that adequate water, sewer, fire, gas, police and electric services are presently available to the subject property. If adequate public facilities and services are not presently available at the time of submittal of the application for preliminary site plan approval, as determined by the affected utility company or agency, the preliminary site plan may be denied. 
(3)  Final site plan. Nine (9) copies of the final site plan shall be submitted in support of the application for final site approval. The final site plan shall contain the following information and meet the following requirements: 
a.  A small key map indicating the location of the property within the City, a north arrow and scale. 
b.  A title block including: 
1.  Name and address of the landowner; 
2.  Name and address of the architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer, surveyor, contractor, or other persons or entities involved in preparation of the final site plan; 
3.  Original date and date of latest revisions to the final site plan. 
c.  With regard to the subject property: 
1.  Finished grades or contours for the entire site at one (1) foot contour intervals. 
2.  All existing and proposed adjacent public street right-of-way with centerline location. 
3.  All existing and proposed adjacent public street and public drive locations, widths, curb cuts and radii. 
4.  Location, width and limits of all existing and proposed sidewalks, including the crossing distance of any crosswalks across right-of-way, private lanes, or internal drive aisles. 
5.  Location, size and radii of all existing and proposed median breaks and turning lanes. 
6.  Distance between buildings, between buildings and property lines and between all parking areas and property lines. 
7.  Location of all required building and parking setbacks. 
8.  Location, dimensions, number of stories and area in square feet of all proposed buildings. 
9.  Area of land on the final site plan in square feet and acres. 
10.  Limits, location, size and material to be used in all proposed retaining walls. 
11.  Location and dimensions of all driveways, parking lots, parking stalls, aisles, loading and service areas and docks. 
12.  Location, height, candle power and type of outside lighting fixtures for buildings and parking lots. 
13.  Location, size, type of material and message of all proposed signs on the subject property, and a written and graphic description of all other existing signs located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property which is the subject of the application in order to determine compatibility of design. 
14.  Pertinent peripheral information to include adjacent developments, alignment and location of public and private driveways and streets, medians, and public and semi-public easements. 
15.  Preliminary drainage design and location and existing drainage facilities. 
16.  For all R-1 activity defined as a new house, and for all new building construction in the B-1, B-2, B3P, and R2P zoned districts, a watershed analysis stamped by a licensed Kansas Engineer shall be required. The watershed analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i)  Baseline watershed level as property exists before any demolition. 
(ii)  Watershed level with proposed changes including new construction, hardscape and specific changes to grades. 
(iii)  Impact to immediate surrounding properties. 
(iv)  A determination that the new construction will not adversely impact adjoining or downstream property. 
The Planning Commission may waive the requirement that a watershed analysis be submitted under this subsection for good cause shown by the applicant, which evidence may include: (1) letters from all property owners immediately adjacent stating that they do not object to the applicant's submission of the final site plan without a watershed study, and (2) at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the lot consists of permeable and uncovered surface. 
17.  Any request for a variance to the minimum permeable surface requirement or a variance or exception to any building setback for new footprint additions will require a watershed analysis meeting the requirements of Subsection (b)(3)c.16 of this section and stamped by a licensed Kansas engineer. 
d.  Building elevations including the following: 
1.  Elevations of all sides of proposed buildings including notation indicating building materials to be used on exteriors and roofs, and dimensions with sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with all building design standards of the zoning regulations. 
2.  Size, location, color and materials of all signs to be attached to building exteriors. 
3.  Location, size and materials to be used in all screening of rooftop mechanical equipment. 
4.  Building sections. 
e.  Floor plans indicating dimensions and areas of all floors within proposed buildings. 
f.  Landscaping and screening plans as required by this article, which include: 
1.  Size, species, location and number of all existing and proposed landscape materials. 
2.  Notation of all areas to be seeded or sodded. 
3.  Location, size and materials to be used for all screening, including screening of outside trash enclosure areas. 
4.  A schedule calculating the sizes and types of different open spaces provided in the final site plan to demonstrate compliance with all landscape and open space design standards of the zoning regulations. 
g.  A parking schedule showing the numbers and dimensions of typical parking spaces, drive aisles, and parking lot landscape areas sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the parking quantity and design standards of the zoning regulations. 
h.  All final site plans are to be drawn to a standard engineer's scale. 
i.  The following additional items shall be submitted in support of the application for final site plan approval: 
1.  Deeds of dedication for all rights-of-way or easements required as a result of preliminary site plan approval. 
2.  A copy of all covenants and restrictions applicable to the site, if required by the terms of the approved preliminary site plan. 
3.  Evidence of satisfaction of any stipulations of the preliminary site plan approval which were conditions precedent to consideration of the final site plan. 
4.  Assurances of adequate public facilities. 
(c)  Review procedures. 
(1)  Preliminary site plan. 
a.  All preliminary site plans that accompany a rezoning or special use permit application request shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures for a rezoning request. 
b.  All other preliminary site plans required under this article shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission in a public meeting. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to either approve, deny or require modifications of the preliminary site plan to the Governing Body for final action. 
c.  The Governing Body may: 
1.  Approve the recommendation; 
2.  Override the Planning Commission's recommendation by a two-thirds (?) majority vote of the membership of the Governing Body; or 
3.  Return the recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying the basis for the Governing Body's failure to approve or disapprove. If the Governing Body returns the Planning Commission's recommendation, the Planning Commission may resubmit its original recommendation giving the reasons or submit new and amended recommendations. Upon the receipt of the recommendation, the Governing Body, by a simple majority, may approve or may revise or amend and approve such recommendation. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendation to the Governing Body following the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after receipt of the Governing Body's report, the Governing Body shall consider the inaction on the part of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original recommendation and proceed accordingly. 
d.  Except as provided below in Subsection (c)(1)e., approval of the preliminary site plan shall authorize the applicant to proceed with the preparation and review process of a final site plan. 
e.  Combination of final plan approval. If an applicant has provided a detailed plan set meeting both the preliminary site plan requirements and final site plan requirements, the review procedures may be combined into one proceeding. If the Planning Commission determines that the preliminary site plan and final site plan submittal requirements and development standards have been meet, it may recommend approval of the preliminary site plan and approve the final site plan conditioned upon the Governing Body's approval of the preliminary site plan. In this case, final approval shall occur upon the Governing Body's approval of the preliminary site plan. 
(2)  Final site plan. 
a.  All final site plans shall be reviewed by staff and placed on the Planning Commission consent agenda for action consistent with the staff recommendation. Any Planning Commission member, upon proper motion and with the concurrence of two additional members, may pull a final site plan from the consent agenda for further discussion and possible Planning Commission action different from the staff recommendations. 
b.  If the Planning Commission determines that the proposed final site plan is a substantial deviation from an approved preliminary site plan, the application may not be considered except through re-submittal of a new preliminary and final site plan according to this section. Substantial deviations shall include any changes from an approved preliminary plan that, in a reasonable determination, could result in adverse impacts on adjacent property different in extent or type than those considered under the preliminary site plan review. Examples of substantial deviations may include different locations of buildings, ingress and egress, parking, or different proposed uses. 
(3)  Appeal of Planning Commission decision to Governing Body. In the event that the Planning Commission denies a final site plan, the applicant may request that the application for final site plan approval be submitted to the Governing Body for final decision by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission's decision to deny the final site plan. Following its consideration of the appeal, the Governing Body may: 
a.  Approve the recommendation; 
b.  Override the Planning Commission's recommendation by a two-thirds (?) majority vote of the membership of the Governing Body. 
(d)  Review criteria. In considering any application for site plan approval, the review body shall give consideration to the criteria stated below, to the extent they are pertinent to the particular application. In addition, the review body may consider other factors which may be relevant to a particular application. 
(1)  Whether the site is capable of accommodating the buildings, parking areas and drives with appropriate open space. 
(2)  Whether the plan provides for safe and easy ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation, and adequate access vehicles, pedestrians, and emergency service to all parts of the property and of all buildings and structures on the property. 
(3)  Whether the plan is consistent with good land planning and site engineering design principles. 
(4)  Whether an appropriate degree of harmony will prevail between the architectural quality and building materials of the proposed buildings and those of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  The character of the neighborhood. 
(6)  The zoning and use of nearby properties, and the extent to which the proposed use would be in harmony with such zoning and uses. 
(7)  The suitability of the property for the uses to which it has been restricted under the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(8)  The length of time the property has remained vacant. 
(9)  The extent to which approval of the application would detrimentally affect nearby properties. 
(10)  The extent to which the proposed use and plan would substantially harm the value of nearby properties. 
(11)  The extent to which the proposed use and plan would adversely affect the capacity or safety of that portion of the road network influenced by the use, or present parking problems in the vicinity of the property. 
(12)  The extent to which utilities and services, including but not limited to, sewers, water service, police and fire protection, and parks and recreation facilities, are available and adequate to serve the proposed use. 
(13)  The extent to which the proposed use and plan would create excessive stormwater runoff, air pollution, water pollution, noise pollution or other environmental harm. 
(14)  The extent to which there is a need for the use in the community. 
(15)  The economic impact of the proposed use and plan on the community. 
(16)  The ability of the applicant to satisfy any requirements applicable to the specific use imposed pursuant to the zoning district regulations. 
(17)  The gain, if any, to the public health, safety and welfare due to denial of the application as compared to the hardship imposed upon the landowner, if any, as a result of denial of the application. 
(18)  The conformance of the proposed use and plan to the City's Comprehensive Plan, and other adopted planning policies. 
(19)  The recommendation of professional staff, or other professionals retained by the City to evaluate the application. 
(e)  Time limitations on approvals. If the owner has obtained preliminary site plan approval, but fails to apply for final site plan approval within one (1) year from the date of approval of the preliminary site plan by the Planning Commission, the preliminary site plan approval shall be deemed to have expired, and the owner shall be required to resubmit his plan for preliminary site plan approval. If the owner has obtained final site plan approval, but fails to commence construction of the project within one (1) year from the date of final site plan approval, both preliminary and final site plan approval will be deemed to have expired, and the owner shall be required to resubmit said plan for preliminary and final site plan approval. 
(f)  Applications and review procedures table. 
    The following table is a summary of the application and review procedures for the zoning regulations under Article 4. 
Table 15-235(f)-Applications and Review Procedures Summary 
Review Body Application Type Zoning Text Amendment Zoning Map Amendment (rezoning) Preliminary Site Plan Review Final Site Plan review Special Review Procedures 
(See Article 4, Division 4) Preliminary Development Plan Final Development Plan Special Use Permit Board of Zoning Appeals Review Staff A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR A 
RR Planning Commission H 
RR H 
RR PM 
RR PM 
D H 
RR PM 
D H 
RR Governing Body PM 
D PM 
D PM 
D PM 
D PM 
D Board of Zoning Appeals H 
D  
A = Determination of complete application 
RR = Review and/or recommendation 
PM = Public meeting 
H = Public hearing subject to notice requirements 
D = Decision 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-108; Ord. No. 1530, § 1, 7-9-2012; Ord. No. 1540, § 1, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1582 , § 5, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 15-236-15-263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 15-264. - Use table. 
    This table indicates the uses permitted for each zoning district. Uses are either allowed subject to the general standards of the zoning districts, allowed subject to specific conditions listed in this article, or allowed only by special use permit. Where special conditions apply for a specific use, that section of the zoning regulations is referenced in the table. Only the uses specified in this table are permitted in the districts, unless otherwise allowed for in the supplemental provisions located in Division 3 of this article or as a temporary or special use pursuant to Division 4 of this article. All uses and any construction, relocation or alteration of any structure is subject to the requirements of this district and shall further be subject to all other requirements of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly exempted. 
Uses Categories/Specific Uses Zoning District R-1 Single-Family 
Residential R-2P- Planned 
Residential* B-1 
Neighborhood 
Business B-2 Office 
District B-3P Planned 
Business Mixed- 
Use District* Dwelling Single-family P P Two-family P P Townhouse P P Multiple-family/apartment P P Accessory dwelling PC/P Mixed-use PC P Civic Elementary school SP SP SP SP SP Secondary school SP SP SP SP SP Higher education or continuing education institution SP SP Library, museum, or other public exhibit venue SP SP SP Place of worship SP SP SP SP SP Common open space P P P P P Community center or club SP P SP SP SP City uses, services, or facilities PC (See Section 15-5) Other government offices P P Other government facilities SP SP SP SP SP Office Neighborhood/professional service office P P P Open office P P Office complex or campus P P Home occupation PC PC PC PC Retail Grocery P PC P Convenience store P PC P Neighborhood retail P PC P Open retail PC Automobile service station PC/SP PC/SP SP Garden center SP Restaurant P PC P Drive-through facility PC/SP PC/SP PC/SP Bar P PC P Outdoor sales SP Adult business PC Service Nursing home, assisted living, or extended care facility P Clinic SP SP SP Outdoor recreation facility SP Day care P P P General personal services P PC P Funeral home SP Automobile repair SP Indoor recreation SP Radio or television stations P P Off-site parking lot SP SP SP SP SP Bed and breakfast SP SP SP SP Hotel or motel P Entertainment venue PC/SP SP Wireless telecommunication facilities SP SP SP Veterinary services SP PC/SP SP  
P = Permitted subject to general standards and conditions of the district. 
PC = Permitted subject to special conditions listed in the zoning district standards for that zoning district. 
SP = Permitted only as a special use permit subject to any special conditions in the Division or listed as part of the special review procedures. 
* = All uses in planned districts (R-2P and B-3P) are subject to approval of a development plan through the procedures of Division 4 of this article. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.101) 
Sec. 15-265. - Description of uses. 
(a)  This section contains descriptions associated with the uses of land. It is organized according to use categories and use types which correspond with the use table, some of which give examples of common uses. Where a general use type is described, and where more specific use type is further described that fits within that general use description, the more specific use type shall be excluded from the general use type. For example, neighborhood retail excludes grocery and convenience store, both of which are more specifically described. Where a use is not generally or specifically described or listed as an example, but meets all of the characteristics of the use category, use type, or is so similar to a described use type or a use specifically listed as an example as to create no perceptible differential impact, the Planning Commission may interpret the regulations as including the unlisted use within the listed use type. All other uses are different from those described and are not anticipated by these regulations, and may only be allowed by a zoning text amendment. 
(b)  The following use definitions and descriptions are grouped into five (5) general use categories: dwellings; civic; office; retail; and service. 
(1)  Dwelling use category. The dwelling use category includes all types of living arrangements, but not including motels, hotels, roominghouses or boardinghouses, institutions, or convalescent or nursing homes. The term "dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means any building, portion thereof, or other enclosed space or area used as or intended for use permanently or temporarily as the home of one (1) family, with separate cooking and housekeeping facilities. 
a.  Single-family. A detached building designed for one (1) dwelling unit and occupied by one (1) family. 
b.  Two-family . A detached building with only two (2) dwelling units within the building designed for or occupied by two (2) families. 
c.  Townhouse. A dwelling unit attached to a series of other dwelling units by party walls, but no single unit shares party walls with more than two (2) other units, and where each unit maintains an individual entrance from the exterior of the building. 
d.  Multiple-family/apartment. A building with three (3) or more dwelling units designed for or occupied by three (3) or more families with separate cooking and housekeeping facilities for each, where either the units share a common entrance from the exterior of the building or any single unit has common walls or floors with more than two (2) other units. 
e.  Accessory dwelling unit. A dwelling unit that is associated with and incidental to another dwelling unit, and is on the same lot as the other dwelling. 
f.  Mixed use. A building designed for one (1) or more other uses in addition to one (1) or more dwelling units and where the dwelling units are separated from and not accessory to any of the other uses. 
(2)  Civic use category. The civic use category includes uses serving a broad and general public interest to enhance daily community life for adjacent landowners and residents, which are typically run by a government entity, not-for-profit agency or association, religious or charitable institutions, or similar philanthropic organizations. 
a.  Elementary school. An education facility for grades K through 8. 
b.  Secondary school. An education facility for grades 8 through 12. 
c.  Higher education of continuing education institutions. Any business or institution established for the purposes of carrying on education activities at a post grade 12 level, whether through degree programs or for continuing adult education. 
d.  Library, museum, or other public exhibit venue. An establishment offering educational resources, cultural or artistic exhibits, or similar experiences and attractions, and is open to the public. 
e.  Place of worship. An establishment that conducts organized religious services and assemblies. 
f.  Common open space. Any space dedicated for common use by a group of citizens due to their property ownership, residency, or patronage of facilities associated with the open space, exclusive or right-of-way and easements, and open from the ground to the sky. Common open space does not include any impervious surfaces designated for automobile use or any required yard or setback. 
g.  Community center or club. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated for a social, literary, political, educational, or recreational purpose, primarily for the exclusive use of members and their guests. 
h.  City uses, services, or facilities. Any structure or area of land, controlled and/or operated by the City. 
i.  Other government offices. Any structure used for the administrative operations of a government entity other than the City. 
j.  Other government facilities. Any structure or area of land, controlled and/or operated by a government entity other than the City, providing operational activities or services inherent to the role of that entity and available to or for the benefit of citizens of the City. 
(3)  Office use category. The office use category consists of the use of buildings for conducting the business of professional firms, organizations, or government, whose products or services are of the nature that generally do not involve the frequent, continuing, and intensive interactions with clients, customers, or patrons on the premises, and where the exchange of products does not necessarily need to occur on the premises. Retail sales associated with the use may occur if either the product is not delivered on the premises or if less than fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area is available for retail purposes and customer use. 
a.  Neighborhood/professional service offices. Any small-scale office uses which involve individual tenant spaces typically no larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet and cumulatively offer no more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in a single structure. Buildings are designed for and occupied by a profession offering services to clients, customers, or patrons which may involve occasional on-site contact with clients, customers or patrons. Examples include architect, accountant, real estate agent, insurance agent, engineer, lawyer, doctor, or other similar professions. 
b.  Open office. Any building used for large scale office uses which involve individual tenant space above ten thousand (10,000) square feet or offering more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in a single structure. 
c.  Office complex or campus. A premises used for any office use but comprised of multiple buildings and including any ancillary uses open primarily to office employees such as cafeterias, day care facilities and fitness centers, and the associated internal networks of roads, sidewalks, and open space. 
d.  Home occupation. An operation for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises limited in its use and not in a manner detrimental to the character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Retail use category. The retail use category consists of business that sell products and merchandise to consumers for use and consumption on or off premises. 
a.  Grocery. A business engaged primarily in the retail sale of food for home consumption, but may also include limited accessory sales of household products, personal services, or food for consumption on premises. 
b.  Convenience store. A business engaged in the retail sale of food and household products for consumption off premises and characterized by limited line of goods that primarily includes milk, bread, soda, and snacks and typically involves frequent, high, and rapid customer turnover. Convenience stores in association with an automobile service station shall meet all the requirements of an automobile service station. 
c.  Neighborhood retail. A use primarily engaged in the small-scale sale of merchandise for consumer use off of the premises, typically involving less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of floor area for the majority of tenants or business and no more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of retail use in a single structure. Neighborhood retail uses are also characterized by a target market area with an approximately one and one-half (1.5) mile radius for on-site customers. 
d.  Open retail. A use primarily engaged in the large-scale sale of merchandise for consumer use off premises, typically involving more than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet per any individual business or more than one-hundred thousand (100,000) square feet for any group of businesses. Open retail uses are also characterized by target market areas of over one and one-half (1.5) miles for on-site customers. 
e.  Automobile service station. Any building or land used for retail sale and dispensing of automobile fuel. Vehicle lubricants, supplies, accessories, and minor services may be offered if incidental to the sale of fuel and no more than three (3) interior vehicle storage and service bays are provided. 
f.  Garden center. Any year-round, permanent retail sales of plants that may require outdoor storage and maintenance of merchandise at any time of the year. 
g.  Restaurant. A business serving prepared meals for consumption on the premises, which may include accessory bar, carry out, or catering services. 
h.  Drive-through facility. Any portion of a site or building that is dedicated to the sale, delivery, or consumption of merchandise or services to customers while they remain in the vehicle. 
i.  Bar. A business serving alcoholic beverages, which may include limited accessory food and entertainment services. 
j.  Outdoor sales. A retail use where a significant portion of the merchandise, either in area or in business value, is typically stored outside during business hours. 
k.  Adult businesses. A business as defined in Section 7-139, Definitions, Subdivision a. 
(5)  Service use category. The service use category is for businesses that offer clients, customers, or services for performance or delivery on the premises, and may offer some products or merchandise associated with the service typically for use or application on premises. 
a.  Nursing home, assisted living, or extended care facility. A business providing living accommodations and care for persons suffering from illness, other than mental or contagious, which is not of sufficient severity to require hospitalization, or for persons requiring further institutional care after being discharged from a hospital, and where nonresident staff is present for more than eight (8) hours per day. This shall not include group homes according to K.S.A. 12-736. 
b.  Clinic. A place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of ailing, infirm, or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, but who are not provided with board. 
c.  Outdoor recreation facility. A business primarily engaged in the provision of outdoor sports, entertainment, or similar recreation opportunities for participants or spectators. 
d.  Day care. A business providing children with instruction, food, or lodging, and general child care, away from the children home, where more than six (6) children under the age of sixteen (16) or more than three (3) children under the age of eighteen (18) months are accommodated. Similar businesses accommodating six (6) or less children under the age of sixteen (16) and three (3) or less children under the age of eighteen (18) months may be considered home occupations for the purposes of this chapter. 
e.  General personal services. A business that provides specialized service, primarily to individual customers and which service is unrelated to any open retail use. Examples include a post office, bank, barbershop or beauty salon, bakery or catering, dry cleaner or laundry, film processing, small appliance repair, tailor, office support, or other similar service. 
f.  Funeral home. An establishment used for the preparation of deceased humans and ceremonies prior to burial or cremation. 
g.  Automobile repair. The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles. Vehicle lubricants, supplies, and accessories may be supplied and sold at retail. 
h.  Indoor recreation facility. A business engaged in the provision of indoor sports, entertainment, or similar recreation opportunities for participants of spectators. Examples of uses include roller skating rinks, movie theaters, or fitness clubs. 
i.  Radio or television station. A premises used for broadcast media including administrative and operational functions. 
j.  Off-site parking lot. Any portion of a lot used for vehicle parking for a principal use on a different lot. This use does not include shared parking arrangements as provided in Division 3, Subdivision I of this article. 
k.  Bed and breakfast. A business where lodging and/or meals are provided incidental to a principal single-family dwelling, where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms, and where the owner resides on the premises. 
l.  Hotel or motel. A business where temporary lodging is provided in individual rooms or suites on a daily or weekly basis, including accessory dining and meeting room facilities. 
m.  Entertainment venue. A business where floor shows or other forms of entertainment by persons are provided for guests, which may include accessory dining, bar, and similar refreshment services. Examples include concert halls, dinner theaters, or banquet halls. 
n.  Veterinary services. Any business where four (4) or more dogs over four (4) months of age are kept for general boarding or medical care. 
o.  Wireless telecommunication facilities. Any complex, including tower, antennae, antenna support structure, cabinet, building, screen walls, transmission equipment, power source or other equipment constructed on the ground, and used to assist antennae in the generation or receipt of electromagnetic communication signals, or used for the transmission or receipt of electromagnetic communication signals. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.102; Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 1382; Ord. No. 1530, § 3, 7-9-2012) 
Secs. 15-266-15-293. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - R-1 Single-Family Residential District 

Sec. 15-294. - Intent. 
    The R-1 Single-Family District is intended to provide a low to medium-density residential environment consisting of single-family dwelling units on lot sizes consistent with the patterns and arrangement of the neighborhood, and preserving the character of the existing neighborhoods within the district, each having their own characteristic of size and residential architecture. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.201; Ord. No. 1582 , § 7, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-295. - Uses. 
    Uses allowed in the R-1 District are specified in Section 15-264. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.202; Ord. No. 1582 , § 7, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-296. - Dimension standards. 
(a)  Lots. 
Lot  Minimum area 6,000 square feet  Minimum width 60 feet  Minimum front setback 40 feet a  Minimum side setback  Less than 80-foot lot width = 6 feet 
 80-100-foot lot width = 8 feet 
 More than 100-foot lot width = 10% of lot width  Minimum rear setback 25 feet Principal building (dwelling unit)  Maximum height 21/2 stories with a maximum of 30 feet above the lesser of: finished grade of previous structure measured at previous threshold or current finished grade measured at current threshold  Minimum ground floor area (excluding garage)  1,800 square feet for one-story structures 
 900 square feet for all other structures Accessory buildings  Maximum height 11/2 stories or the height of the principal building, whichever is less  Minimum front setback Behind the rear building line of the principal building  Minimum side & rear setback 4 feet 
In addition: (a) any portion of an accessory building that exceeds 8 feet high shall be set back 1 additional foot for each foot over 8 feet high; (b) any accessory building with a footprint greater than 576 square feet shall have the same setbacks as required for principle buildings; and (c) an accessory building that is connected to a principle building by any structure, such as a breezeway or arbor shall meet the same setbacks as required for the principle building. The additional setback shall apply even when the structure is not physically attached to the accessory building or principle building.  Maximum ground-floor area 576 square feet for lots under 10,000 square feet; 
720 square feet for lots 10,000 square feet or more.  
a  Lots with existing front setbacks of less than 40 feet are eligible for status as a non-conforming lot in Division 3, Part 6 and may be eligible for exceptions with regard to future additions to the principal building. 
(b)  Corner lots. The following corner lot patterns exist in the City. A corner lot shall maintain the existing lot pattern, however, through the site plan process the Planning Commission may approve a new pattern where the context suggests a new pattern is at least as appropriate with the character of the area. Setbacks for corner lots shall be as follows. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-16] 
(1)  Standard corner lot. Standard corner lots are lots that are oriented the same as all other lots on the block, with a side yard adjacent to the side street. 
a.  Street side setback. The greater of: 
1.  The same as the required setback for all other lots; or 
2.  Three (3) times the distance of the required setback, but measured from the back of the curb. 
b.  The front, interior side, and rear setbacks shall be the same as required for all other lots; 
c.  Accessory buildings shall be setback at least twenty feet (20') from the lot line on the street side lot. 
(2)  Reverse corner lot : Reverse corner lots are lots that are oriented to the side street or shorter end of the block. 
a.  Street side setback: Same as required for all other lots plus an additional fifteen feet (15'); 
b.  Front setback : Same as required for all other lots, except that the setback may be adjusted to reflect the front building line of the adjacent building also fronting on the side street, but in no case closer than 25' from the front lot line; 
c.  Interior side and rear setbacks : Same as required for all other lots. 
d.  Accessory buildings shall be setback at least twenty-five feet (25') from any lot line along a street or behind the front building line of the adjacent lot, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Intersection lot . Intersection lots are lots that have a dual orientation or are oriented to the intersection. These lots shall have two (2) front setbacks on each street side, and two (2) side setbacks on the interior sides, and no rear setback. 
a.  Front setbacks: Same as required for all other lots and is applied to both street frontages, except that the setback may be adjusted to reflect the front building line of each adjacent building, but in no case closer than twenty-five feet (25') from the front lot line. 
b.  Interior side setbacks : Same as required for all other lots and shall be applied to both interior lot lines. 
c.  Rear setback : There is no rear setback for an intersection lot. 
d.  Accessory buildings shall be set back at least twenty-five feet (25') from any lot line along a street, or behind the front building line of the adjacent lot, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Exception: As a part of the site plan process, the Planning Commission may grant exceptions to the dimension standards set forth in this section, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Front setback exceptions: Where the front building lines along the same side of a block are less than the required setback, the Planning Commission may grant an exception to the front setback of an adjacent lot to make its building line consistent. 
(2)  Side setback exceptions: 
a.  The existing structure was legally constructed with a side setback of less than the currently required side setback; 
b.  The proposed addition shall have a side setback that is equal (i.e., continuous and consistent with) or greater than the existing side build line of the existing structure; 
c.  The proposed addition shall not cause further encroachment than that of the existing structure; and 
d.  The exception shall not cause an adverse impact on the surrounding properties. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.203; Ord. No. 1582 , § 7, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-297. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Lot design. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the lot design standards is to: 
a.  Reinforce the existing scale and patterns of neighborhoods, including appropriate transitions to adjacent neighborhoods. 
b.  Promote the character of the neighborhood through the design and relationship of lots to streetscapes. 
c.  Preserve and strengthen the generous tree canopy throughout neighborhoods. 
d.  Minimize the impacts of development on prevailing grades and associated runoff through landscape design. 
(2)  Greenspace requirement. The following greenspace requirements provide environmental and aesthetic benefits through landscape design. 
a.  All lots up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the following shall apply: 
1.  At least sixty percent (60%) of a lot shall be permeable and uncovered surface. 
2.  At least sixty percent (60%) of the lot in front of the front building line shall be permeable and uncovered surface. 
b.  Lots greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet but less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, the following shall apply: 
1.  The first ten thousand (10,000) square feet: At least sixty percent (60%) of a lot shall be permeable and uncovered surface; 
2.  The first ten thousand (10,000) square feet: At least sixty percent (60%) of a lot in front of the front building line shall be permeable and uncovered surface; 
3.  Remaining square footage less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet: At least seventy-five percent (75%) of a lot shall be permeable and uncovered surface. 
Example: 11,600 square foot lot 
10,000 square feet x 60% = 6,000 square feet 
1,600 square feet x 75% = 1,200 square feet 
6,000 + 1,200 = 7,200 square feet of greenspace required  
c.  Lots greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, the following shall apply: 
1.  The first ten thousand (10,000) square feet: At least sixty percent (60%) of a lot shall be permeable and uncovered surface; 
2.  The first ten thousand (10,000) square feet: At least sixty percent (60%) of a lot in front of the front building line shall be permeable and uncovered surface; 
3.  The square footage greater than ten thousand (10,000) but less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet: At least seventy-five percent (75%) of a lot shall be permeable and uncovered surface. 
4.  The square footage greater than thirty thousand (30,000): One hundred percent (100%) shall be permeable and uncovered surface. 
Example: 31,200 square foot lot 
10,000 square feet x 60% = 6,000 square feet 
20,000 square feet x 75% = 15,000 square feet 
1,200 square feet x 100% = 1,200 square feet 
6,000 + 15,000 + 1,200 = 22,200 square feet of greenspace required  
d.  Exclusions. Permeable or uncovered surfaces recessed within the perimeter of the building footprint or any permeable surface less than four feet (4') in any dimension shall not count towards this requirement. 
e.  Large shade trees. Large shade trees shall be maintained or established between the front building line and street through the following: 
1.  All lots shall have at least one (1) large shade tree for every forty feet (40') of street frontage, or fraction thereof. Existing large shade trees, including any large shade trees in the right-of-way, may be counted towards this requirement 
2.  Removal of an existing large shade tree that results in less than one (1) per forty feet (40') of street frontage shall require replacement of two (2) new large shade trees for each one (1) tree removed. 
3.  Large shade trees shall be planted between the front building line and the street. 
4.  Large shade trees species shall be selected from the "Great Trees for the Kansas City Region" guide and the "Large Trees for the Landscape" list. 
5.  Any new trees required to be planted shall be at least three (3) inch caliper. 
f.  Foundation planting. All buildings shall maintain a foundation planting bed at least four feet (4') deep along at least fifty percent (50%) of the building frontage. This planting bed shall be planted with ornamental living materials that complement the design of the site and building. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 4-2-17] 
g.  [Remaining surfaces]. All of the remaining minimum permeable and uncovered surfaces on residential lots shall be planted with vegetation. 
(3)  Curb cuts and driveways. The following driveway standards preserve the streetscape, maintain greenspace along the frontages and integrate driveways into the natural terrain and landscape, by keeping them as narrow as practical closer to the streetscape. 
a.  Single curb cut. Each lot shall be entitled to a single curb cut that corresponds to a driveway to the dwelling unit's garage or alternative enclosed vehicle parking space. No such curb cut and driveway shall exceed twenty percent (20%) of the lot frontage up to twenty (20) feet, except: 
1.  Lots less than eighty feet (80') in lot frontage may have curb cuts up to a maximum of sixteen (16) feet in width. 
2.  An additional three feet (3') may be permitted at the curb cut on each side of the driveway. 
3.  Within twenty feet (20') forward of the front building line, the driveway width may be expanded to twenty feet (20') to accommodate garage entrances or parking. 
4.  There is no limit to the driveway width behind the front building line, other than by application of the overall lot greenspace requirement. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-18] 
b.  Multiple curb cuts. Lots with a lot width of eighty feet (80') or more may be allowed two (2) curb cuts, subject to the following: 
1.  The driveways corresponding to the two (2) curb cuts must interconnect in an arc or similar fashion, and at least one (1) curb cut must correspond to a driveway to the dwelling unit's garage or alternative enclosed vehicle parking space. A connecting arc driveway is not subject to the lot frontage width limits below; provided, it is no wider than the two (2) connecting driveway portions. 
2.  No single curb cut and driveway shall exceed ten percent (10%) of the lot frontage up to twelve feet (12'), except: 
(a)  An additional three feet (3') may be permitted as the curb cut on each side of the driveway. 
(b)  Within twenty feet (20') curb-ward of the front building line, the driveway width may be expanded to twenty feet (20') to accommodate garage entrances or parking. 
(c)  There is no limit to the driveway width beyond the front building line, other than by application of the overall lot greenspace requirement. 
3.  There must be at least thirty-six (36) linear feet between the two (2) curb cuts. (Measured along the street curb.) 
c.  Location. No driveway or curb cut shall be located within two feet (2') of any side yard property line, except in the case of a side yard curb cut entrance for a corner lot, or a shared driveway serving two (2) properties. Driveway width and paved parking areas shall be limited in size by the greenspace requirement in Subsection (a)(2). 
d.  Materials. Any construction or replacement of driveways shall be with a hard surface material. Gravel, crushed rock or other similar material is not considered hard surfaced material. Curb and driveway materials in the public right-of-way shall also be subject to any applicable right-of-way material requirement. Landscape strips or any landscape islands within driveways that are less than eight feet (8') in any dimension are prohibited. 
e.  Nonconforming. Any legal nonconforming driveway or curb cut not complying with the above standards may be maintained, repaired or replaced without any modification other than adherence to any applicable right-of-way material requirement; provided, all driveways and curb cuts shall be brought into compliance in the event of a new dwelling unit, or when determined necessary, in the Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer's sole discretion, in the event of a substantial addition or remodel. 
f.  KDOT. In the event any driveway or curb cut is associated with any KDOT project or is otherwise subject to KDOT right-of-way regulation, any conflicting KDOT requirement shall supersede the standards set forth hereinabove. 
(b)  Building design. The following building standards apply to all principal buildings and any accessory building that exceeds one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the building design standards is to: 
a.  Reinforce the existing scale and patterns of buildings within neighborhoods, including appropriate transitions to areas adjacent to neighborhoods. 
b.  Promote the character of the neighborhood through the design and relationship of buildings to streetscapes, 
c.  Ensure quality design and the longevity of investments in neighborhoods. 
d.  Manage the relationship of adjacent buildings to maintain privacy and promote compatible building scale and transitions. 
e.  Enhance the quality, aesthetic character, and visual interest within neighborhoods by breaking down larger masses, incorporating human scale details and ornamentation, and encouraging the integrity of various architectural styles found within neighborhoods. 
(2)  Building entrances. The following standards break up the scale and mass of front facades and create human-scale details that relate buildings to the neighborhood streetscape: 
a.  All principal buildings shall have a primary entrance or a primary entrance feature that faces the street. 
b.  Any front facade that exceeds a one and one-half (11/2) stories shall be articulated by one of the following unenclosed primary entrance features [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-1]: 
1.  A single-story covered front porch at least seven feet (7') deep with a total area of at least seventy (70) square feet; 
2.  A stoop rising at least two feet (2') above the finished grade with enhanced architectural elements, such as decorative railings, decorative door moldings, or transom windows, or 
3.  A single-story covered portico projecting from the front facade at least three feet (3') with a total covered area of at least twenty-four (24) square feet. 
c.  Unenclosed primary entrance features meeting the minimum requirements of this section may encroach up to seven feet (7') into the front setback with a maximum of one hundred forty (140) square feet within the front setback. 
d.  Exception: Encroachments of unenclosed primary entrance features up to ten feet (10') into the front setback with a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet within the front setback may be approved by the Planning Commission upon a determination of the following: 
1.  The encroachment results in a setback, building lines, or other structural encroachment similar to that of the immediately adjacent property; 
2.  The encroachment is architecturally compatible with and integrated into the principal building; 
3.  The encroachment does not adversely impact any other required residential site design guideline; and 
4.  The encroachment does not have a detrimental impact on adjacent property. 
e.  In no case may any portion of the primary entrance feature, as provided in Subsection c. or d. above, be closer than thirty feet (30') to the front property line. 
(3)  Garages. The following standards shall minimize car-oriented building features and maintain a human-scale relationship between buildings and the neighborhood streetscape. 
a.  Overhead garage doors shall not be more than eight feet (8') in front of the threshold of the primary entrance of the principal building. Provided, in the event the garage doors face a direction different than that of the primary entrance of the principal building (e.g., a side-facing garage), this requirement shall apply to the foremost front portion of the garage structure. 
b.  No more than forty percent (40%) of the linear width of the front facade may be occupied by front-facing overhead garage doors. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-2] 
c.  All dwelling units shall maintain at least one (1) fully enclosed vehicle parking space. Conversion of an attached or detached garage to a different use shall require provision of an alternative fully enclosed vehicle parking space. 
(4)  Building massing: The following building massing standards shall apply in addition to the setbacks and heights standards to break up the building massing in relation to adjacent lots: 
a.  Side setback lines: 
1.  Wall planes at or within one and one-half (1.5) times the side setback line shall be limited to eight-hundred (800) square feet; 
2.  Wall planes at one and one-half (1.5) or up to two (2) times the side setback line shall be limited to one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; 
3.  Wall planes at two (2) times or more the side setback line shall not be limited, other than the general height, building footprint and design standards. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-19] 
b.  Rear setback lines: 
1.  Wall planes at or within fifteen feet (15') of the rear setback line shall be limited to eight-hundred (800) square feet. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-20] 
c.  Projections: Chimneys, bays, eaves and other massing elements that are integral to the design and style of a structure may project into the required setback and building massing standards subject to the following: 
1.  Projections may be between two feet (2') and four feet (4'), but never more than fifty percent (50%) of the required setback. However window wells designed for egress may be four feet (4') deep and extend into the required setback in all cases. 
2.  Projections shall be limited to no more than two hundred (200) square feet. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-21] 
(5)  Building facades. The following design standards shall be used to organize the composition of facades consistent with the architectural style of the home and provide details that relate buildings to the neighborhood streetscapes and adjacent sites. 
a.  No facades shall exceed more than six hundred (600) square feet without architectural relief. Architectural relief shall be: 
1.  A structural building element that breaks up a wall plane by creating a projection or recession of at least eighteen inches (18") that occurs cumulatively over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the facade. Examples include dormers projecting from a roof, projecting primary entrance features, or projections or recessions in the facade building line. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-3]; or 
2.  Architectural details and ornamentation characteristic of a particular style that establish patterns and proportions on the overall facade. Examples include material changes, vertical or horizontal moldings, columns or trim or similar details and ornamentation that may be essential to any particular chosen architectural style. 
b.  All facades shall have window or door openings covering at least fifteen percent (15%) of the facade above grade. The shape, style, and placement of windows and doors shall not be inconsistent with the architectural style of the home. In the event of an addition to an existing structure, this requirement may apply to the least restrictive of: (1) the entire facade facing the same direction (e.g., front, rear or either side facade), including both the addition and the existing structure; or (2) only the facade of the addition being built and not any part of the existing structure that is not being modified as part of the construction project. See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 4-2-4. 
1.  Windows shall have a vertical or square proportion, although groups of windows may be joined in a horizontal proportion; 
2.  Windows shall be stacked for two-story facades with lower windows aligning with upper windows, and have a hierarchy with lower windows being larger than upper windows; 
3.  In the event of an addition to an existing structure, this requirement may apply to the least restrictive of: (1) the entire facade facing the same direction (e.g., front, rear or either side facade), including both the addition and the existing structure; or (2) only the facade of the addition being built and not any part of the existing structure that is not being modified as part of the construction project. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-4] 
(6)  Building materials. The following building material standards shall be used to create quality designs consistent with the architectural style of the home and prioritize natural materials that age and weather well. 
a.  Acceptable materials-The following exterior surface materials are acceptable on all facades: 
1.  Brick; 
2.  Stone; 
3.  Stucco; 
4.  Wood shingles; 
5.  Wood siding; 
6.  Wood paneling; 
7.  Glass blocks; 
8.  Vinyl siding; 
9.  Horizontal aluminum siding; 
10.  Fiber cement siding designed to look like wood siding or shingles (e.g., Hardie board); 
11.  Engineered wood siding (EWS), including strand and fiber wood products meeting ANSI 135.6 standards for hardboard, designed to look like wood lap siding or shingles and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. (E.g., SmartSide, Catawba or TruWood.). 
Additional building materials may be approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Provisional materials. The following provisional exterior surface materials may be approved by the Planning Commission, subject to the special provisions listed: 
1.  Exterior insulation finishing system (EIFS) shall require certification by an independent third party, paid for by the owner, certifying that the material was installed according to manufacturer's specifications. 
c.  Prohibited materials. In addition to those materials prohibited by the City's building code, the following materials are prohibited on all facades: 
1.  Corrugated metal siding; 
2.  Sheet panel materials including particle board, plywood, oriented strand board (OSB) or engineered wood, i.e. 4-foot by 8-foot panel material; 
3.  Concrete masonry units, such as cinder block or split-faced block. 
d.  Windows, doors, and louvers shall be wood, vinyl, or metal and glass. 
e.  Siding material shall extend below the top of the exterior of the foundation or curtain wall or the joint between the siding and enclosure wall shall be flashed according to the City's building code. 
f.  Material allocation. Allowed materials shall be allocated according to the following: 
1.  All new buildings shall be limited to two (2) base materials and up to three (3) accent materials. 
2.  Additions to existing buildings having one (1) base material at the time of adoption of these zoning regulations shall continue the use of the same base material on the addition, provided that any building with a brick or stone base material may use a second base material. 
3.  Accent materials shall be limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) of any single facade. 
4.  The architectural style and all materials shall be consistent and compatible on all facades. 
5.  Base material changes shall only occur horizontally at architectural elements or vertically at internal corners. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-5] 
g.  Any building lawfully existing at the time of adoption of these zoning regulations may continue the use of the building materials existing on the structure at that time whether through maintenance, siding replacement, or additions. Any new structure must conform with the provisions of this section. 
(7)  Roofs. 
a.  Acceptable primary materials. The following primary roofing materials are the types of materials that are acceptable: 
1.  Composite shingles; 
2.  Wood shake shingles; 
3.  Clay or concrete tile; 
4.  Natural slate; 
5.  Glass, acceptable only for greenhouses or solarium; or 
6.  Rolled composition or membrane roofing may be used on slopes of 4:12 or less at the discretion of the Building Official/Codes Administrator. 
    Additional primary roofing materials may be approved by the Planning Commission. 
b.  P rohibited materials. In addition to those materials prohibited by the City's building code, the following roofing materials are prohibited: 
1.  Corrugated metal roofs. 
c.  Only one (1) roof material for each structure shall be visible from any area along the property line, but may include any accent materials up to twenty percent (20%) of the overall roof area. Accent materials may be approved by the Planning Commission in excess of twenty percent (20%) of the overall roof area where a degree of harmony will prevail between the architectural quality and the accent materials proposed. In addition to the acceptable roofing materials in Subsection b. above, copper and other standing seam metal roofing materials are acceptable for any accent material. 
d.  The type of roofing material used on all building additions shall be consistent with the material on the existing roof. 
(8)  Accessory buildings. Any accessory building greater than one-hundred twenty (120) square feet shall use materials, massing, and roof pitches that are consistent with the architectural style of the principle building. 
(c)  Fences and walls. A building permit shall be required for construction, alteration, replacement, repair or relocation of a fence or wall on any residential lot. The proposed fence or wall shall meet all standards of the building code and demonstrate that the following additional standards are met: 
(1)  Generally. Unless otherwise specified, fences or walls: 
a.  Shall not be located in front of the front building lines of the principal building or any adjacent dwelling units. 
b.  Shall not exceed six feet (6') high. 
c.  In the case of a corner lot, shall not be located closer to the street-side property line(s) than the street-side building line(s) of any adjacent dwelling unit; provided, in no event shall any fence or wall be located any closer than twelve feet (12') to any street-side property line. [See Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-6] 
d.  Exception: In the event the principal building and lot are situated in such a manner that a fence or wall subject to this corner lot requirement would yield an area smaller than six hundred (600) square feet, or alternatively, can yield an area over six hundred (600) square feet, but only with an area less than twenty-five feet (25') in any single dimension (length or width of the yard), the Planning Commission may approve an exception subject to the following: 
1.  The exception may only be granted for a fence or wall on one (1) street-side yard. When applicable, the Commission shall make a determination on which street-side yard provides the least disruption to the predominant streetscape. In making this determination, the Commission shall take into account the predominant frontage of the existing property as well as the frontage of adjacent properties; 
2.  The fence or wall within the exception area shall not exceed four feet (4') in height; 
3.  The fence or wall shall be constructed out of a material compatible with the style of the principal building, and limited to the following types of materials: wood, brick, stone or wrought iron; 
4.  The exception shall not cause an adverse impact on the surrounding properties; and 
5.  The Commission may specify an additional location or other restrictions to the extent that it protects the appearance and function of the public streetscape, and minimizes the impact on adjacent properties. 
e.  Shall be structurally stable and shall not incorporate the use of any type of wire such as barbed wire, chicken wire or wire which is electrically charged. 
f.  Any support or framing members shall have those members on the fence side facing the owner's property. 
g.  Shall be located to permit proper maintenance on all sides of the fence or wall. If the owner's existing fence or wall and the erection of the proposed fence or wall would not inhibit the growth of vegetation and would not allow sufficient space between the existing fence or wall and the proposed fence or wall for proper maintenance, the existing fence or wall must be removed. If an existing fence or wall is owned by an abutting property owner and is on or near the property line, the proposed fence or wall must be erected close enough to the abutting owner's fence or wall so as to inhibit the growth of vegetation or, in the alternative, provide sufficient space between the existing fence or wall and the proposed fence or wall for proper maintenance. 
h.  Any legal nonconforming fence or wall that does not meet the current standards of this section may be repaired, replaced and maintained at its present location; provided, however, that any repair or replacement shall not increase the degree of the nonconformity; and further provided, where fifty percent (50%) or more of the existing fence or wall is repaired or replaced, such fence or wall shall comply with Subsections c., d. and e. above (concerning height, materials and design). No property shall be allowed multiple permits over any eighteen (18) month period when the effect would be to circumvent this latter provision. 
(2)  Decorative fences. Decorative fences: 
a.  Shall extend no further than twelve feet (12') in front of the front building line of the principal building and shall in no case be closer than twenty-five feet (25') to any public right-of-way. Further, such fence may only be located in front of the primary entrance to the principal building and shall not extend beyond either side of the principal building. 
b.  Shall not exceed three feet (3') in height. 
c.  Shall be compatible with the style of the principal building, and limited to the following types of materials: wood, brick, stone or wrought iron. 
d.  Shall have a surface area with a minimum of fifty percent (50%) open area allowing an unobstructed view through the fence. 
e.  Shall not connect with any other fence on the property. 
f.  Shall not create an area that is completely enclosed without an un-gated opening to the yard that is at least three feet (3') in width. 
g.  Shall be maintained in good condition so that: 
1.  Painted portions of the fence are not chipped or peeling; 
2.  Broken elements of the fence are promptly repaired or replaced; and 
3.  The area at the base of the fence is kept free of debris and neatly trimmed. 
(d)  Exceptions: Through the site plan process, the Planning Commission may grant exceptions to the site design standards in this section, based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The exception will equally or better serve the intent statements for this section and the particular standards being altered; 
(2)  The exception meets any specific exception criteria identified in the standards, but shall not be granted to allow something that is specifically prohibited in the regulations; 
(3)  Any lot design exception is consistent with sound planning, urban design and engineering practices when considering the site and its context within the neighborhood. 
(4)  Any building design exception is consistent with the common characteristics of the architectural style applied to the overall design of the building, 
(5)  The requested exception coordinates quality design of the building and site-primarily considering the integrity of the architectural style, the energy performance of the site and building orientation, and the relationship of the internal function of the building to the site, streetscape and adjacent property. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.204; Ord. No. 1530, § 5, 7-9-2012; Ord. No. 1535, § 1, 8-13-2012; Ord. No. 1540, § 3, 10-8-2012; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 1582 , § 7, 12-8-2014; Ord. No. 1615 , § 1, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1641 , § 1, 12-12-2016; Ord. No. 1620 , § 1, 3-4-2016) 
Sec. 15-298. - Special conditions for uses. 
    In addition to the general standards in this part, the applicable supplemental provisions in Division 3, and any applicable special use conditions and procedures in Division 4, the following uses shall be subject to these special conditions in the R-1 district. 
(1)  Home occupation. The following home occupation standards are intended to permit the establishment of certain incidental and accessory home occupation uses in residential neighborhoods under conditions that will ensure their compatibility with the residential character of the neighborhood. They are intended to permit residents to engage in home occupations that are compatible with residential land uses and to ensure that home occupations do not adversely affect the integrity of residential areas. Accordingly, a home occupation shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Use. The home occupation must be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary residential use of the premises as a dwelling. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of the principal building, not including garage or basement space, shall be used for the home occupation. If more than one (1) home occupation is operated within the premises, the combined total floor area shall meet this standard. No accessory buildings shall be used in conjunction with a home occupation. No outside storage of any kind related to the home occupation shall be permitted. 
b.  Change to exterior. The home occupation must not change the outside appearance of the principal building or provide any visible exterior evidence of the home occupation. No building addition shall be permitted solely for the purpose of accommodating the occupation, and no separate street-side entrance shall be permitted for the exclusive use of the home occupation. 
c.  Signs. Exterior signage for the home occupation shall be prohibited. 
d.  Employees. The home occupation shall be conducted only by family members residing on the premises with no assistance from other individuals or groups. 
e.  Hours of operation. A home occupation may attract business-related traffic only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
f.  Vehicles. The home occupation shall not utilize more than one private commercial vehicle limited to 3/4-ton capacity. 
g.  Traffic, parking, sewerage and water. The home occupation must not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic, parking, sewerage or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential neighborhood. 
h.  Deliveries. Deliveries of materials to and from the premises in conjunction with the home occupation shall not require the use of vehicles other than parcel post or similar parcel service vehicles. 
i.  Nuisances and hazards. The home occupation shall not create noise, dust, dirt, heat, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical interference, glare, light, or radio or television transmission interference that exceeds the levels normally associated with single-family dwellings or any such other nuisance. The home occupation shall not create any hazard to person or property. The production, dumping or storage of combustible, toxic or other hazardous substances shall be expressly prohibited on the site. 
j.  Licenses. The home occupation and its operator(s) shall have all licenses/permits mandated by any applicable local, state and/or federal laws. 
(2)  Private swimming pools. Private swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall require a building permit. 
b.  Construction of all swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and any accessory building or structure shall comply with all applicable building code requirements. 
c.  All outdoor swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height, and shall comply with all other applicable fence or wall requirements. In addition, such fence or wall shall be designed to reasonably prevent unauthorized access by children, and shall be provided with self-closing gates equipped with self-latching devices. 
d.  In lieu of the fence or wall requirement, spas and hot tubs may be equipped with a safety cover. Said safety cover shall securely cover the spa or hot tub at all times when not in use and under the supervision of an adult person. Said safety cover shall be classified under WBAH and have been evaluated to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard F1346, Standard Performance Specifications of Safety Covers (as may be amended) or the equivalent. Each safety cover shall bear the classification marking "UL", the word "Classified", a control number, and the product name or the equivalent. 
e.  No swimming pool, spa or hot tub shall be located in front of the front building lines of the principal building or any adjacent dwelling units. 
f.  Subject to any easements, a swimming pool, spa or hot tub may be located anywhere within the interior area of a fence or wall located in compliance with the general fence or wall requirements. Provided, the edge of said pool, spa or hot tub shall be not less than six feet (6') from said fence or wall, and further provided, said pool, spa or hot tub shall be not less than twenty feet (20') from any adjacent dwelling unit. 
g.  All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be designed so that any drainage shall comply with the City's NPDES Standards as codified in Article 3 to Chapter XII of this Code (as amended). Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall not be drained at any time which may cause icing or other hazardous public street or sidewalk conditions. 
(3)  Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No more than one accessory building shall be allowed per lot or principal building. 
b.  Accessory buildings shall not be designed or used for dwelling purposes. 
c.  No accessory building shall be used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
(4)  Sport courts. Sport courts accessory to residential uses shall only be allowed subject to a special use permit issued according to the standards and procedures of Article IV, Division 4. 
(5)  Play structures. Play structures primarily intended for use by children for recreational purposes, including but not limited to basketball goals, swingsets, jungle gyms, children's playhouses and slides, shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  No play structure shall be located in front of the front building line of the principal building, provided, however, that a single basketball goal or tether ball pole may be located in the front setback when the same is: located adjacent to the driveway, not less than twenty feet (20') from the front property line, and not less than three feet (3') from the side property line. 
b.  All play structures not exceeding ten feet (10') in height may be located anywhere in the rear yard, and may be located anywhere in any side yard, provided the same is: not less than six feet (6') from any side property line or twelve feet (12') from any street-side side property line, and not located in front of the front building lines of any adjacent dwelling units. 
c.  Play structures exceeding ten feet (10') shall be subject to the setback requirements for an accessory building. 
d.  Any playhouse or similar enclosed building or structures that might be adapted or transformed to another use (such as storage, pool or lawn equipment) shall be considered an accessory building, and shall be subject to the applicable conditions thereto. 
e.  Notwithstanding the above location requirements, all play structures shall meet any manufacturer recommended setbacks for safety purposes. 
(6)  Emergency generators. Permanent standby emergency generators shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A building permit is required prior to installation. 
b.  The generator shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 37 Standards for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines, and shall meet all other applicable building code requirements. 
c.  The generator shall be connected to a natural gas line. 
d.  The generator shall be contained in an enclosed cabinet or housing that provides sound attenuation, and the decibel level shall be less than or equal to seventy-five (75) dBA at the property line. 
e.  The footprint of the cabinet shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet, and the pad shall not exceed forty-eight inches (48") in any dimension. 
f.  The generator shall be located within the building envelope but no further than five feet (5') from a wall of the principal building and not in a front or side yard, except that alternate locations may be approved by the building official for greater than five feet (5') from the wall and up to the minimum additional distance necessary to adequately address any safety and carbon monoxide issues. 
Exception: An exception may be granted to this location requirement upon a finding of the following: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property; 
2.  Adequate distance exists between the location and adjacent properties; 
3.  The location will not cause an adverse impact on the adjacent properties; 
4.  The proposed location will be adequately screened from the street; and 
5.  The Board may impose any screening or other condition it deems necessary to mitigate any negative impacts of the proposed location. 
Provided, in no event shall an exception be granted to locate a generator in any front yard. 
g.  The generator shall be used during emergency situations only which result in power failures. 
h.  The generator shall only be tested during daylight hours after 9:00 am, and not on any holiday. 
(7)  Accessory structures and streetscape features. Accessory structures used to animate the streetscape, support neighborhood activities, and serve or provide ornaments for the residential lots, such as mail boxes, bird houses or little free libraries or other similar features are permitted subject to the following: 
a.  Any structure that is permanently fixed to the ground must meet all applicable building codes. 
b.  No structure may be located in the public right-of-way. 
c.  Permanent structures within the front setback area shall not exceed five feet (5') in height and shall not exceed three (3) cubic feet of volume, excluding any support structure. 
d.  No structure shall be located in a way that obscures safe ingress and egress of vehicles to the lot, considering visibility, and traffic speeds and volumes on the street. 
e.  Any structure not kept in working condition and maintained shall be removed. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.205; Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 1455; Ord. No. 1582 , § 7, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 15-299-15-329. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - R-2P Planned Residential District 

Sec. 15-330. - Intent. 
    The R-2P Planned Residential District is intended to provide for appropriate opportunities for diverse residential formats that blend into the context of adjacent neighborhoods and the overall City character. It may be characterized by more compact development patterns and flexible development standards that allow smaller lots, more dense units, or other variations on the residential dwelling units in exchange for increased community amenities such as significant public or common open space, enhanced architectural qualities of buildings, and integrated community site design. This district is intended to be applied only through special application based on an overall development plan. It is most appropriate in close proximity to business districts so that any impacts from increased density can be alleviated by strong pedestrian connections to many daily needs, and so that businesses can benefit from expanded local markets. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.301) 
Sec. 15-331. - Uses. 
    Uses allowed in the R-2P district are specified in Subdivision I of this division. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.302) 
Sec. 15-332. - Development plan review process. 
(a)  Development plan required. All allowed uses in the R-2P district shall be allowed according to the submittal of an overall project development plan. Approval of the development plan shall occur through the special procedures for development plans in Division 5 of this article and subject to the development plan meeting the intent, planning criteria, standards, and any special conditions for this district. The Planning Commission may recommend conditional approval or the Governing Body may conditionally approve any development plan; provided that the conditions further the intent or planning criteria specified. 
(b)  Planning criteria. Development plans for the R-2P district shall be evaluated on how well they achieve the following site design goals: 
(1)  Use of existing and planned streets to minimize any traffic impact on adjacent areas. 
(2)  Proximity of the proposed R-2P district to facilities and land uses that may be frequented by pedestrians, including neighborhood retail, parks and civic uses, and the degree that the site design for the development plan encourages pedestrian activity with direct and convenient connections to these areas. 
(3)  The compatibility of the architecture with any residential dwelling uses adjacent to the proposed R-2P district. 
(4)  The degree to which the development plan creates transitions in both intensity or density of use and building scale, both within the development plan and to areas outside of the development plan. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.303) 
Sec. 15-333. - Dimension standards. 
District Minimum project size 2.5 acres for initiation of a R-2P development plan unless adding to or amending an approved R-2P District. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Governing Body may grant a waiver for projects as small as 1 acre in size provided it finds that a larger project is impractical due to site conditions and existing adjacent land uses; the smaller project has no negative impact on adjacent uses; and the proposed development plan creates better transitions between existing adjacent land uses than is currently existing on the site. Lot Minimum area 2,400 square feet Minimum width 24 feet Front setback 20 feet minimum 30 feet maximum Minimum side setback  6 feet for detached dwellings  0 feet for attached dwellings, except that no single structure shall include more than 8 dwelling units, and all structures shall maintain at least 20 feet separation from other structures  Street-side on corner lots = 20 feet Minimum rear setback 25 feet Principal building (dwelling unit) Maximum height 31/2 stories and a maximum of 42 feet Accessory buildings and structures a Maximum height 2 stories or the height of the principal building, whichever is less Minimum front setback Behind the rear building line of the principal building Minimum side setback Same as lot requirement for principal building except that accessory buildings more than 10 feet high shall be set back 1 additional foot for each foot over 10 feet Minimum rear setback 6 feet Maximum ground-floor area 750 square feet  
a  These are general height, setback and area regulations. Where specific regulations are otherwise provided for any specific type of accessory structure, the specific regulations shall govern. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.304) 
Sec. 15-334. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Block design. All development plans shall be organized into residential blocks. Residential blocks shall be formed by public streets or by private streets designed to public standards. All blocks shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Block perimeter. The perimeter of all residential blocks, measured from the centerline of the streets forming the block, shall not exceed one thousand, four hundred feet (1,400') total, and shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') along any block face. 
(2)  Dwelling types. Structures on opposing block faces, including structures within and external to the development plan, shall have the same or similar dwelling types. For the purposes of this section, the term "similar" shall include any dwelling type on the level immediately above or below the subject dwelling type: 
a.  Level 1 Single-family. 
b.  Level 2 Townhouse, duplexes. 
c.  Level 3 Multifamily/apartments. 
(3)  Curb cuts. Curb cuts shall be separated by at least one hundred feet (100') along any block face, and no single curb cut shall exceed twenty feet (20'); provided that an additional three feet (3') may be permitted per driveway wing. Shared access or rear alley access for vehicles is encouraged for all development plans. 
(4)  Streets. All public and private streets shall be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly, residential character. All streets shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Finished street widths shall be between twenty-five feet (25') and thirty-two feet (32') wide. 
b.  Parking shall be allowed on both sides of all streets. 
c.  Sidewalks between five feet (5') and ten feet (10') wide shall be provided on both sides of all streets. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be separated from the finished street by a planting strip between five feet (5') and twenty feet (20') wide, and at least as wide as the sidewalk in all cases. 
e.  The planting strip shall contain street trees planted at least every forty feet (40') planted on center in the planting strip. Street trees shall reach a minimum bottom canopy height of approximately twenty feet (20') at maturity. 
(b)  Lot design. 
(1)  Private yard, courtyard or terrace. Each lot or dwelling unit in the development plan shall have a minimum private yard, courtyard, or terrace, exclusive of the front setback area, of at least four hundred (400) square feet. As an alternative to meeting this requirement, the development plan may propose adding this required square footage per unit to the required open space in addition to the minimum common or public open space requirements, provided the additional common or public open space is: 
a.  Designed and located according to Subsection (d) of this section; 
b.  Within three hundred feet (300') of the dwelling unit; and 
c.  All other setback requirements for the lot are met. 
(2)  Parking. 
a.  All exterior off-street parking shall be located behind the rear building line. 
b.  All required parking spaces shall be within one hundred feet (100') of the dwelling entrance it is intended to serve. 
(3)  Green space requirement. All required front setback areas and required private open space shall maintain at least fifty percent (50%) permeable and uncovered surface planted with vegetation. 
(c)  Building design. The following building standards apply to all principal buildings and any accessory building that exceeds one hundred and twenty (120) square feet in area. 
(1)  Building entrances. All principal buildings shall have a primary entrance or a primary entrance feature that faces the street. Primary entrances shall: 
a.  Be connected to the public right-of-way by a sidewalk at least four feet (4') wide, or by a similar pedestrian connection; and 
b.  Be articulated by any of the following unenclosed primary entrance features (see Subdivision VII, Figure 15-438-1): 
1.  A single-story porch at least seven feet (7') deep and covering at least fifty percent (50%) of the facade; 
2.  A stoop entry rising at least two feet (2') above the finished grade, with an entry platform at least six feet (6') deep by eight feet (8') wide, and featuring architectural treatments such as decorative railings, significant decorative moldings and framing, or transom windows; or 
3.  A single-story covered portico projecting from the front facade at least three feet (3') with a total covered area of at least twenty-four (24) square feet. 
c.  Alternative handicap accessible entrances may be substituted, however they should seek to maintain the aesthetic qualities of the other entry options. 
(2)  Garages. 
a.  All dwelling units shall maintain at least one (1) fully enclosed vehicle parking space. 
b.  Detached garages may be located in accessory buildings behind the rear building line subject to dimension standards for the district. 
c.  No garage entry doors shall be allowed on the front facade. 
(3)  Building facades. 
a.  All facades shall not exceed more than six hundred (600) square feet without architectural relief. Architectural relief shall be a structural building element that breaks up a wall plane by creating a projection or recession of at least eighteen inches (18") and occurring cumulatively over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall plane requiring relief. Examples include dormers projecting from a roof, projecting primary entrance features, or projections or recessions in the facade building line (see Subdivision VII, Figure 15-438-3). 
b.  All facades shall have window or door openings covering at least fifteen percent (15%) of the facade above grade. In the event of an addition to an existing structure, this requirement may apply to the least restrictive of: the entire facade facing the same direction (e.g., front, rear or either side facade), including both the addition and the existing structure; or only the facade of the addition being built and not any part of the existing structure that is not being modified as part of the construction project (see Subdivision VII, Figure 15-438-4). 
c.  No part of any facade may encroach into any front, side or rear setback. This requirement includes any cantilever, chimney, or any bay, bow, oriel, dormer or other projecting window. Provided that any grade level window well may encroach up to three feet (3') into any front, side or rear setback. 
(4)  Building materials. 
a.  Acceptable materials. The following exterior surface materials are acceptable on all facades: 
1.  Brick; 
2.  Stone; 
3.  Stucco; 
4.  Wood shingles; 
5.  Wood siding; 
6.  Wood paneling; 
7.  Glass blocks; 
8.  Vinyl siding; 
9.  Horizontal aluminum siding; 
10.  Fiber cement siding designed to look like wood siding or shingles (e.g., Hardie board). 
b.  Provisional materials. The following exterior surface materials are acceptable on facades subject to the special provisions listed: 
1.  Exterior insulation finishing system (EIFS) shall require certification by an independent third party, paid for by the owner, certifying that the material was installed according to manufacturer's specifications. 
c.  Prohibited materials. In addition to materials prohibited by the City's building code, the following materials are prohibited on all facades: 
1.  Corrugated metal siding; 
2.  Pressed panel materials such as particle board, plywood, or oriented strand board (OSB); 
3.  Concrete masonry units such as cinder block or split-faced block. 
d.  Windows, doors, and louvers. Windows, doors, and louvers shall be wood, vinyl, or metal and glass. 
e.  Siding material. Siding material shall extend below the top of the exterior of the foundation or curtain wall or the joint between the siding and enclosure wall shall be flashed according to the City's building code. 
f.  Material allocation. Allowed materials shall be allocated according to the following: 
1.  Buildings shall be limited to two (2) base materials and up to three (3) accent materials. 
2.  Accent materials shall be limited to no more than twenty percent (20%) of any single facade. 
3.  The architectural style and all materials shall be consistent and compatible on all facades. 
4.  Base material changes shall only occur horizontally at architectural elements or vertically at internal corners (see Subdivision VII, Figure 15-438-5). 
(5)  Roofs. 
a.  Pitched roofs shall have a minimum eave projection and roof overhang of ten inches (10"), including guttering. 
b.  Acceptable primary materials. The following primary roofing materials are acceptable: 
1.  Composite shingles; 
2.  Wood shake shingles; 
3.  Stone-coated steel shingles; 
4.  Clay or concrete tile; 
5.  Natural slate; or 
6.  Glass, acceptable only for greenhouses. 
c.  Prohibited materials . In addition to those materials prohibited by the City's building code, corrugated metal roofs are prohibited. 
d.  Only one (1) roof material for each structure shall be visible from any area along the property line; provided that this restriction shall not include accent materials covering no greater than ten percent (10%) of the overall roof area. In addition to the acceptable roofing materials in Subsection (c)(5)b of this section, copper and other standing seam metal roofing materials are acceptable for any such accent material. 
e.  The type of roofing material used on all building additions shall be consistent with the material on the existing roof. 
f.  Pitched roofs are preferred. Buildings with a flat roof should incorporate a parapet or decorative cornice line. 
g.  An eave projection and roof overhang (including guttering) may encroach up to eighteen inches (18") into any front, side or rear setback. 
(d)  Landscape and open space design. In addition to the general landscape and open space design standards in Article IV, Division 3, Subdivision III of this chapter, the following standards shall apply in the R-2P district: 
(1)  All development plans shall provide, in addition to any areas on lots required to be open due to setbacks, common or public open space subject to the following dimensional standards: 
Overall Plan Density Minimum Percent Open Space More than 8 units per acre At least 20% of project area 6 to 8 units per acre At least 15% of project area Less than 6 units per acre At least 10% of project area  
(2)  Open space, whether common or public, shall be located in a central part of the development plan, including the following design standards: 
a.  All open space meeting the requirements of Subsection (d)(1) of this section shall be abutted by public or private streets on at least one (1) side. 
b.  Required common or public open space may be divided up in the development plan, however one (1) area shall provide at least sixty percent (60%) of the minimum open space required in Subsection (d)(1) of this section in a central and contiguous area. 
c.  Open space should be designed and located to serve multiple functions including recreation, stormwater management, aesthetic enhancements, and screening, buffering or transitions between uses. 
d.  Open space shall be designed for public gathering, including plazas or courtyards, public art, and seating areas. However all open space shall maintain significant natural features with at least seventy percent (70%) of the total project open space remaining as permeable and uncovered surface planted with vegetation. 
(3)  All required open space shall contain landscape materials meeting the requirements of Article IV, Division 3, Subdivision III of this chapter. 
(4)  Stormwater. Open space shall be designed and located in the development plan to encourage infiltration of stormwater. The rate of runoff for stormwater attributable to the development plan shall not be increased by development of the property. Stormwater calculations shall be clearly indicated in the development plan. 
(e)  Fences and walls . A building permit shall be required for the construction, alteration, replacement, repair or relocation of a fence or wall on any lot or parcel. The proposed fence or wall shall meet all standards of the building code and, unless otherwise approved in the development plan, meet the additional standards required for fences and walls in the R-1 district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.305) 
Sec. 15-335. - Special conditions for uses. 
(a)  Home occupation. Home occupations in the R-2P district shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the same conditions as set forth for home occupations in the R-1 district. 
(b)  Accessory dwelling unit. In the R-2P district, accessory dwellings are allowed in a principal or accessory building subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Accessory dwelling units shall have a minimum floor area of seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet. 
(2)  In no case shall the floor area of the accessory dwelling unit exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the principal use. 
(3)  The owner of the principal building or lot shall be the occupant of the principal dwelling or of the accessory dwelling unit at all times. 
(4)  No exterior structural alterations that provide visible evidence of an accessory dwelling unit shall be made to the principal building or accessory building which hosts the accessory dwelling unit. All other dimension and design standards for the structure in the R-2P district shall apply. 
(5)  Parking for the accessory dwelling unit shall be within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of the accessory dwelling entrance. 
(6)  Accessory dwelling unit shall be limited to one (1) per primary dwelling unit. 
(c)  Private swimming pools. Unless otherwise provided for in the development plan, private swimming pools, spas and hot tubs in the R-2P district shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the same conditions as set forth for private swimming pools in the R-1 district. 
(d)  Sport courts . Unless otherwise provided for in the development plan, sport courts in the R-2P district shall only be allowed subject to a special use permit issued according to the standards and procedures of Article IV, Division 4 of this chapter. 
(e)  Play structures . Unless otherwise provided for in the development plan, play structures primarily intended for use by children for recreational purposes in the R-2P district shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the same conditions as set forth for play structures in the R-1 district. 
(f)  Emergency generators . Unless otherwise provided for in the development plan, emergency generators in the R-2P district shall be allowed as an accessory use, subject to the same conditions as set forth for emergency generators in the R-1 district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.306; Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 1456) 
Secs. 15-336-15-358. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - B-1 Neighborhood Business District 

Sec. 15-359. - Intent. 
    The B-1 Neighborhood Business District is intended to provide limited retail, service, and civic uses to primarily serve adjacent residential neighborhoods. Uses in this district should be characterized by low-intensity and low-impact on surrounding property. This district is characterized by enhanced pedestrian-oriented characteristics represented in the building, site, and street designs. Residential uses may be introduced to the extent that they are accessory to neighborhood business uses in the district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.401) 
Sec. 15-360. - Uses. 
    Uses allowed in the B-1 district are specified in Section 15-264. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.402) 
Sec. 15-361. - Dimension standards. 
Minimum front setback  0 feet if adjacent to a public sidewalk which is at least 8 feet wide.  10 feet in all other cases. Maximum front setback  30 feet  Modification: a larger front setback may be granted as a modification through the site plan procedures, provided a site plan is submitted which demonstrates that the development will provide a significant street edge in conjunction with usable public or common open space meeting the standards of Section 15-362(d). Minimum side setback  0 feet if adjacent to other B-1 lots and the side lot line is either a party wall or the adjacent property owner has given a maintenance easement to the property owner.  0 feet if it is a street side and adjacent to a public sidewalk which is at least 6 feet wide.  30 feet if abutting property zoned or used solely for residential uses.  6 feet in all other instances. Minimum rear setback  30 feet.  Modification: a smaller rear setback may be approved through the site plan procedures, provided a site plan is submitted which demonstrates that: (1) A rear access alley is provided for either mechanical equipment, loading areas, or rear parking; (2) No building is closer than 20 feet from the line of adjacent property used solely for residential purposes (areas dedicated as right-of-way or access easements may be counted in this 20 feet); (3) Sufficient screening and landscaping is provided between any loading areas, access lanes, mechanical equipment, or off-street parking and adjacent property; and (4) Efficient ingress and egress for pedestrians and vehicles is maintained. Maximum building height  2 stories and a maximum of 30 feet.  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.403) 
Sec. 15-362. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Block design. Development in the B-1 district shall be organized in blocks bordered by public streets, alleys, or by private internal lanes designed to mimic public streetscapes. Where only a portion of a block is zoned B-1, the block design standards of this section shall apply to the portion of each lot that abuts a public right-of-way or private lane. 
(1)  The perimeter of all commercial blocks, measured from the centerline of the public streets or private lanes forming the block, shall not exceed one thousand, four hundred feet (1,400') total, and shall not exceed five hundred feet (500') along any block face. 
(2)  All blocks shall have a street edge between zero feet (0') and ten feet (10') from the public right-of-way or private lane (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-7). 
a.  The street edge shall be formed by any of the following site elements: 
1.  The front facade of a building; 
2.  A two and one-half-foot (21/2') to four-foot (4') decorative fence or wall matching the architectural style and materials of adjacent buildings; or 
3.  A dense four-season vegetative screen where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the screen exceeds four feet (4'). 
b.  The street edge shall occupy at least seventy percent (70%) of each block face. Areas without a street edge may be open to provide access to parking, courtyards or plazas subject to other design standards in this subdivision. 
c.  Where an entire block is zoned B-1, at least two (2) block faces on every block shall contain a street edge comprised of the front building facade along at least seventy percent (70%) of each block face (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-8). 
(3)  Curb cuts shall be separated by at least one hundred and fifty feet (150') along any block face and limited to no more than twenty-four feet (24') wide. Shared access or rear alley access for vehicles is encouraged in the B-1 district. 
(4)  All public streets and private lanes forming blocks shall be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly, neighborhood character. All streets and lanes shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Parking should be provided on streets and lanes subject to public works approval. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') wide on all streets where buildings have a zero-foot (0') setback. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet (6') wide at all other locations. 
c.  Sidewalks may abut the finished street in areas where on-street parking is permitted. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be separated from the finished street by a planting strip between four (4') feet and eight feet (8') wide where on-street parking is not permitted. 
e.  Street trees should be planted in tree wells in the sidewalk or in planting strips every thirty-five feet (35'). Tree wells shall contain a minimum pervious area of twenty-five (25) square feet and no less than four feet (4') in any one (1) direction. In all cases tree wells shall be sized to ensure the survival of the species. Street tree species should have a minimum under canopy height of fourteen feet (14') at maturity. 
(b)  Lot design. 
(1)  Each lot shall have a direct pedestrian connection from the sidewalk at the perimeter of the block to the primary entrance of the building. Buildings with a zero-foot (0') setback or directly fronting the sidewalk of a private lane meet this standard by default. For any buildings set back from the perimeter sidewalk, the direct pedestrian connection shall: 
a.  Be at least eight feet (8') wide; 
b.  Shall separated from the grade of any parking surface by a curb and gutter (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-9). 
(2)  All off-street parking shall be located behind the street edge. 
(3)  Any area between the public right-of-way or private lane and the street edge shall be used for expanded pedestrian sidewalks, or where sufficient sidewalks exist in the right-of-way, this area may be used for enhanced landscape materials, plazas, or courtyard seating. 
(c)  Building design. 
(1)  Building materials. 
a.  Exterior surface of all buildings and structures shall be brick, stone, concrete, stucco, wood shingles, wood siding, wood paneling, glass block, or a combination of these materials. 
b.  Windows, doors, and louvers shall be wood or metal and glass. 
c.  Roofs exposed to view from public streets or common areas and walkways adjacent to buildings shall be covered with wood shingles, wood shakes, compositions shingles, terne, copper, slate, or tile. 
d.  No plastic or back-lighted awnings shall be allowed. 
(2)  Entrances. 
a.  All structures shall have a primary entrance that faces the street or private lane. 
b.  Primary entrances shall be articulated by one (1) or a combination of the following design elements: 
1.  A canopy or arcade; 
2.  An entrance projecting from the facade by no more than three feet (3'); 
3.  An entrance recessed from the facade by between three feet (3') and ten feet (10'); or 
4.  Architectural treatments such as significant decorative moldings and framing, transom windows, or sidelights (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-10). 
(3)  Facades. 
a.  Between fifty percent (50%) and eighty percent (80%) of all street-facing facades, between the ground and fourteen feet (14') shall be occupied by windows or door openings. All windows counting towards this requirement shall remain transparent. This provision is not intended to regulate window signs which are regulated by Division 3, Subdivision IV of this article (see Figure 15-438-11). 
b.  All street-facing facades shall have an entrance at least every one hundred feet (100'). 
c.  Between twenty-five percent (25%) and fifty percent (50%) of any upper-story facades shall be occupied by window openings. 
d.  Building facades longer than one hundred feet (100') shall be articulated by in one (1) or more of the following ways (see Figure 15-438-12): 
1.  By providing awnings on ground level windows and awnings or balconies on upper level openings; 
2.  By providing offsets in the facade between three feet (3') and ten feet (10') over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the facade; or 
3.  By providing prominent single-story entrance features, decorative cornice lines, and decorative horizontal molding between stories. 
(d)  Landscape and open space design. 
(1)  Each block which is zoned B-1 shall provide either common or public open space in one (1) of the following manners: 
a.  By including courtyards or plazas within the block that: 
1.  Cover at least five percent (5%) of the block; 
2.  Border a public street or internal lane on at least one (1) side; and 
3.  Are designed with landscape materials and public seating (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-13); or 
b.  By being immediately adjacent to or including a trail, greenway or other enhanced dedicated pedestrian connection that connects the nonresidential uses in the district to surrounding neighborhoods. 
(2)  Where an entire block is not zoned B-1, each lot which is zoned B-1 shall leave twenty percent (20%) of the lot as landscape or open space area. Individual lot open space may include: 
a.  Lawn areas; 
b.  Courtyards or plazas; or 
c.  Parking lot landscape areas. 
(3)  All landscape and open space areas shall meet the standards of Division 3, Subdivision III of this article. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.404) 
Sec. 15-363. - Special conditions for uses. 
(a)  Automobile service station. In the B-1 district, the following additional conditions shall apply to automobile service stations: 
(1)  No more than two (2) pump islands with a maximum of four (4) pumps at each island shall be allowed. 
(2)  No more than three (3) vehicle service bays, including car wash bays, shall be allowed. 
(3)  Pump islands shall be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from all lot lines. 
(4)  All lighting shall conform with Division 3, Subdivision III of this article regarding landscape and open space design. In addition, light or glare shall not spill onto adjacent property or rights-of-way. All light fixtures shall be either recessed into a canopy, or if they protrude shall have a box that shields the bulb from direct view. A light fixture that protrudes from the bottom of a canopy shall have a box completely surrounding the bulk and the lens shall be flush with the box. Lenses shall not protrude past the bottom of the box. 
(5)  All disabled vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed area and all vehicle repairs shall occur in an enclosed area. 
(6)  Outdoor storage of all vehicles shall be limited to no more than seven (7) calendar days on premises per vehicle per visit. 
(7)  All automobile service stations are subject to special site enhanced screening conditions identified through a special use permit to appropriately screen adjacent property from parking, pump islands, or service bays. This site screening shall be specific to the context of the site and may involve landscaping, walls, or other elements consistent with the architecture of the surrounding buildings. 
(b)  Drive-through facilities. Any proposed drive-through facilities in the B-1 district shall meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  Any service area shall be oriented away from and fully screened from any property that is zoned for or used solely for residential uses. No speaker, sign, or service area shall be audible or visible from any property that is zoned for or used solely for residential uses. 
(2)  Vehicle stacking lanes shall be designed so that lanes are located as far away from the street edge as possible and do not interrupt any required pedestrian path. 
(3)  Drive-through lanes shall have ingress and egress through an internal parking lot, unless otherwise authorized by the Governing Body. 
(4)  Menu boards or any other sign associated with the drive-through facility shall be limited to total of thirty-six (36) square feet and a maximum height of six feet (6'). 
(c)  Dwellings. Any proposed dwellings use in the B-1 district shall meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  Dwellings shall only be allowed on the second story above another allowed use in the B-1 district. 
(2)  All dwelling units or groups of dwelling units shall maintain their own individual entrance from the exterior of the building, separate from entrances to ground level uses. 
(d)  Home occupation. Any dwellings in the B-1 district may have home occupations subject to the same conditions for home occupation in the R-1 district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.405) 
Secs. 15-364-15-384. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - B-2 Office District 

Sec. 15-385. - Intent. 
    The B-2 Office District is intended to provide for large-scale office complexes and employment centers as well as supporting commercial and service uses that benefit from proximity to office uses. These uses generally serve as an employment center drawing employees from surrounding communities. The district generally provides a campus atmosphere with edges buffered from surrounding areas, consolidated ingress and egress locations, and connections for pedestrians and vehicles internal to the site. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.501) 
Sec. 15-386. - Uses. 
    Uses allowed in the B-2 district are specified in Subdivision I of this division. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.502) 
Sec. 15-387. - Dimension standards. 
Minimum district size  15 acres unless adding to an existing B-2 district. Minimum front setback  20 feet. Minimum side setbac  20 feet.  30 feet if abutting property zoned or used solely for residential uses. Minimum rear setback  10 feet if adjacent to a rear access alley.  30 feet if abutting property zoned or used solely for residential uses.  20 feet in all other instances. Maximum building height  5 stories and a maximum of 60 feet.  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.503) 
Sec. 15-388. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Block design. Development in the B-2 district shall be organized in blocks bordered by public streets, alleys, or by private internal lanes designed to mimic public streetscapes. 
(1)  The perimeter of all commercial blocks, measured from the centerline of the public streets or private lanes forming the block, shall not exceed three thousand feet (3,000') total, and shall not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') along any block face. 
(2)  All blocks shall have a street edge between twenty feet (20') and fifty feet (50') from the public right-of-way or private lane. 
a.  The street edge shall be formed by any of the following site elements: 
1.  The front or side facade of a building; 
2.  A two and one-half-foot (21/2') to four-foot (4') decorative fence or wall matching the architectural style and materials of adjacent buildings; or 
3.  A dense four (4) season vegetative screen where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the screen exceeds four feet (4'). 
b.  The street edge shall occupy at least fifty percent (50%) of each block face. 
c.  Areas between the public right-of-way and the street edge shall meet the landscape and open space design standards of Division 4, Subdivision II of this article. 
(3)  Curb cuts shall be separated by at least one hundred and fifty feet (150') along any block face and limited to no more than thirty-two feet (32') wide. Shared access or rear alley access for vehicles is encouraged in the B-2 district. 
(4)  All public streets and private lanes forming blocks shall be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly character. Where pedestrian connections along streets or private lanes are lacking, pedestrian paths or trails shall be provided between buildings and through open spaces in the B-2 district. 
(b)  Lot design. 
(1)  Each lot shall have a direct pedestrian connection from the sidewalk at the perimeter of the block to the primary entrance of the building. 
(2)  All off-street parking shall be located behind the street edge or in cases where it is in front of the street edge, it shall be screened by: 
a.  A two and one-half-foot (21/2') to four-foot (4') decorative fence or wall matching the architectural style and materials of adjacent buildings; or 
b.  A dense four (4) season vegetative screen where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the screen exceeds four feet (4'). 
(c)  Building design. 
(1)  Building materials. 
a.  Exterior surface of all buildings and structures shall be brick, stone, concrete, stucco, wood shingles, wood siding, wood paneling, glass block, or a combination of these materials. 
b.  Windows, doors, and louvers shall be wood or metal and glass. 
c.  Roofs exposed to view from public streets or common areas and walkways adjacent to buildings shall be covered with wood shingles, wood shakes, compositions shingles, terne, copper, slate or tile. 
d.  No plastic or back-lighted awnings shall be allowed. 
(d)  Landscape and open space design. 
(1)  At least twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area shall be permeable landscape area. This area may include perimeter or internal parking lot landscape areas or may be located between the street edge and the public right-of-way or private lanes. Where any individual lot is part of a larger development, open space requirements may be provided on a separate lot, provided covenants and restrictions between the lots maintain open space in compliance with these regulations. 
(2)  All landscape and open space areas shall meet the design standards of Division 3, Subdivision III of this article. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.504) 
Sec. 15-389. - Special conditions. 
(a)  Retail and service. All retail and service uses allowed subject to special conditions in the B-2 district, according to Section 15-264, shall subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Retail and service uses that are not integrated into an office building shall be developed according to the B-1 district site design standards and any special conditions in the B-1 district. 
(2)  Retail and service uses that are located inside an office building, are not accessory to the office use, and which rely on customers outside the office complex shall meet the following additional conditions (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-14): 
a.  The use shall only be allowed on the ground floor. 
b.  Uses shall maintain an individual entrance to the outside of the building. The entrance shall open onto or be directly connected to a pedestrian sidewalk at least eight feet (8') wide which runs along the entire frontage of the building facade. 
c.  Facades along the ground-floor retail space shall include at least two (2) of the following special design features: 
1.  Between fifty percent (50%) and eighty percent (80%) of the ground floor facade between zero feet (0') and fourteen feet (14') above grade occupied by clear glass windows or lightly tinted and non-reflective windows; 
2.  Awnings or a canopy matching the architectural style of the building; 
3.  Enhanced storefronts with at least fifteen feet (15') wide sidewalks, landscape features such as planting beds or tree wells with ornamental trees, and public seating areas. 
(b)  Adult business . All adult businesses shall be subject to the licensing procedures enumerated in Chapter 7, Article V. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.505; Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 1382) 
Secs. 15-390-15-406. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - B-3P Planned Business/Mixed-Use District 

Sec. 15-407. - Intent. 
    The B-3P Planned Business/Mixed-Use District is intended to provide a large-scale City-wide or regional designation commercial, office and residential uses in a mixed-use and compact development plan that blends with existing adjacent neighborhoods. Alternatively, this district may also accommodate a large-scale office campus, providing major employment and ancillary uses, that results in an internally integrated plan that also provides for transitions and connections to existing adjacent neighborhoods. The B-3P district characterized by more compact development patterns and flexible development standards that allow greater density of residential units or more regional destination nonresidential uses in exchange for increased community amenities such as significant public or common open space, enhanced architectural qualities of buildings, and integrated community site design. It is most appropriate when planned with transitional uses that provide edges compatible with adjacent property and provides strong pedestrian connections into and within the planned area. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.601) 
Sec. 15-408. - Uses. 
    Uses allowed in the B-3P district are specified in Section 15-264. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.602) 
Sec. 15-409. - Special plan review process. 
(a)  Plan required. All allowed uses in the B-3P district shall be allowed according to the submittal of an overall project development plan. Approval of the plan shall occur through the special procedures for development plans in Division 4 of this article, and subject to the plan meeting the intent, planning criteria, standards, and any special conditions for this district. The Planning Commission may recommend conditional approval or the Governing Body may conditionally approve any B-3P plan, provided that the conditions further the intent or planning criteria specified. 
(b)  Planning criteria . Plans for the B-3P district shall be evaluated on how well they achieve the following site design goals: 
(1)  Block design. The block layout and streetscape area in the B-3P plan should: 
a.  Accommodate convenient and direct travel patterns for both pedestrians and vehicles on all streets and private internal lanes. 
b.  Physically and perceptually link all sites in the district through internal site connections, particularly on portions of the site that do not contain public streets, by using consistent streetscape designs on all public rights-of-way and private internal lanes. 
c.  Create frequent connections of either public streets or private internal lanes, generally at least every three hundred feet (300') to five hundred feet (500'). 
d.  Minimize conflict points between pedestrians and vehicles. 
e.  Create a pleasing aesthetic appearance for public and private circulation routes in the district by defining these routes with building facades or other street edges. 
(2)  Building and lot design. Building and lot orientation in the B-3P plan should: 
a.  Create an enhanced streetscape design for the district made up of the public right-of-way, building facades that line the street, and landscape and open space elements between buildings and the public right-of-way. 
b.  Develop buildings that orient towards public spaces and create a stronger sense of physical definition of the streetscape areas and open space in the district. 
c.  Encourage architectural diversity and creativity. 
d.  Locate buildings in a way that supports multi-modal transportation patterns through the district, including vehicles and pedestrians. 
e.  Place high impact building elements such as loading docks, drive-through facilities, mechanical equipment, storage areas, and vehicle service bays away from public spaces and screen them from adjacent property. 
(3)  Landscape and open space design. Open space and public or common space design in the B-3P plan should accomplish the following goals: 
a.  Value the design, utility, and perceptual impact of open space rather than simply quantity. 
b.  Integrate open space as a usable and functioning element of the plan. 
c.  Link open spaces, whether private or public, to provide the greatest perceived impact. 
d.  Locate open space elements at prominent locations to create a focal point for the community or for the district. 
e.  Incorporate a wide array of open space including small courtyards, plazas, green space, parks, and trails. 
f.  Relate constructed elements of the development, including buildings and pedestrian areas, to the open space. 
g.  Integrate existing natural elements in the district as common or public open space. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.603) 
Sec. 15-410. - Dimension standards. 
    Dimension standards for the B-3P district are as follows: 
District Minimum project size 15 acres for initiation of a B-3P plan unless adding to or amending an approved B-3P district. Lot Lot standards and setbacks shall be established based on the context of an overall development plan. Development plans should use similar lot dimension standards of other districts for each particular use in the development plan, however these standards may be deviated from if the overall development plan demonstrates that the intent of the B-3P zoning district (Section 15-407) is better served by the alternative lot standard; the planning criteria (Section 15-409(b)) are better met with the alternative standards; and there is no advance impact on adjacent property. Structures Maximum height 5 stories and a maximum of 60 feet.  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.604) 
Sec. 15-411. - Site design standards. 
(a)  Block design. Development in the B-3P district shall be organized in blocks bordered by public streets, alleys, or by private internal lanes designed to mimic public streetscapes. 
(1)  The perimeter of all commercial blocks, measured from the centerline of the public streets or private lanes forming the block, shall not exceed one thousand, eight hundred feet (1,800') total, and shall not exceed five hundred and fifty feet (550') along any block face. 
(2)  The perimeter of mixed-use, or residential blocks shall not two thousand feet (2,000') total, and shall not exceed seven hundred feet (700') along any block face. 
(3)  All blocks shall have a street edge between zero feet (0') and thirty feet (30') from the public right-of-way or private lane (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-7). 
a.  The street edge shall be formed by any of the following site elements (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-8): 
1.  The front or side facade of a building; 
2.  A two and one-half-foot (21/2') to four-foot (4') decorative fence or wall matching the architectural style and materials of adjacent buildings; or 
3.  A dense four (4) season vegetative screen where no more than fifty percent (50%) of the screen exceeds four feet (4'). 
b.  The street edge shall occupy at least seventy percent (70%) of each block face. Areas without a street edge may be open to provide access to parking, courtyards or plazas subject to other design standards in this article. 
c.  At least fifty percent (50%) of the street edge on all sides of the block shall be made up of a building facade. 
d.  A street edge less than twenty feet (20') from the public right-of-way or private lane shall only be allowed on designated "pedestrian-oriented" streets which contain on-street parking and a sidewalk at least eight feet (8') wide. 
e.  Areas between the public right-of-way and the street edge shall meet the landscape and open space design standards of Division 4, Subdivision III of this article. 
(4)  Curb cuts shall be separated by at least one hundred and fifty feet (150') along any block face and limited to no more than thirty-two feet (32') wide. Shared access or rear alley access for vehicles is encouraged in the B-3P district. 
(5)  All public streets and private lanes forming blocks shall be designed to create a pedestrian-friendly character. All streets and lanes shall meet the following requirements. 
a.  Parking should be provided on streets and lanes subject to public works approval. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of: 
1.  Ten feet (10') wide on all streets where buildings have a zero-foot (0') setback; 
2.  Eight feet (8') wide on all streets where buildings are set back less than twenty feet (20'); and 
3.  Six feet (6') wide at all other locations. 
c.  Sidewalks may abut the finished street in areas where on-street parking is permitted. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be separated from the finished street by a planting strip between four feet (4') and eight feet (8') wide where on-street parking is not permitted. 
e.  Street trees should be planted in tree wells in the sidewalk or in planting strips every thirty-five feet (35'). Tree wells shall contain a minimum pervious area of twenty-five (25) square feet and no less than four feet (4') in any one (1) direction. In all cases tree wells shall be sized to ensure the survival of the species. Street tree species should have a minimum under canopy height of fourteen feet (14') at maturity. 
(b)  Lot design. 
(1)  Each lot shall have a direct pedestrian connection from the sidewalk at the perimeter of the block to the primary entrance of the building. Buildings with a zero-foot (0') setback or directly fronting the sidewalk of a private lane meet this standard by default. For any buildings set back from the perimeter sidewalk around a block, the direct pedestrian connection shall: 
a.  Be at least eight feet (8') wide; 
b.  Shall separated from the grade of any parking surface by a curb and gutter (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-9). 
(2)  All off-street parking shall be located behind the street edge. 
(c)  Building design. 
(1)  Building materials. 
a.  Exterior surface of all buildings and structures shall be brick, stone, concrete, stucco, wood shingles, wood siding, wood paneling, glass block, or a combination of these materials. 
b.  Windows, doors, and louvers shall be wood or metal and glass. 
c.  Roofs exposed to view from public streets or common areas and walkways adjacent to buildings shall be covered with wood shingles, wood shakes, compositions shingles, terne, copper, slate, or tile. 
d.  No plastic or back-lighted awnings shall be allowed. 
(2)  Entrances. 
a.  All structures shall have a primary entrance that faces the street or private lane. 
b.  Primary entrances shall be articulated by one (1) or a combination of the following design elements (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-10): 
1.  A canopy or arcade; 
2.  An entrance projecting from the facade by no more than three feet (3'); 
3.  An entrance recessed from the facade by between three feet (3') and ten feet (10'); or 
4.  Architectural treatments such as significant decorative moldings and framing, transom windows, or sidelights. 
(3)  Facades. 
a.  All street-facing facades shall have an entrance at least every one hundred and fifty feet (150'). 
b.  All street-facing facades shall have doors or window openings of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the facade. 
c.  Building facades longer than one hundred and fifty feet (150') shall be articulated in at least two (2) of the following ways (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-12): 
1.  Window and door openings of fifty percent (50%) to eighty percent (80%) of the facade between zero feet (0') and fourteen feet (14') above grade, and having window or door openings of twenty-five percent (25%) to fifty percent (50%) of the facade above fourteen feet (14') (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-11); 
2.  Awnings on all ground level openings and awnings or balconies shall be provided on upper level openings; 
3.  Off-sets in the facade between three feet (3') and ten feet (10') over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the facade; or 
4.  Prominent single-story entrance features, decorative cornice lines, and decorative horizontal moldings between stories. 
(d)  Landscape and open space design. 
(1)  Each B-3P plan shall provide either common or public open space in one (1) or a combination of the following types: courtyards and plazas; parks and greens; or general green space. Where a combination each open space type is used, the open space shall be allocated to a specific area of the plan and calculated so that each area meets the minimum open space calculations for that specific type of open space. The following are the descriptions of the types of open space and minimum dimension and design standards for each type: 
a.  Courtyards and plazas. Include courtyards or plazas within each block covering at least five percent (5%) of the block, bordering a public street or internal lane on at least one (1) side, and designed with landscape materials and public seating (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-13); 
b.  Parks and greens. Include at least fifteen percent (15%) of the plan area as small parks or greens, located as focal points for the plan in central locations. Each park or green shall also meet the following design standards (see Subdivision VII of this division, Figure 15-438-15): 
1.  Cover at least forty percent (40%) of the block it is on; 
2.  Border a public street or internal lane on at least two (2) sides; 
3.  Contain at least seventy percent (70%) of the park or green area as permeable surface covered with vegetation; and 
4.  Be designed to include landscape materials and public; or 
c.  Green space. Maintain at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total plan area as permeable landscape area. This area may include perimeter or internal parking lot landscape areas or may be located between the street edge and the public right-of-way or private lanes. 
(2)  All landscape and open space areas shall meet the design standards of Division 3, Subdivision III of this article. 
(3)  Stormwater . Open space shall be designed and located in the development plan to encourage infiltration of stormwater. The rate of runoff for stormwater attributable to the development plan shall not be increased by development of the property. Stormwater calculations shall be clearly indicated in the development plan and approved by the City Council prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.605) 
Sec. 15-412. - Special conditions. 
(a)  Open retail. Any proposed open retail use in the B-3P district shall be planned according to the following standards: 
(1)  The open retail uses shall only be proposed as a mixed-use development, also involving land uses from at least two (2) non-retail use categories from the Use Table in Section 15-264. 
(2)  The non-retail uses shall make up at least fifty percent (50%) of the floor area, and fifty percent (50%) of the land area for the proposed development plan. 
(b)  Drive-through facilities. Any proposed drive-through facilities in the B-3P district shall meet the following additional standards: 
(1)  Any service area shall be oriented away from and fully screened from any property that is zoned for or used solely for residential uses. No speaker, sign, or service area shall be audible or visible from any property that is zoned for or used solely for residential uses. 
(2)  Vehicle stacking lanes shall be designed so that lanes are located as far away from the street edge as possible and do not interrupt any required pedestrian path. 
(3)  Drive-through lanes shall only have ingress and egress through an internal parking lot. No drive-through lane shall enter from or exit onto a public street or internal private lane. 
(4)  Menu boards or any other sign associated with the drive-through facility shall be limited to total of thirty-six (36) square feet and a maximum height of six feet (6'). 
(c)  Home occupation. Any dwellings in the B-3P district may have a home occupation subject to the same conditions for home occupations in the R-1 district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-2.606) 
Secs. 15-413-15-437. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Supporting Material 

Sec. 15-438. - Graphics. 
Figure 15-438-1: Enhanced entry features . Single-story front entry features such as porches, ornamental stoops, or covered porticos, help reduce the scale of large (two-story) front facades, create a pedestrian-friendly streetscape, and preserve the character of existing neighborhoods. [See Sections 15-297(b)(2)a.; 15-334(c)(1)b.] Figure 15-438-2: Garage doors. Overhead garage doors present a blank building front along the street. Limiting front-facing overhead garage doors to a specified percentage of the total facade width helps preserve the character of the streetscape. [See Section 15-297(b)(3)b.] Figure 15-438-3: Architectural relief . Offsets in the building, projections around window elements, and roof dormers are examples of architectural relief features that break up tall or long wall planes along a single building line and reduces the mass of residential facades. [See Sections 15-297(b)(5)a.; 15-334(c)(3)a.] Figure 15-438-4: Residential facade opening. Openings help break up the mass of larger facades. Residential openings include windows and doors. When calculating openings as a specified percent of a total facade, integral molding and architectural details may be included in the area of the opening, however removable, non-integral elements such as shutters shall not be included. [See Sections 15-297(b)(5)b.; 15-334(c)(3)b.] Figure 15-438-5: Material change. Material changes, when limited to inside corners or horizontal architectural features helps better integrate diverse building materials into structural elements of the buildings [See Sections 15-297(b)(6)f.5; 15-334(c)(4)f.4] Figure 15-438-6: Privacy fence or wall locations. Privacy fences or walls generally should not be in front of the front building line of adjacent buildings except in special circumstances on corner lots and subject to specific conditions. [See Sections 15-297(c)(1)c.; 15-297(c)(2).] Figure 15-438-7: Street edges. Street edges, formed by decorative fences or walls, planting treatments, building facades, or a combination of these elements, help define the spaces around blocks and creates a transition between public streetscapes and private areas. [See Sections 15-297(a)(3).; 15-408.] Figure 15-438-8: Street edges/Block face. Depending on the zoning district, street edges may be made up of various percentages of "street edge elements" along a single block face. [See Sections 15-297(a)(3)c.; 15-411(a)(3).a.] Figure 15-438-9: Grade-separated pedestrian connections . When buildings do not front on the street, grade-separated pedestrian connections improve walkability by providing dedicated connections to building entrances from public sidewalks or internal pedestrian circulation systems. [See Section 15-362(b)(1)b.; 15-411(b)(1)b.] Figure 15-438-10: Enhanced commercial entrances . Specialized architectural treatments at building entrances, when concentrated to a single story entrance feature, creates a pedestrian scale and adds interest to the streetscape. [See Sections 15-362(c)(2)b.4; 15-411(c)(2)b.] Figure 15-438-11: Commercial facade openings . Commercial openings include windows and doors. When calculating openings as a specified percent of a facade or part of a facade, integral molding and architectural details may be included in the area of the opening, however removable, non-integral elements such as shutters shall not be included. [See Sections 15-362(c)(3)a.; 15-411(c)(3)b.] Figure 15-438-12: Articulated commercial facades. Recurring building entrances, window and door openings, architectural details at the base, first story and top of buildings, awnings over windows and small off-sets of the building front help articulate large facades and reduce the scale of large buildings to a more pedestrian level. [See Sections 15-362(c)(3)d.; 15-411(c)(3)c.] Figure 15-438-13: Courtyards or Plazas . Small courtyards or plazas, when designed appropriately and frequently located, such as on every block, can provide better impact for open space than requirements on a per lot basis. [See Section 15-411(d)(1)a.] Figure 15-438-14: Enhanced retail storefront. Office buildings can be improved to create a better mixed-use environment when ground level retail uses provided enhanced retail storefronts, including architectural elements on buildings or improved pedestrian areas along building frontages. [See Section 15-389(a)(2)] Figure 15-438-15: Parks or Greens. Small parks or greens, when designed appropriately and centrally located can provide better impact for open space than requirements on a per lot basis. [See Section 15-411(d)(1)b.] Figure 15-438-16: Corner Lots . Standard, Reverse and Intersection are different corner lot patterns found in Fairway. Flexibility to side setbacks are provided in certain situations with the goal of maintaining good relationships to streetscapes and aligning building frontages along predominant block faces (either short sides of blocks, long sides of blocks or both) based on the particular context of the lot and block. [See Section 15-296(b)] Figure 15-438-17: Foundation Planting . Foundation planting contributes to the greenspace and streetscape appeal of neighborhoods by adding visual interest and breaking up the front facades of buildings. A minimum of half of the building frontage shall have foundation plantings. [See Section 15-297(a)(2)f.] Figure 15-438-18: Driveway Widths . Driveway width limits help preserve the greenspace and streetscape views along blocks and are proportioned to the lot widths based on a percentage. Overall limits cap the allowed width, and exceptions for areas deeper into lots help ensure adequate vehicle access on narrower lots. [See Section 15-297(a)(3)a.] Figure 15-438-19: Building Massing & Side Setbacks . A "3-dimensional" setback helps break up building massing for larger buildings and preserve smaller scale building relationships the closer buildings are to property lines. The tiered approach limits wall planes closest to the setbacks, and encourages massing common to Fairways housing stock with main masses and smaller wings. [See Section 15-297(b)(4)a.] Figure 15-428-20: Building Massing & Rear Setback . A "3-dimensional" setback helps break up building massing for larger buildings and preserves smaller scale building relationships the closer buildings are to property lines. The tiered approach limits wall planes closest to the setbacks, and encourages massing common to Fairways housing stock with main masses and smaller wings. [See Section 15-297(b)(4)b.] Figure 15-438-21: Building Massing & Limited Projections . Limited projections are common to many architectural styles present in Fairway. The limitation on the projections, combined with the "3-dimensional setbacks" will help proportion the massing of buildings, break up larger facades, and preserve small scale relationships with adjacent buildings [See Section 15-297(b)(4)c.]  
(Development Ord. 2004, art. 4, div. 2, pt. 7; Ord. No. 1582 , § 9, 12-8-2014) 
Secs. 15-439-15-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 15-460-15-486. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Parking 

Sec. 15-487. - Intent. 
    This subdivision is intended to ensure that all land uses are provided with adequate site accessibility from a variety of modes of transportation, including pedestrian, bicycles, and automobiles. The parking requirements and design standards ensure adequate vehicle storage to support land uses; provide appropriate site location and design features that mitigate the impact of parking lots on other land uses and goals for the City; create the least visible impact of parking on adjacent private and public property; encourage parking designs that minimize runoff and incorporates infiltration of stormwater into the ground; and reduce the need to dedicate areas of sites to underutilized parking. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.101) 
Sec. 15-488. - Required parking schedule. 
(a)  Minimum parking shall be based on the following schedule: 
Land Use Required Parking Open retail 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area. Neighborhood retail 1 per 350 square feet of gross floor area. Bar, restaurants, or other food service facilities 1 per 3 seats. Medical and dental offices or clinics 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area. General office 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area. Churches, theaters, auditoriums, halls, or other places of assembly 1 per every 4 seats. If there are no fixed seats it shall be 1 per every 4 individuals in the maximum designed capacity. Child care, nursery, or pre-schools 1 per each person in the largest working staff plus 1 additional space for every 10 children at maximum facility capacity. Public and private elementary schools 2 per classroom. Public and private secondary schools or higher or continuing education institutions 8 per classroom. Service stations 1 per each person in the largest working shift plus 2 spaces per each service bay. Single-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit. Townhouses, apartments or other attached dwellings 1.25 per dwelling unit.  
*Gross floor area excludes basement or storage areas 
**Where computation of required parking results in a fractional number, the required number shall be the next higher whole number 
***Each parking space shall contain a rectangular area at least 18 feet by 9 feet. 
(b)  Accessible parking space requirements. Parking facilities accessible for physically handicapped persons shall be provided according to the most recent standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act and associated guidelines, including quantity, size, location, and accessibility. Applicants must clearly demonstrate compliance with these standards or in the alternative, demonstrate why the standards are not applicable to their project or parcel. 
(c)  Maximum parking. No use shall provide more than ten percent (10%) more than the minimum required parking without providing two or more of the following mitigating design features: 
(1)  The surface shall be an porous surface that allows all stormwater to be infiltrated below the surface, subject to the approval by the City. Any porous surface used shall demonstrate that it has at least the same or better performance standard as the required standard parking surface and does not present any maintenance issues; 
(2)  The site shall be required to provide additional area, equal to or greater than the area of parking in excess of the maximum, as public or common open space. This additional open space shall be subject to the design and location requirements article be in addition the minimum open space requirements for the site; 
(3)  Landscape material requirements for the site shall be increased by ten percent (10%) above the minimum amount required by this division and shall be allocated to provide enhanced buffering of all on-site parking; or 
(4)  Internal landscape islands for the on-site parking shall be increased by five percent (5%) above the minimum percentage requirements of this division. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.102) 
Sec. 15-489. - Shared parking. 
    In meeting the requirements of the parking schedule in Section 15-488, adjacent uses may share parking under the following conditions and standards: 
(1)  Adjacent landowners shall execute the necessary cross access easements to facilitate shared parking and record all documents for the easements with the Recorder of Deeds. 
(2)  A written agreement for the joint use of parking facilities shall be executed by the parties and approved by the City. 
(3)  All shared parking spaces shall be within a reasonable proximity of the main entrance of any building sharing the parking and provide direct pedestrian access to the entrance. 
(4)  Parking requirements shall be the cumulative requirements of the uses sharing the parking, except where different uses (retail or service, office, civic, or residential) are located on the same or adjacent lot. The following is a base guide for shared parking. Each use should provide a percentage of parking required by these regulations according to the following table. Whichever time period requires the highest total parking spaces among the various uses subject to the shared parking agreement should be the amount of parking provided. Alternative parking allocations may be approved by the City based on sufficient evidence an analysis of peak parking demands for specific uses which are subject to the agreement. 
Category of Use
Sharing Parking Percentage of Required Parking Spaces
by Time Period Weekday Daytime & Evening Weekend Daytime & Evening Nighttime 6:00 a.m. to 
5:00 p.m. 5:00 p.m. to 
1:00 a.m. 6:00 a.m. to 
5:00 p.m. 5:00 p.m. to 
1:00 a.m. 1:00 a.m. to 
6:00 a.m. Office 100% 10% 5% 5% 5% Retail 75% 75% 100% 90% 5% Restaurant 50% 100% 75% 100% 25% Entertainment 
& Recreation 30% 100% 75% 100% 5% Church 5% 25% 100% 50% 5% School 100% 10% 10% 10% 5% Residential 25% 90% 50% 90% 100% Lodging 50% 90% 75% 100% 100%  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.103) 
Sec. 15-490. - Parking credits. 
    A credit may be given to the requirements of the table in 15-488(a) Parking Schedule, under the following conditions: 
(1)  On-street parking within three hundred feet (300') of any lot line may be credited to the parking requirement at a rate of one (1) credit for every two (2) on-street parking spaces. 
(2)  Bicycle parking facilities within reasonable proximity of the main entrance may be credited at a rate of one (1) credit for every two (2) bicycle parking spaces, up to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the required vehicle parking. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.104; Ord. No. 1582 , § 11, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-491. - Parking design. 
(a)  Location. Except for parking for single-family homes, all parking should be located behind the street edge or on the street, and according to the lot design standards for each zoning district [See Section 15-492, Figure 15-492-1] 
(b)  Size and circulation. Parking lot dimensions shall be as follows: 
See Figure 15-492-2 90° Angle 60° Angle 45° Angle A-stall width 9 feet 10 feet 10 feet B-stall depth 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet C-two-way aisle width 23 feet 23 feet 23 feet D-one-way aisle width 16 feet 14 feet 12 feet E-one-way single-loaded aisle width 14 feet 11 feet 11 feet  
Figure 15-492-2 - Stall and aisle dimensions. 

(c)  Landscape requirements. 
(1)  Internal planting requirements. All parking lots shall provide internal planting islands subject to the following minimum dimensions standards: 
Number of Spaces in the Lot Percent of Internal Parking Lot Surface Area, 
Including Drive Aisles 20 or fewer No requirement 21-30 6% 31-40 10% Over 40 15%  
(2)  Perimeter planting requirements. All parking lots shall provide perimeter planting strips subject to the following dimension standards: 
a.  All parking lots shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot wide perimeter landscape area along all public rights-of-way. 
b.  Parking lots with eighty (80) or fewer spaces shall provide a minimum six (6) foot wide perimeter landscape along all other edges not directly fronted by a building. 
c.  Parking lots with greater than eighty (80) spaces shall: 
1.  Provide a minimum ten (10) foot wide perimeter landscape area along all other edges not directly fronted by a building; and 
2.  Contain a continuous intervening planting strip at least six feet (6') wide, so that no single parking area contains more than eighty (80) spaces without being surrounded by a perimeter planting strip. These intervening planting strips may count towards the requirements of Subsection (c)(2)c.1. of this section. [See Section 15-492, Figure 15-492-4] 
(3)  Landscape and planting areas in parking shall contain plant materials meeting the requirements of Division 3, Subdivision III of this article. The primary landscape materials used in parking lots shall be trees which provide shade or are capable of providing shade at maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting materials may be used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not be the sole means of landscaping. Effective use of earth berms and existing topography is also encouraged as a component of a landscaping plan. In those instances where plant materials exist on a parking lot site prior to its development or redevelopment, such materials may be used if approved as meeting the requirements of Division 3, Subdivision III of this article. 
(4)  Landscape and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot, located to break the expanse of pavement, to guide traffic flow, and to treat stormwater runoff from the parking surface. Trees, shrubs, grass and other ground cover shall be planted in the interior landscape areas. 
(5)  The dimensions of any planting area or planting median shall be sufficient to protect and ensure proper growth of the landscaping materials. In no event shall any such area be less than sixty (60) square feet or less than five feet (5') in width in any direction. Each area shall be protected by Portland cement concrete vertical curbs or similar structures, except that the Planning Commission may approve alternative designs to infiltrate stormwater into landscape areas, such as perforated curbs, rain gardens and other best management practices that meet sound engineering practices. 
(d)  Pedestrian connections. All parking lots greater than twenty (20) spaces shall have a direct pedestrian connection from the lot to either the primary entrance of the building on the lot or to the public sidewalk. The pedestrian connection shall meet the following standards: [See Section 15-492, Figure 15-492-3] 
(1)  It shall be of a different surface than the parking lot surface both in color and texture or material. 
(2)  It shall be located at a central location in the parking lot. 
(3)  It shall be at least eight feet (8') wide. 
(4)  It shall cross all internal drive aisles and private lanes at designated crosswalks. In no instance shall a crosswalk across a drive aisle or private lane be greater than twenty feet (20') for any single crosswalk. 
(5)  For lots greater than eighty (80) spaces, the pedestrian connection shall be separated from the parking surface by either a grade separation or be located within intervening planting strips so that the pedestrian connection is dedicated solely to pedestrian use [See Section 15-492, Figure 15-492-4]. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.105; Ord. No. 1582 , § 13, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-492. - Supporting graphics. 
Figure 15-492-1: Screened parking/street edge . Placing on-site parking behind low screens such as ornamental fences, walls, or landscape minimizes the impact of parking lots on public streetscapes. This concept works in conjunction with providing a street edge (see Figures 4-2-12 and 4-2-13) along nonresidential blocks (see Section 15-491(a)). Figure 15-492-2: Stall and aisle dimensions. Figure appears with text in Section 15-491(b). Figure 15-492-3: Pedestrian connections. Larger parking lots, such as those greater than 20 spaces, provide better safety and improved walkability when pedestrian connections are made through intervening parking areas, between building entrances and public sidewalks. These areas are more clearly identified to pedestrians and vehicles when textured or colored pavement treatments or grade-separated pedestrian paths are used (see Section 15-491(d)). Figure 15-492-4: Parking blocks. Extremely large parking areas, greater than 80 spaces, provide for better balance of pedestrian and vehicle access, and improved community aesthetics, when broken into "parking blocks" of fewer than 80 spaces. Perimeter landscaping, internal access lanes with enhanced streetscapes, and grade-separated pedestrian connections complete the design enhancements of parking blocks (see Sections 15-491(c)(2)c.2 and (d)(5)).  
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.106) 
Secs. 15-493-15-522. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Landscape and Open Space Design 

Sec. 15-523. - Intent. 
    The landscape, open space, and lighting design standards are intended: 
(1)  To provide greenery to visually soften paved areas and buildings; 
(2)  To incorporate usable and accessible open spaces, whether public, common, or private, into development projects; 
(3)  To establish optimum environmental conditions by providing shade, air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, retardation of stormwater runoff, and abatement of noise, glare and heat; 
(4)  To ensure the replenishment of the local stock of native trees by utilizing plant materials that are generally native or hearty to the region; 
(5)  To preserve existing trees; 
(6)  To screen certain unsightly equipment or materials from the view of persons on public streets or adjoining properties; 
(7)  To provide visible, accessible, and safe areas on sites for community gathering and interaction; and 
(8)  To buffer uncomplimentary land uses and generally enhance the quality and appearance of developed properties within the City. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.201) 
Sec. 15-524. - Applicability. 
    The landscape and open space standards in this subdivision shall apply to all business districts, and in residential districts where a site plan is required or where uses requiring parking lots may be permitted. Where necessary to interpret the precise meaning of technical landscaping terms utilized in this subdivision or elsewhere in this chapter, reference shall be had to The American Standard for Nursery Stock, as published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.202; Ord. No. 1582 , § 13, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-525. - Landscape and open space plan. 
    Any development application requiring a site plan or a development plan, shall also include a landscape and open space plan as part of the site or development plan, signed by a landscape architect registered in the State and containing the following minimum information: 
(1)  North point and scale. 
(2)  Topographic information and final grading adequate to identify and properly specify planting for areas needing slope protection. 
(3)  The location, size and surface of materials of all structures and parking areas. 
(4)  The location, size and type of all aboveground and underground utilities and structures with proper notation, where appropriate, as to any safety hazards to avoid during installation of landscaping. 
(5)  The location, size, type and quantity of all proposed landscaping materials, along with common and botanical names of all plant species. The size, grading and condition shall be specified according to American Association of Nurserymen Standards. 
(6)  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained on the site. 
(7)  Mature sizes of plant materials shall be drawn to scale and called out on the plan by a common name or appropriate key. 
(8)  Location of hose connections and other watering sources. 
(9)  The location of all trees that are proposed for removal. 
(10)  All screening required by this section, including dimensions and a description of building materials. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.203) 
Sec. 15-526. - Required landscape material. 
(a)  General requirements. All land areas that are to be unpaved or not covered by buildings, parking areas, or other structures shall be brought to finished grade and planted with turf or native grass or other appropriate ground cover. In addition to the minimum number of trees required to be planted by this part, an appropriate number or amount of shrubs, ground cover and/or turf area plantings shall be included in each project, to be determined by the design criteria for the project relating to visual safety, species and landscape function. When business uses are adjacent to residential property, the minimum tree and planting requirements shall be planted within the ten feet (10') of the setback area immediately adjacent to the residential property. 
(b)  Minimum tree requirements. 
(1)  Quantity. Each site shall contain the following minimum quantity of trees: 
Site Area Minimum Quantity For every 40 feet of street frontage 1 large shade tree; or 
1.5 small deciduous or ornamental tree For every 3000 square feet of landscape area or open space area 1 medium shade; or 
1.5 small deciduous or ornamental tree; or 
2 evergreen or conifer shrubs For every 10 parking spaces required 1 medium or large shade tree; or 
2 small deciduous or ornamental tree  
* Minimum quantity shall apply to each fraction of the area. Where a calculation results in a fraction of a tree, the required amount shall be rounded up to the nearest whole tree. 
(2)  Location. Trees required for the street frontage shall be located in the landscaped setback abutting the street frontage or in the right-of-way as street trees. Trees may be clustered to achieve the best overall design for the site and need not be planted at 40-foot intervals. Trees required for parking spaces shall be located in the parking lot islands or perimeter landscape strips. 
(3)  Species . Tree species shall be selected from the list of recommended trees that is maintained by the City as provided in Section 11-53. 
(c)  Minimum planting requirements. Minimum planting requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Medium and large shade trees-minimum three-inch caliper. 
(2)  Small deciduous or ornamental trees-six feet (6') in height, with the exception of true dwarf species. 
(3)  Conifers-five (5') to six feet (6') in height. 
(4)  Upright evergreen trees-four feet (4') in height, except for true dwarf species. 
(5)  The size of deciduous and conifer shrubs, including spreader and globe tree forms, shall be determined by the applicant. 
(6)  Ground cover plants, whether in the form of crowns, plugs or containers, shall be planted in a number as appropriate by species to provide fifty percent (50%) surface coverage after two (2) growing seasons. 
(7)  All other areas shall be sodded unless otherwise approved for seeding at the time of final site plan approval by the Planning Commission. 
(d)  Maintenance of landscaping. 
(1)  Trees, shrubs, and other landscaping materials depicted on landscaping plans approved by the City shall be considered to be elements of the project in the same manner as parking, building materials and other details. The developer, its successor and/or subsequent owners and their agents shall be responsible for maintenance of landscaping on the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development. Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season after installation. All landscaping will be subject to periodic inspection by the City. Should landscaping not be installed, maintained and replaced as needed to comply with the approved plan, the owner and its agent or agents shall be considered in violation of the terms of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  As a condition to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy, a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the initial landscaping costs shall be required to be posted to ensure the needed replacement of materials and the continued maintenance of the same for a period of two (2) years after initial installation, unless this requirement is modified or waived by the Planning Commission. This cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited if the necessary maintenance and replacement has not been performed in a satisfactory manner within the two-year period. Further, should it be determined that the landscaping, as approved on the landscaping plan, is not being maintained as specified beyond the initial two-year maintenance period, resubmission of the approved plan and the positing of an additional maintenance escrow may be required by the City. 
(e)  Screening. Landscape and open space plans shall include a detailed drawing of enclosure and screening methods as provided below. 
(1)  Trash enclosures shall be screened from public view on at least three (3) sides with a six-foot solid fence, and the fourth side shall be a solid gate, said fence and gate to be constructed of cedar, redwood, masonry or other compatible building material, and shall be appropriately landscaped. 
(2)  Exterior-mounted or building-mounted equipment including, but not limited to, mechanical equipment, utilities and banks of meters, shall be screened from public view with landscaping or with an architectural treatment compatible with the building architecture. 
(3)  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from public view from adjoining properties or any street right-of-way with an architectural treatment which is compatible with the building architecture. 
(4)  All buildings or additions thereto in business districts shall provide a solid screen fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in height along all rear and side property lines which are common to property zoned for residential purposes, except that such screening shall not extend in front of the building line or adjacent dwellings. Such screening shall not be required where similar screening exists on the abutting residential property. 
(5)  Trash enclosures shall not be located in the setback. 
(6)  All landscape and screening material so that clear sight lines are provided for vehicle ingress and egress of the site. For the purposes of this section, distances and sight paths shall be based on the context of the ingress and egress locations and be developed in conformance with all other site design standards of this article and specific zoning district. Therefore, elements such as controlled intersections, required stopping locations, and design speeds for conflicting vehicle movements may all contribute to the appropriate design for clear sight lines. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.204; Ord. No. 1582 , § 15, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-527. - Lighting performance standards. 
    Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas, signs, buildings or other structures in business districts shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residentially zoned property or from public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, from floodlights or commercial operations, shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights that cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) footcandle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of the street. Any light or combination of lights that cast light on adjacent residentially zoned property shall not exceed one-quarter (0.25) footcandle (meter reading) as measured from said property line. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.205) 
Secs. 15-528-15-547. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Signs 

Sec. 15-548. - General provisions. 
(a)  Intent. Sign regulations may impact First Amendment rights; rights are that are important constitutional rights that must be protected. Unregulated signage, however, has direct and secondary effects that are harmful to the safety and general welfare of the City as a whole and to its individual citizens. These direct and secondary effects result from the visual clutter that occurs as a result of the unregulated installation and lack of maintenance of signs, and include harm to traffic and pedestrians' safety, depreciation of property values within the City, decreased business opportunities for individual and business residents of the City (resulting in decreased sales, property and other tax revenues that are necessary to provide an adequate level of public service to City residents), community blight, and an overall less pleasing community appearance. Because of these direct and secondary effects, the City has a compelling interest in regulating signs within the City. For the most part, these regulations are content- and viewpoint-neutral, reasonable time, manner and place restrictions that directly advance the City's stated interests and are not designed to discourage of prevent any particular message or suppress, disadvantage or impose differential burdens on speech because of its content, and are justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech. To the extent that certain provisions of these regulations make content-based distinctions, those distinctions are reasonably related to a content-neutral purpose, the scope of the regulations is proportionate to the interests served, a reasonable fit with the City's interests and narrowly tailored to achieve the desired objective. Furthermore, a direct nexus exists between the desired City's goals and the means chosen in these regulations to achieve its desired goals. Each exemption in these regulations is based on objective factors relevant to each particular exemption, does not draw distinctions based on the content of the sign, does not create competition for limited space for signs or preclude the placement of another sign and is reasonably related to the legitimate, stated interests of these regulations. Temporary signs have certain characteristics that distinguish them from many of the other types of signs permitted and regulated by the City, specifically including the fact that many of these signs do not meet the regular structural and insulation requirements necessary to prevent them from being affected by weather and other natural forces and therefore present a potential hazard to persons and property; severe weather conditions, including, without limitation, thunderstorms with accompanying high winds, tornadoes, ice accumulation and flooding, are characteristic of local weather conditions. A primary and compelling interest of the City is the ability of the City, other governmental entities and utilities to erect official signs and other warnings to protect the public without being subject to regulation and to allow property owners to display legal postings without being subject to regulation so that the information is conveyed to the public to protect the public safety and welfare, to promote vehicular and pedestrian safety on private property by allowing directional signs to be posted without being subject to regulation, the safety and security from harm of residents' families and homes through signs displaying the existence of home security systems and neighborhood watch programs and the ability of the police and fire departments to easily identify residents or addresses in emergency situations, and therefore necessitate the ability of residents and businesses to erect address signs and name plate signs. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.302; Ord. No. 1582 , § 17, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-550. - Sign use table. 
    The following table is for convenience of reference only, and shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of any other provisions of this subdivision. When a conflict occurs, the other provision shall control. 
Sign Type Zoning District R-1 Single-Family 
Residential R-2P- Planned 
Residential* B-1 
Neighborhood 
Business B-2 Office 
District B-3P Planned 
Business Mixed- 
Use District* Address signs R R R R R Flags A* A* A or GB A or GB A or GB Banners GB* GB* P or GB P or GB P or GB Holiday displays A A A A A Contractor signs A A P or PC P or PC P or PC Informational signs A A A A A Real estate signs A A P or PC P or PC P or PC Ongoing lease signs GB GB GB GB Public institutions-permanent signs GB GB GB GB GB Public institutions-temporary signs P or PC P or PC P or PC P or PC P or PC Business-permanent signs GB GB GB Business-wall directory signs GB GB GB Business-directional signs GB GB GB Business-open/closed signs A A A Business-interior window/door signs A A A Business-temporary signs P or PC P or PC P or PC Customary residential signs A A Garage sale signs A A Home tour signs P or PC P or PC Subdivision signs GB GB Flash/fluctuate/move/rotate/blink, etc. Pole signs Roof signs Changeable copy signs * * * * * Directly illuminated signs (e.g., neon) Searchlights Electronic message/graphic signs Obscene/profane/indecent signs False/misleading advertising Off-site signs (e.g., billboard sign) Snipe signs Portable signs Inflatable signs Home Occupation signs Vehicle signs  
R = Required 
A = Allowed (with possible restrictions or conditions) 
P = Requires permit by Building Inspector/Codes Official 
PC = Requires permit by Planning Commission 
GB = Requires permit by Governing Body upon Planning Commission recommendation 
* = Public Institutions in these districts have different requirements 
Blank Box = Prohibited or not allowed 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.303) 
Sec. 15-551. - Allowed signs (all districts). 
    No sign may be constructed, permitted or displayed in any district within the City, except as expressly provided for by this subdivision or other City ordinance. 
(1)  Address signs . All primary buildings shall have a permanent property address sign placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street fronting the property. Multi-tenant buildings with separate tenant entrances shall have a permanent address sign by each entrance. Such address signs shall contain the address number, and may contain the street name. Residential address signs shall have a minimum number height of four inches (4"), with a maximum area of two (2) square feet. Nonresidential address signs shall have a minimum number height of five inches (5"), with a maximum area of three (3) square feet. 
(2)  Flags . Noncommercial flags are allowed in residential districts; provided that that no such flag shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area. A business entity or public institution may display a maximum of three (3) flags; provided that any nongovernmental flag must be approved and permitted under the same procedure as required for business signs; and further provided that no such flag shall exceed forty (40) square feet in area, and no flagpole for the same shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height. Such flagpoles shall be ground-mounted and must comply with the setback provisions. 
(3)  Banners . A banner is a sign other than an official or personal flag that is made of cloth, canvas, thin plastic or other flexible material. A banner may be used for any permitted temporary public institution or business sign, provided that such banner is placed flush upon the wall or other surface to which it is attached. Additionally, the Governing Body may authorize any temporary or permanent noncommercial banner to be located on or hung from any street light or other structure on any public or private property; provided that such banner is located in a manner so as not to create any road or other hazard or to interference with any traffic or street lighting; and further provided that such banner is constructed and displayed in a manner so as not to create any noise disturbance to any adjacent property owner. 
(4)  Holiday displays . Holiday displays, including strings of light, may be used for decorative purposes during any nationally recognized holiday period; provided that said display not exceed seven and one-half (71/2) watts, traverse any street right-of-way, or create any traffic problem, congestion or hazard. 
(5)  Contractor signs . 
a.  Temporary nonilluminated contractor signs are allowed on properties in any district to advertise a contractor's construction, remodeling or improvement of the property; provided, such sign in any business district shall require a permit from the Building Official/Codes Administrator. Each parcel or lot shall be permitted only one (1) contractor sign during such construction, remodeling or improvement, and such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height. A contractor sign shall not be allowed until after the issuance of any necessary building permit, and shall be removed upon the completion of the project; provided, in no event shall such sign remain upon the property more than thirty (30) days. 
b.  Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to issue a permit for: 
(1)  A contractor sign in a business district exceeding the size requirement of Subsection (5)a of this section; provided that no such approved sign may exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height; 
(2)  A contractor sign for any period greater than thirty (30) days; provided that such permit shall not exceed six (6) months without approval by the Governing Body; or 
(3)  Multiple contractor signs per parcel or lot at any one (1) time. 
When approving any such permit, the Planning Commission may reasonably set any necessary material requirement. Applicants for an extension of an existing permit shall pay a new application fee. 
(6)  Informational signs . 
a.  An informational sign is a noncommercial sign that states, promotes or addresses an expression of free speech, a personal belief, or a political party, candidate or issue. Temporary nonilluminated informational signs may be placed upon private property in any district; provided that permission is granted by either the property owner or the owner's agent. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height per street right-of-way. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and abatement of the sign; provided that candidates for election endorsed by the sign shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance and abatement of the sign. 
b.  In addition to the allowed temporary nonilluminated information signs, any sign requiring a permit or other authorization, regardless of type or location, may contain the above-described noncommercial informational speech in lieu of any other permitted speech. 
(7)  Real estate signs . Real estate signs are used to advertise the availability of a parcel, lot, building, residence or land area for sale or lease. When allowed or permitted, such sign must be removed immediately after the closing of the sale or the execution of the lease. Nonilluminated real estate signs are allowed or permitted within the City as follows: 
a.  Residential (R-1 and R-2P). No permit or other authorization is required for any residential real estate sign. Each residence shall be allowed only one (1) real estate sign; provided, corner lots shall be allowed a sign for each street front. Residential real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height. 
b.  Business real estate signs (B-1 B-2 and B-3P). Real estate signs in a business district shall require a permit. Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Building Official/Codes Administrator is hereby authorized to issue a permit for a business real estate sign for a period up to six (6) months; provided, such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height; and further provided that only one (1) sign shall be allowed per parcel or lot within a twelve (12) month period (even if multi-tenant facility). Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to issue a permit for a commercial real estate sign for: 
1.  Any sign meeting the requirements set forth in Subsection (7)b of this section; 
2.  Any sign exceeding six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height, provided, no approved sign may exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height; 
3.  Any sign for any period in excess of six (6) months, provided such permit shall not exceed twelve (12) months without approval by the Governing Body; 
4.  Multiple signs per parcel or lot; or 
5.  Multiple sign requests for any parcel or lot within a twelve (12) month period. 
When approving any such permit, the Planning Commission may reasonably set any necessary time limit, size restriction or material requirement. Applicants for an extension of an existing permit shall pay a new application fee. 
c.  Multi-tenant. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, no multi-tenant parcel, lot, building, residence or land area shall be allowed more than one (1) real estate sign. 
d.  Ongoing lease signs. An ongoing lease sign is a sign that is not tied to any specific unit within a building, condominium, apartment complex or other multi-tenant facility, but is instead used on a semi-permanent or permanent basis to continually advertise available units or space within said multi-tenant facility. An application (including any applicable fee) for an ongoing lease sign shall be made to the Planning Commission who shall consider the size, appearance and other characteristics of a proposed ongoing lease sign, whether the same is harmonious with the neighboring and surrounding areas and surrounding signs, and whether it meets the requirements of the City's ordinances and comprehensive plan. In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission may establish any reasonable size restriction or material requirement, including, but not limited to, requiring such ongoing lease sign to be merged or incorporated into any other authorized permanent sign on the premises, and requiring the extension of the sign face or other part to grade in order to hide any posts. Such sign may then be approved and permitted by the Governing Body upon the Planning Commission's recommendation. 
(8)  Public institutions . A public institution, including schools, houses of worship, community centers, cultural facilities, and other public/semi-public facilities, shall be allowed up to two (2) permanent (wall or monument) signs identifying the premises and activities provided therein. Such signs must be approved and permitted under the same procedure as required for business signs. Such signs shall be of a design, location and size as determined by the Planning Commission to be in harmony with the neighborhood and the building served. No such wall sign shall exceed thirty (30) square feet in area and five feet (5') in height, and no such monument sign shall exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height above the average grade; provided that the sign area for a monument with identical sign faces on two (2) sides shall be calculated using only one (1) face; and further provided that at the Planning Commission's discretion, a monument sign may be allowed up to an additional ten (10) square feet for a changeable copy panel. While wall signs may not include a changeable copy panel, up to fifty percent (50%) of a monument sign area may consist of a changeable copy panel. Sign area shall be calculated using both lettered and nonlettered portions of the sign. In addition to the permanent signs, referenced in this subsection, upon application (including any applicable fee), sign approval and a permit for a temporary nonilluminated sign for a public institution shall be granted under the same process and criteria as required for temporary business signs. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.304) 
Sec. 15-552. - Business signs. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 15-551 related to signs in all districts, the following requirements and provisions shall apply to signs in business districts (B-1, B-2 and B-3P). 
(1)  Permits required . Except as otherwise provided for by this subdivision or other City ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct, alter, replace, relocate, convert or change any sign in a business district without first obtaining sign approval and a sign permit, and paying any applicable permit fee; provided that such approval or permit is not required for ordinary maintenance and repair of a permitted sign. Applications for a sign in conjunction with the submission of a site plan shall include the plans for the sign within said site plan. 
(2)  Sign approval and issuance of sign permit . 
a.  Application. Applications for a sign permit and sign approval shall be submitted to the Building Official/Codes Administrator, and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, the owner of property (if different) and the contractor (if applicable); 
2.  Requested location of the proposed sign; 
3.  Nine (9) sets of plans for the proposed sign drawn to scale indicating the sign location on the site, sign size, method of illumination, colors, materials of the sign, method of attachment. If requesting a deviation, plans must also include the location and nature of all permanent signs located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the site where the proposed sign is to be located. 
4.  Any other information deemed necessary by the Building Official/Codes Administrator, the Planning Commission or the Governing Body. 
b.  Sign review. The Planning Commission shall consider a completed application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. In reviewing a proposed sign, the Planning Commission shall consider whether the size, appearance and other characteristics of the sign are harmonious with the neighboring and surrounding areas and surrounding signs, and whether the sign meets the requirements of the City's ordinances and comprehensive plan. When appropriate to ensure traffic safety, the Planning Commission may request the applicant to provide a traffic study of the area in which the sign is to be located. 
c.  Sign approval. After reviewing the proposed sign, the Planning Commission may recommend to the Governing Body that the sign be approved, approved with stipulations, or rejected. The Governing Body shall review this recommendation and any reasons therefor, and may then: adopt the recommendation; override the recommendation by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) majority vote of its membership; or return the recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying the basis for its failure to approve or disapprove. If the recommendation is returned, the Planning Commission, after reconsidering the same, may resubmit its original recommendation giving the reasons therefor, or submit a new or amended recommendation. Upon the receipt of this recommendation, the Governing Body may then: adopt the recommendation; override the recommendation by a simple majority; or take no further action. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver a recommendation to the Governing Body after its next regular meeting, the Governing Body shall consider such inaction as a resubmission of the original recommendation and proceed accordingly. 
d.  Issuance of sign permit. Upon approval of a sign, the Building Official/Codes Administrator shall issue a sign permit; provided, all other City ordinance requirements have been met, and any applicable permit fee has been paid. 
e.  Revocation of sign permit. Upon the recommendation of the Building Official/Codes Administrator, the Governing Body may revoke a sign permit upon failure of the permit holder to comply with any provision of this subdivision or other applicable City ordinance. 
(3)  Standards . Each building may be permitted one (1) permanent wall sign designating the name or business of any City-licensed occupant therein; provided, the Planning Commission may recommend the Governing Body approve additional signs for multiple tenants when the circumstances regarding the use and design of the building support such deviation. No such sign shall exceed thirty (30) square feet in area and five feet (5') in height, and the sign shall be attached firmly to the building parallel with and adjacent to the wall to which it is attached. Sign area shall be calculated using both lettered and non-lettered portions of the sign. In addition to this sign, the following nonilluminated signs are allowed: 
a.  A wall directory sign containing tenant names and addresses may be installed by each exterior entrance; provided that that such sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
b.  Two (2) directional signs may be installed on a site; provided that such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall contain only arrows or the words "entrance," "exit," "one-way," "parking," or "stop," and shall not bear any commercial logo. 
c.  An "open" or "closed" sign may be displayed inside or outside a City-licensed occupant's window or door; provided that such sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
d.  Signs may be displayed inside a City-licensed occupant's windows or doors; provided that the aggregate area of all such interior signs within thirty-six inches (36") of the windows or doors shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the window and door area. Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Governing Body may grant a deviation to this provision to allow for the display of an interior illuminated sign. 
e.  All signs shall be constructed of materials and designed in such a way as to be compatible with the buildings located on the same property. 
(4)  Monument signs . In lieu of a wall sign described in Subsection (3) of this section, a detached monument sign may be permitted. The monument shall not exceed six feet (6') in height above the average grade and the sign face shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area; provided that the sign area for a monument with identical sign faces on two (2) sides shall be calculated by using only one (1) face. The monument may be placed in the front setback; however, it shall be located at least ten feet (10') from the street curb, or more if safety requires. If not sitting within the landscaped setback, the monument base shall be located within curbed landscaped area, extending a minimum of three feet (3') on all sides of the monument base. 
(5)  Lighting . Signs may be approved and permitted to provide for internal lighting or back-lighting. If such sign is externally or ground lighted, the light source shall be completely concealed and not visible to pedestrians, vehicles and persons located on adjacent property. All illuminated signs shall abide by any lighting standards set forth in this chapter. 
(6)  Sign schemes . A developer or property owner of an office park, shopping center, multi-tenant building or other grouping of three (3) or more tenants or establishments under unified control or ownership may seek approval of a designated sign scheme in order enhance the quality, harmony and consistency of the development, and to expedite future sign approval. In applying for a sign scheme, the developer or owner shall prepare and submit a set of sign standards for all permanent exterior signs that comply with the requirements for signs established by this subdivision. Such standards shall set forth all sign scheme requirements, including location, placement, size, appearance, colors, materials, graphic design styles, font, type of illumination, possible variances/options, etc. The approval of a proposed sign scheme shall follow the same procedure for sign approval outlined in Subsection (2)c of this section. Upon receipt of a completed application (including any applicable fee) for a proposed sign that meets the standards of an approved sign scheme, the Building Official/Codes Administrator shall issue a sign permit, unless, in his sole discretion, further approval is deemed necessary. The standards of the approved sign scheme shall run with all leases or sales of the approved development. Upon application, an approved sign scheme may be modified by the same process; provided that minor modifications may be approved by the Building Official/Codes Administrator. 
(7)  Service stations . In addition to any other sign authorized by this subdivision, service stations may also be permitted the following: 
a.  One (1) sign to display fuel prices, provided, such sign shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area. Such sign may be detached or wall-mounted, and may be illuminated. 
b.  Two (2) nonilluminated signs on each fuel pump island canopy; provided, such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. 
c.  Two (2) nonilluminated signs on each fuel pump island identifying if the island is full or self service; provided, such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area. If the service station is all self service, a maximum of two (2) such signs shall be permitted. 
d.  Two (2) nonilluminated signs displaying credit card information shall be permitted; provided, such signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
e.  Fuel pumps may display signs indicating only the type and brand name of fuel, in addition to other signs required by law which shall be of minimum size and quantity. 
(8)  Temporary business signs . Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Building Official/Codes Administrator is hereby authorized to issue sign approval and a permit for a temporary nonilluminated business sign for a period up to thirty (30) consecutive days; provided that such sign shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and five feet (5') in height, and shall be made of materials of a permanent nature. In no event shall a temporary business sign be constructed of paper. A temporary business sign may only be displayed affixed to and parallel to a building facade facing street right-of-way, and only one (1) sign is permitted on any single building facade at any time. A single permit may be issued for identical signs on multiple building facades, but different signs shall require separate permits. No individual temporary business sign may be posted for more than sixty (60) days in any calendar year. No property owner may obtain temporary business sign permits for any parcel or lot totaling more than one hundred and twenty (120) days in any calendar year. 
(9)  Permits for other signs. Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to issue a permit for: 
a.  Temporary signs not approved by the Building Official/Codes Administrator; 
b.  Requests for larger temporary signs, provided, no such sign may exceed the size restrictions for permanent business signs; and 
c.  Requests for any particular sign for a period up to one hundred and twenty (120) days at any one (1) time or during any calendar year (requests for longer periods shall require the approval of the Governing Body. 
(10)  Signs not requiring sign permit . Unless the Building Official/Codes Administrator in his sole discretion reasonably deems otherwise, the following nonilluminated signs meeting the requirements of this subdivision shall not require a permit or approval in any business district: 
a.  Address signs; 
b.  Governmental flags; 
c.  Holiday displays; 
d.  Informational signs; 
e.  Open/closed signs; and 
f.  Interior window/door signs. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.305) 
Sec. 15-553. - Residential signs. 
    In addition to the provisions of Section 15-551 related to signs in all districts, the following requirements and provisions shall apply to signs in residential districts (R-1 and R-2P): 
(1)  Customary residential signs . Noncommercial signs that are customarily associated with residential use are each authorized up to six (6) square feet in area, including signs for: the names of occupants or addresses; mailboxes or newspaper tubes; parking on private property; or warning against trespassing or danger from animals. No home occupation signs are allowed. 
(2)  Garage sale signs . One (1) temporary nonilluminated garage sale sign is permitted on a property conducting a garage sale for the duration of the sale; provided that such sale does not exceed five (5) consecutive days; and further provided that no property shall be allowed any such sign more than two (2) times per calendar year. Such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height. Four (4) similar signs may be placed for the same duration on other private property with the property owner's permission; provided that no property shall have more than one (1) garage sale sign displayed at any time. 
(3)  Homes tour signs . Upon the approval of the Building Official/Codes Administrator, a temporary sign or banner may be placed on a residential property that is featured on an annual or semi-annual homes tour sponsored by an organization that encourages ownership, remodeling or renovation, for display during the days that the homes tour is in effect; provided such period does not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. Such sign shall not to exceed six (6) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height. Upon application (including any applicable fee), the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to permit: an extension period up to thirty (30) additional days; or a larger sign; provided, no approved sign may exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and six feet (6') in height. 
(4)  Subdivision signs . Subdivision signs, including any supporting/supplemental structure, may be approved and permitted under the same procedure as required for business signs, and subject to the following: 
a.  The subdivision sign may be on private property or non-street right-of-way; provided that, upon the recommendation of the Public Works Director, the Governing Body approves such location and determines that it shall not create a traffic hazard, maintenance problem, nuisance or other condition adverse to public interest. 
b.  The subdivision sign is maintained in good condition and appearance at all times, and adjacent land is kept free of weeds and debris. The homeowner's association or property owners served by the sign shall be responsible for such maintenance. If long-term maintenance is a concern, the Governing Body may require a deposit of surety in the amount of the cost of one (1) year's maintenance plus the cost of demolition and removal. 
c.  The design, shape, size and location of the subdivision sign shall be in harmony with the neighborhood served, and present a dignified appearance. Materials, lettering, and design shall be so that long-term maintenance can be readily and economically accomplished. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.306) 
Sec. 15-554. - Planned districts. 
    The overall project development plan for an approved planned district (R-2P and B-3P) may incorporate specific exceptions or additions to the sign requirements and regulations of this subdivision. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.307) 
Sec. 15-555. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Prohibitions . The following types of signs are prohibited within the City: 
(1)  Signs with flashing lights or reflectors, that fluctuate in light intensity, or that convey the impression of movement through lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker or vary in intensity or color, except for holiday displays. 
(2)  Signs that rotate, have moving components, or are animated. 
(3)  Pole signs. 
(4)  Roof signs. 
(5)  Changeable copy signs, except as specifically allowed by this subdivision. 
(6)  Directly illuminated signs, including, but not limited to, exposed incandescent, neon or other tube type lights; provided that indirect flood lighting with the same is permissible when provided for by this subdivision. 
(7)  Searchlights. 
(8)  Electronic message or graphic signs. 
(9)  Signs containing obscene, profane or indecent material. 
(10)  Signs containing false or misleading advertising. 
(11)  Signs directing attention to a business, organization, commodity, service, product or activity not conducted, sold, offered available, or located on the premises where the sign is located, including, but not limited to, signs affixed to or painted onto structures such as benches and shelters, and freestanding off-premises advertising signs commonly referred to as billboards or poster panels. 
(12)  Attention-attracting devices not specifically allowed by this subdivision. 
(13)  Snipe signs, defined as a sign of any material whatsoever that is attached in any way to a utility pole, lamppost, tree, shrub, fence, another sign, curb, hydrant or other similar object located or situated on public or private property. 
(14)  Portable signs, defined as signs that are capable of being carried, wheeled or otherwise transported from one (1) location to another. 
(15)  Inflatable signs. 
(16)  Home occupation signs. 
(17)  Any sign that blocks the clear sight triangle of an intersection or roadway corner that in any manner causes a reduction in intersection sight distances or otherwise creates any other hazard to life or safety. 
(b)  Vehicle signs . It shall be prohibited to park or use a vehicle in such a way as to function as a sign, defined to include the parking of any vehicle, trailer or similar moving structure containing or supporting any signage within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of a street right-of-way, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Vehicles actively involved in construction on, or delivery to the site. 
(2)  Vehicles parked in any business district screened from or not generally visible from the street right-of-way. 
(3)  Vehicles of a size that fully fits within a standard parking space, containing signs painted on or permanently affixed on the doors or integral side body panels that do not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.308) 
Sec. 15-556. - Maintenance of signs. 
    All signs shall be of sound structural quality, be maintained in good repair, have a clean and neat appearance and, as appropriate, abide by all building, electrical and other codes. Land adjacent to such signs shall be kept free from debris, weeds and trash. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.309) 
Sec. 15-557. - Removal of signs. 
(a)  Removal of signs on vacated premises . If a building or premises is vacated for six (6) months or longer, any sign located thereon other than a governmental or real estate sign shall be deemed abandoned. The property owner shall remove any such abandoned sign, and shall restore the building facade to its normal appearance. In the case of a monument, the owner shall remove all lighting fixtures and structural members, or alternatively, arrange for an opaque surface to cover such fixtures and members. If the owner fails to remove any such sign within ten (10) days of written notice, the City may remove such sign at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Unsafe or unlawful signs . If the Building Official/Codes Administrator determines that any sign is unsafe, insecure, is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or maintained in violation of this subdivision or any other City ordinance, written notice shall be given to the property owner to remove said sign, or to bring it into proper compliance. If the owner fails to remove the sign or to bring it into proper compliance within five (5) days of such notice, then the City may remove or appropriately alter the sign at the owner's expense, and any applicable permit shall be revoked. No further sign permit shall be issued to such party until such cost has been fully paid. The Building Official/Codes Administrator may immediately remove without notice (at the owner's expense when appropriate) any sign that is: 
(1)  An immediate peril to persons or property; 
(2)  Specifically prohibited by this subdivision; or 
(3)  On the right-of-way, public park or other public property without City authorization. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.310) 
Sec. 15-558. - Nonconforming signs. 
    A nonconforming sign legally existing upon the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived may remain; provided that it undergoes no changes in the basic structure, source of illumination, location or appearance, or any maintenance or repair costing more than fifty percent (50%) of the sign's current value; and further provided that if the current business closes or relocates, the sign shall at such time be removed or otherwise brought into proper compliance with this subdivision or other City ordinance. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.311) 
Sec. 15-559. - Deviations. 
    Upon the Planning Commission's recommendation, the Governing Body may grant a deviation to this subdivision with regard to the size, color, location, illumination of, and number of signs, based upon unique architectural treatments, special project conditions, or specific hardship. The consideration of a proposed deviation shall review whether the proposed deviation: 
(1)  Complies with the general purpose and intent of this subdivision and other City ordinances. 
(2)  Will adversely affect neighboring property owners, and whether the image presented by the proposed deviation is consistent or compatible with the area as a whole. It should be considered whether any lighting will disturb residents on nearby residential properties. 
(3)  Adversely affect public safety, or traffic on adjacent streets. For monument signs, a safe sight-distance setback is required, and the sign location should not encroach upon potential future right-of-way needs. The proposed deviation should not significantly distract traffic on adjacent streets. 
(4)  In addition to all existing or potential future signs in the nearby and surrounding area, significantly clutters or negatively impacts or blights the visual landscape. 
(5)  Is intended to account for topography, landscaping, existing buildings or unusual building designs that would otherwise substantially block or impair the visibility of the applicant's existing or proposed signs. Deviation may be appropriate to provide reasonable visibility of a business entity's main sign. 
(6)  Is of high quality and is compatible and integrates aesthetically with the daytime/nighttime color, lighting, and architecture of the area as a whole. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.312) 
Secs. 15-560-15-581. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Wireless Facilities[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1681 , §§ 1, 2, adopted December 10, 2018, repealed the former subdivision V, and enacted a new subdivision V as set out herein. The former subdivision V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Development Ord. of 2004. 

Sec. 15-582. - Intent. 
    The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the City's authority concerning the placement, construction, and modification of communication facilities. The intent of this chapter is to ensure the provision of quality wireless services within the City limits; establish a fair and efficient process for the review and approval of communication facility applications; assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental impacts of communications facilities, and promote the public health, safety, security, and the general welfare of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-583. - Definitions. 
    For purpose of this chapter, and where consistent with the context of a specific section, the defined terms, phrases, words and abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. 
    Accessory facility means an accessory facility, building, structure or equipment serving or being used in conjunction with communications facilities and generally located on the same site as the communications facilities, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, storage sheds or cabinets, or similar structures. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of wireless services; provided that for the purposes of this subdivision, antennae does not include dish receiving antennas and radio transmitting and receiving antennas as defined in Section 15-624 of this chapter. 
(1)  Distributed antenna system (DAS) means a network that distributes radio frequency signals and consisting of: 
a.  Remote communications or antenna nodes deployed throughout a desired coverage area, each including at least one (1) antenna for transmission and reception; 
b.  A high capacity signal transport medium that is connected to a central communications hub site; and 
c.  Radio transceivers located at the hub's site to process or control the communications signals transmitted and received through the antennas to provide wireless or mobile service within a geographic area or structure. 
(2)  Small cell facility means a communications facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
a.  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, or in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and 
b.  Primary equipment enclosures that are no larger than seventeen (17) cubic feet in volume, or facilities comprised of such higher limits as the FCC has excluded from review pursuant to 54 U.S.C. § 306108. Accessory facilities may be located outside the primary equipment, and if so located, are not to be included in the calculation of equipment volume. Accessory facilities includes, but is not limited to, any electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
(3)  Small cell network means a collection of interrelated small cell facilities designed to deliver wireless service. 
    Applicant means any person or entity that is engaged in the business of providing wireless services or the wireless infrastructure required for wireless services and that submits an application pursuant to this chapter. 
    Application means all necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant submits in order to receive approval for a communications facility. 
    Approval Authority means the Director for all applications pursuant to Section 15-585(a), and means the Governing Body for all applications pursuant to Section 15-585(b). 
    Base station means a station that includes a structure that currently supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, coaxial cables, power cables or other accessory facilities at a specific site that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless service to mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated electronics. The term does not mean a tower or equipment associated with a tower; and it does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City, does not support or house equipment described in this paragraph or that was not previously approved under the applicable zoning or siting process. (A non-tower support structure - for example, a building, church steeple, water tower, sign, street light, utility pole or other non-tower structure that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such.) 
    Collocation means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for wireless service. 
    Communications facility means a structure, facility, or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support antennas or other transmission equipment used in wireless services. This includes without limit, towers of all types, and base stations, including but not limited to buildings, church steeples, water towers, signs, or other structures that can be used as a support structure for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It further includes all related accessory facilities associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or receiving, wireless services, specialized mobile radio (SMR), personal communications services (PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services, radio, television, and any commercial Wireless Service not licensed by the FCC. 
    Director means Director of Public Works or his/her designee. 
    Eligible facilities request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change (see definition) the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving: 
(1)  Collocation of new transmission equipment; 
(2)  Removal of transmission equipment; or 
(3)  Replacement of transmission equipment. 
    Eligible support structure means any tower or base station (see definition), provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed. 
    Existing [tower or base station]. A constructed tower or base station is existing if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Modification or modify means the addition, removal or change of any of the physical and noticeably visible components or aspects of a communications facility such as antenna, cabling, radios, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any noticeably visible components, vehicular access, parking, upgrade or exchange of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Modification shall not include replacement of such components in kind. A collocation which changes the physical configuration of the existing facility or structure shall be considered a modification. The Director shall determine when changes such as enlarging the ground-mounted equipment area, increasing the screen wall height or installing additional equipment changes the physical and noticeably visible aspects of a communications facility. 
    Replacement means replacement of an existing communications facility that exists on a previously approved site, utility easement, or an approved special use permit area, with a new facility of comparable proportions and of comparable height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial change to an existing structure to support communications facilities or accommodate collocation. A replacement includes any associated removal of the pre-existing communications facilities. A replacement tower shall be within fifteen feet (15'), as measured horizontally along the ground, of an existing tower, and the existing tower shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the installation of the replacement tower. The Director may approve a separation greater than fifteen feet (15'). 
    Site means, for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
    Stealth or stealth technology means using the least visually and physically intrusive facility by minimizing adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and generally in the same area as the requested location of a communications facility. Specifically, this means ensuring that all antenna arrays, cables, and other accessory facilities used for providing the wireless service are not obtrusive or noticeably visible from adjacent properties or adjacent rights-of-way. Any accessory facilities mounted onto a tower or structure shall not project greater than one (1) foot, as measured horizontally, from the surface of the tower or structure and shall be painted or screened with materials that are a complementary color as the tower or structure. Cables shall not be allowed to travel along the exterior of a tower or structure. Understanding that new technologies are anticipated to change the components of communications facilities, the Director may determine if a communications facility or component of a communications facility is designed to be stealth. 
    Substantial change means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure (tower or base station) by any of the following criteria: 
(1)  Height. 
a.  For towers not in the public rights-of-way, an increase in the height of the tower by more than ten percent (10%) or by the height of one (1) additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty feet (20'), whichever is greater. 
b.  For other eligible support structures (e.g., towers in the public rights-of-way or base stations), an increase in the height of the structure by more than ten percent (10%) or more than ten feet (10'), whichever is greater. 
Changes in height are measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally (such as on buildings' rooftops); in other circumstances, changes in height are measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act. (Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act 2012 [Pub. L.112-96 March 27, 2017]) 
(2)  Width/girth. 
a.  For towers not in the public rights-of-way, adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that protrudes from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet (20'), or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater. 
b.  For other eligible support structures (e.g., towers in the public rights-of-way or base stations), adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet (6'). 
(3)  New equipment cabinets. 
a.  For any eligible support structure (see definition), the installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four (4) cabinets. 
b.  For towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else the installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent (10%) larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure. 
(4)  Any excavation or deployment outside the current site. 
(5)  Defeating the stealth technology or concealment elements of the eligible support structure. 
(6)  Not complying with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in Subsections (1) through (4) above. 
    Transmission equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
    Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their accessory facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. 
(1)  Monopole means a tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
(2)  Lattice tower means a guyed or self-supporting three (3) or four-sided, open, steel frame structure used to support antennas and transmission equipment. 
    Wireless services means "personal wireless services" and "personal wireless service facilities" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C), including commercial mobile services as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), provided to personal mobile communication devices through communications facilities or any fixed or mobile wireless services provided using communications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-584. - Overall policy. 
    In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of communications facilities protect the public health, safety, security, and general welfare of the City, the following policies are hereby adopted (subject to applicable State and Federal law): 
(1)  Optimize the number of communications facilities in the City. 
(2)  Encourage opportunities for user collocation on existing communications facilities, buildings and other structures and maximize replacement strategies. 
(3)  Comply fully with established planning guidelines regarding land use and performance standards. 
(4)  Emphasize the use of stealth technology to integrate the appearance of communications facilities with many architectural and nature themes throughout the City and to use existing communications facilities instead of building new communications facilities. 
(5)  Protect the public interests, where practical and applicable. 
(6)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-585. - Application approval authority. 
(a)  Administrative approval. The Director may approve applications for communications facilities for the following: 
(1)  The modification of an existing tower or base station that does not incur a substantial change (see definition) to the tower or base station or that otherwise qualifies as an eligible facilities request (see definition). (See (c)(1) for timeframe.) 
(2)  New small cell/DAS facilities on an existing tower, utility pole or street light in the public right-of-way. This provision is also applicable when the existing tower, utility pole or street light is replaced by a tower, utility pole or street light that is not a substantial change (see definition) from the original. (See (c)(1) for timeframe.) 
(3)  New antenna (including small cell/DAS facilities) on an existing tower or base station (such as a building) that does not incur a substantial change (see definition) to the tower/base station and that: 
a.  Is permitted by right in the underlying zoning district; and 
b.  Meets applicable performance standards. (See (c)2 for timeframe.) 
(4)  New antenna (including small cell/DAS facilities) on an existing tower or base station (such as a building) that incurs a substantial change (see definition) to the tower or base station and that: 
a.  Is permitted by right in the underlying zoning district; and 
b.  Meets applicable performance standards. (See (c)(2) for timeframe.) 
(5)  New tower permitted by right in the underlying zoning district that meets applicable performance standards. (See (c)(3) for timeframe.) 
(6)  New tower or utility pole for small cell/DAS facilities in the public right-of-way. (See (c)(3) for timeframe.) 
(b)  Special use permit approval. A special use permit (SUP) reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the Governing Body is required for applications for communications facilities for the following: 
(1)  A substantial change (see definition) to an existing tower or base station that is not permitted by right in the underlying zoning district. (See (c)(2) for timeframe.) 
(2)  Any other application for placement, installation or construction of transmission equipment that does not constitute an eligible facilities request (see definition). (See (c)(2) for timeframe.) 
(3)  New tower that is not permitted by right in the underlying zoning district. (See (c)(3) for timeframe.) 
(c)  Application timeframe. 
(1)  A final decision shall be issued for applications under Subsections (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3) within 60 calendar days. 
(2)  A final decision shall be issued for applications under Subsections (a)(4), (b)(1) and (b)(2) within 90 calendar days. 
(3)  A final decision shall be issued for applications under Subsections (a)(5), (a)(6) or (b)(3) within 150 calendar days. 
(4)  The timeframes set forth in Subsections (c)(1)-(c)(3) begin to run when a completed application is filed following the pre-application conference. The applicable timeframe may be tolled by mutual agreement or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City may provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents and information. The timeframe begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission responding to the City's notice. The City then has ten (10) days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to this subsection. Second or subsequent notices may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
(d)  Small cell and DAS facilities-Consolidated application and exemption. 
(1)  Consolidated application. Pursuant to Kansas Statute, an applicant may file one (1) consolidated application for a small cell network up to twenty-five (25) individual small cell facilities of a substantially similar design. Notwithstanding, the City may require a separate application for any small cell facilities that are not of a substantially similar design. 
(2)  Exemption. No zoning or siting approval is required for the construction, installation or operation of any small cell or DAS facilities located in an interior structure or upon the site of any campus, stadium or athletic facility; provided, however, this exemption does not exempt any such facility from any applicable building or electrical code provision. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-586. - Application process and requirements. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is required before filing an application for the replacement or modification of an existing communications facility or the construction of a new communications facility, unless waived by the Director. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to ensure the applicant understands all requirements, to establish a tentative timeline, and to determine the approval authority for the application. The pre-application conference should address issues that will expedite the review and approval process. Pre-application conferences for small cell/DAS facilities in the public right-of-way will be conducted with the City's Right-of-Way Coordinator. 
(b)  Application fee. At the time the application is filed for a communications facility, the applicant will pay a non-refundable application fee as determined in the current version of the Governing Body resolution establishing applicable fees; provided, the application fee shall be subject to any applicable statutory maximum. An application shall not be deemed submitted unless the applicable fee is paid. 
(c)  Application requirements. An application for the replacement or modification of an existing communications facility or the construction of a new communications facility shall include the following information and requirements, unless waived by the Director: 
(1)  As applicable, a site plan or preliminary development plan, and if applicable, any other special use permit submission requirements set forth in Division 4, Article IV of Chapter 15. 
(2)  A descriptive statement of the proposed communications facility. For towers or base stations, the statement shall provide the capacity of the structure, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate. [8] 
(3)  An affidavit from the applicant stating that it conducted a thorough analysis of available collocation opportunities within the applicable search ring. [9] 
(4)  Elevation drawings of the proposed communications facilities showing all towers, base stations, antennas, transmission equipment, accessory equipment, cabinets, fencing, screening, landscaping, lighting, and other improvements related to the facility. Specific colors and materials shall be noted. 
(5)  Digital photo simulations of the site providing "before and after" views demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed communications facilities on the surrounding environment. Staff or the approval authority may require photo simulations from any specific vantage point. 
(6)  A report from a licensed professional engineer that describes the communications facility's structural capacity, including a statement to the effect that the communications facility can safely accommodate all antennas, transmission equipment and/or accessory equipment. This may include structural calculations, geotechnical foundation studies, and other data as determined by the Director, as applicable, and in compliance with all City codes. In the event an existing communications facility is to be used, the report shall describe the condition of the existing communications facility based on a physical inspection and its ability to accommodate any additional accessory equipment and/or antennas. 
(7)  A landscape plan that demonstrates the effective screening of the proposed communications facility and any accessory facilities as required by the Section 15-588(h). The landscape plan shall be sealed by a professional landscape architect, unless this requirement is waived by the Approval Authority. 
(8)  If lighting is required by the FCC or the FAA, the applicant shall submit the proposed lighting plan and identify an available lighting alternative. If security lighting is to be used, the applicant may be required to submit a photometric plan to ensure that lighting is unobtrusive and inoffensive and that no light is directed towards adjacent properties or rights-of-way. All lighting will meet any requirement of Section 15-588(i). 
(9)  If an emergency power system will be utilized, the applicant will provide: sufficient details showing the location and proposed use of the same; a proposed plan for any intended non-emergency use (e.g., testing); and certification that the system will not violate local health and safety requirements and local noise control ordinances. 
(10)  A statement that the proposed communications facility and any accessory facilities and/or landscaping shall be maintained within City ordinances, under what arrangement, and by whom. The statement shall provide contact information for the responsible party. 
(11)  An engineer's certification that the proposed communications facility and the cumulative effect of all communications facilities on the site comply with all FCC standards, including but not limited to, certifying that all facilities meet all provisions and regulations for radio frequency (RF) emissions or exposure, and that anticipated levels of electromagnetic radiation to be generated by all facilities on the site, including the effective radiated power (ERP) of the transmission equipment, shall be within the guidelines established by the FCC. 
(12)  When applicable, a signed copy of the lease between the applicant and the landowner or other acceptable documentation signed by the landowner evidencing the landowner's approval for the proposed communications facility. The lease or other documentation shall contain a provision stating that the landowner shall be responsible for the demolition and/or removal of the communications facility in the event the lessee fails to remove it upon abandonment of the facilities or the termination of the lease. 
(13)  Applicants for communications facilities in the right-of-way shall provide notice by certified mail to the owners of record of all property within two hundred feet (200') of the proposed location. The notice shall provide the following: 
a.  City-issued case number (if available); 
b.  Description of the proposed facility; 
c.  Location of the proposed facility; 
d.  Plan sheet showing the proposed location and the facility improvements; and 
e.  Applicant's contact information and a statement that the owner shall have twenty (20) days from the date of the notice to provide the City with any input regarding the application. Each communications facility location shall be provided with its own notice; notices for multiple locations, even if under the same City case number, may not be provided in a single letter. No application will be approved until the applicant submits an affidavit affirming that the required notice was sent. For applications requiring a special use permit, the notice requirements outlined in Division 4, Article IV of Chapter 15 shall apply. 
(14)  Any other information to satisfy the performance standards in Section 15-588 or that, as determined by the Director, will assist the review and approval process for communications facilities. 
(d)  Independent third party review. 
(1)  The applicant may be required to provide an independent review of the application as determined by the Director. 
(2)  The Director will select and approve a list of acceptable consultants to be used for the third party independent review. 
(3)  The scope of the third party review will be determined by the Director and may vary with the scope and complexity of the application; the scope will be determined following the pre-application conference. The independent third party review will generally be focused on the technical review of wireless services and verification of the information submitted by the applicant such as Federal RF emissions standards, and other technical requirements to ensure that the modeling parameters and data used in developing these technical requirements are valid and representative of the proposed communications facility. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Kansas Statute, the City may not require specific information about: the applicant's business decision regarding its designed service, customer service demand or quality of service for a particular area or site; the specific need for the communications facility; or any proprietary, confidential or other business information to justify the need for the site, including propagation maps and telecommunications traffic studies. 

--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Kansas Statute, the City may not evaluate the application based on availability of other potential locations for siting, including options to collocate. 

Sec. 15-587. - Location of communications facilities. 
    When possible, the City encourages, but does not require, new communications facilities to be located on existing communications facilities or on existing structures (for example, commercial buildings, water towers, utility poles and street lights) whereby the new communications facilities can be architecturally integrated or otherwise camouflaged in a stealth manner to minimize the intrusion upon the public and adjacent properties. If and when a new tower or new base station is installed for communications facilities, said new tower or new base station should be located and designed in a manner to minimize the intrusion upon the public and adjacent properties, and when possible, to be architecturally integrated or camouflaged in a stealth manner with surrounding structures. For any new tower or new base station the City's preference of location is as follows: 
(1)  In Neighborhood Business, Office and Planned Business/Mixed Use Districts as permitted by right. 
(2)  In Neighborhood, Business, Office and Planned Business/Mixed Use, public property or semi-public property (such as churches and schools), as permitted by special use permit pursuant to Division 4, Article IV of Chapter 15. 
(3)  In Planned Residential District and Planned Business/Mixed Use District as permitted by special use permit pursuant to Division 4, Article IV of Chapter 15. 
(4)  In a single-family residential district, as permitted by special use permit pursuant to Division 4, Article IV of Chapter 15. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-588. - Performance standards for communications facilities. 
(a)  Height. 
(1)  Towers. The maximum height which may be approved for a tower is one hundred fifty feet (150'), which includes any transmission equipment on top of the tower. A lightning rod, ten feet (10') in height or less, shall not be included within the height limitations. 
(2)  Towers in right-of-way. The maximum height which may be approved for a tower and related transmission equipment in the public right-of-way is: fifty feet (50') along a main thoroughfare; and twenty feet (20') along all other streets. 
(3)  Base stations. Base stations shall comply with any applicable height requirement for its particular type of structure as set forth in the applicable zoning district. 
(b)  Design and color. 
(1)  Tower. 
a.  Design. Towers shall be a monopole or of some other stealth or stealth technology design unless required by the Approval Authority to be architecturally compatible to the surrounding development. Guy and lattice towers are not allowed. Furthermore, towers must be designed in compliance with all current applicable technical, safety, and safety-related codes adopted by the City or other applicable regulatory authority. 
b.  Color and finish. Towers shall have a galvanized finish unless an alternative stealth or camouflaged finish is approved by the Approval Authority. 
(2)  Base stations. Base stations shall comply with any applicable color and design requirement for its particular type of structure as set forth in the applicable zoning district, and shall blend with the surrounding buildings and/or natural environment. 
(3)  Antennas. 
a.  Design on towers. Antenna bridges and platforms on towers are not allowed. Antennas on towers may be: 
1.  Internal; 
2.  A panel of slim-line design mounted parallel with the tower; 
3.  A design deemed by the Approval Authority to be less obtrusive or more stealth than the above-described designs; or 
4.  An omni-directional antenna placed at the top of the tower when it gives the appearance of being a similarly sized or smaller extension of the tower. (The latter will be included in the tower height calculation.) 
b.  Design on base stations. Antennas and visible accessory facilities on a base station or other building/structure shall be comprised of materials that are consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with said building/structure and to camouflage their appearance in a stealth manner. These facilities on rooftops may require screening that is architecturally compatible with the building. As applicable, the following additional requirements apply: 
1.  Antennas may be installed on any existing building or structure (such as a water tower but excluding single-family residences and accessory uses) three (3) stories in height or greater but no less than thirty-five feet (35') provided that the additional antennas shall add no more than twenty feet (20') to the height of said existing structure. 
2.  Antennas which are architecturally compatible to the building architecture may locate on non-residential buildings less than three (3) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height, subject to final development plan approval pursuant to Division 5 of Article IV of Chapter 15. 
3.  Attached antennas on a roof shall be located as close to the center of the roof as possible; and antennas mounted on a building or structure wall shall be as flush to the wall as technically possible, and shall not project above the top of the wall. 
4.  Accessory facilities for antennas may be permitted on the roof so long as it is screened from view when deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or Governing Body. (For ground mounted accessory facilities see Section 15-588(g).) 
c.  Color and finish. Antennas and visible accessory facilities shall be colored and finished in a manner consistent with the tower/base station and any surrounding elements so as to camouflage their appearance in a stealth manner. These facilities shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the tower/base station so as to make these facilities as visually unobtrusive as possible. Antennas mounted on the side of a building or structure shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. 
(c)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Communications facilities in Neighborhood Business, Office and Planned Business/Mixed Use zoning districts shall meet the setback requirements for other types of commercial structures of a similar size that are allowed by right in the zoning district in which the facilities are located. In the event the communications facilities will exceed the height allowed for other types of commercial structures in the district in which the facilities are located, the communications facilities shall meet the greater of the maximum setback requirements for the zoning district or a setback equal to the height of the facility, unless the Approval Authority reasonably finds that a greater setback is required in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Communications facilities in single family residential zoning districts shall meet the greater of the maximum setback requirements for the zoning district or a setback equal to the height of the facility, unless the Approval Authority reasonably finds that a greater setback is required in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. Setbacks for towers located on residentially zoned property that is shown on the Comprehensive Plan for a use other than very-low density or low density residential shall be determined at the time of the application. 
(3)  In addition to the above setback requirements set forth in Subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2), towers shall have a minimum setback of two hundred feet (200') from any surrounding property which is shown as very-low or low-density residential on the Comprehensive Plan, unless such tower: 
a.  Does not exceed the height requirement for other types of commercial structures in the district in which the tower is located; 
b.  Is a utility pole or street light or a monopole similar in size thereof; or 
c.  Is designed as an architecturally compatible element in terms of material, design and height to the existing or proposed use of the site. 
(4)  Small cell/DAS facilities on utility poles or street lights shall not be subject to the setback requirements in Subsections (c)(1)-(c)(3) above. 
(d)  Accessory facilities. Accessory facilities shall include only structures and facilities necessary for transmission functions for wireless services, but shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicle storage areas, or other similar uses not necessary for the transmission function. Accessory facilities shall be constructed of building materials consistent with the primary use of the site and shall be subject to the applicable approval process. Where there is no primary use other than the communications facility, the accessory facility and the building materials for the accessory facility shall be subject to the review and approval of the Approval Authority. 
(e)  Equipment storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a communications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the communications facility unless repairs to the communications facility are being made or pursuant to emergency approval as set forth in Section 15-590. 
(f)  Parking areas and drives. All parking areas and drives associated with the communications facility shall comply with Sub-Division II, Division 3 of Article 4 of Chapter 15, except that the Approval Authority may waive the requirements for curbing and drainage facilities when they are not needed for drainage purposes. All access roads and turn-arounds shall be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access. 
(g)  Screening. Accessory facilities located at the base of a tower or base station shall be screened from view with a solid screen wall a minimum of six (6) feet in height. The materials of the wall, including any proposed razor wire or other security wire, shall be of a material designed to match the architecture of the surrounding structures, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Approval Authority. The landowner or provider shall be responsible for maintenance of the screening. The Approval Authority shall have the ability to waive or reasonably modify this requirement where the design of the accessory facility is architecturally compatible to the primary use of the site or where the accessory facility will have no visible impact on the public right-of-way and any other nearby property. 
(h)  Landscaping. A landscape plan shall be required in accordance with Section 15-525 of Chapter 15. The landscape plan shall be sealed by a professional landscape architect, unless this requirement is waived by the Approval Authority. A continuous landscaped area shall be provided around the perimeter of the accessory building or screening wall; and utility boxes will comply with any applicable utility box screening requirement. All plant materials are subject to Section 15-526 of Chapter 15 and shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting materials. Drought tolerant plant materials are encouraged. The owner or provider shall be responsible for maintenance of all approved landscaping. Where the visual impact of the equipment building would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the Approval Authority. 
(i)  Lighting. Communications facilities shall only be illuminated as required by the FCC and/or the FAA. If lighting is required, the Approval Authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Security lighting around the base of a tower may be provided if the lighting is shielded so that: no light is directed towards adjacent properties or rights-of-ways; the lighting avoids illuminating the tower; and the lighting meets any other applicable City requirements. 
(j)  Utilities. All utilities at a communications facility site shall be installed underground and in compliance with applicable codes. 
(k)  Security. All communications facilities shall be located, fenced, or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. 
(l)  Signage. Signage at the site is limited to non-illuminated warning and equipment identification signs required by the FCC or applicable regulatory body or otherwise approved by the Approval Authority. 
(m)  Building codes and inspection. 
(1)  Construction and maintenance standards. To ensure structural integrity, communications facilities shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the standards contained in applicable local building codes and the Applicable Standards for Communications Facilities published by the Electronic Industries Association, (EIA) or any applicable regulatory authority (all as amended from time to time). If upon inspection the City concludes that a communications facility fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then the facility owner or landowner shall have thirty (30) days following written notice to bring such facility into compliance. If the facility owner or landowner fails to bring such facility into compliance within this period, the City may order the removal or cause the removal of such facility at the facility owner or landowner's expense. Failure of the City to inspect the facility shall not relieve the facility owner or landowner of their responsibility to comply with this provision. 
(2)  Inspection. At least every twenty-four (24) months, the communications facility shall be inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the maintenance, inspection and/or erection of communications facilities. At a minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in accordance with the inspection check list provided in the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) Standard 222, Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures (as amended from time to time). A copy of the inspection record shall be provided to the City upon request. The inspection shall be conducted at the facility owner or landowner's expense. 
(n)  Operational standards. 
(1)  Communications facilities shall meet or exceed all minimum structural, height, radio frequency radiation and other operational standards as established by the FCC, FAA, EPA and other applicable federal regulatory agencies. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the communications facilities shall be brought into compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of the ordinance or law from which these standards and regulations are derived, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring communications facilities into compliance with any revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the facility at the owner or provider's expense. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the wireless service provider to promptly resolve any electromagnetic interference problems in accordance with any applicable law or FCC regulation. 
(o)  Removal of abandoned communications facilities. Any communications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned and a nuisance, and the owner of the facility or the landowner shall remove the facility within ninety (90) days of a receipt of notice from the City. If such facility is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the City may remove the facility at the facility owner or landowner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(p)  Unsafe communications facilities. Any communications facility which is not maintained to a suitable degree of safety and appearance (as determined by the City and any applicable code, statute, ordinance, law, regulations or standard) will be considered a nuisance and will be upgraded or removed at the owner or provider's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-589. - Application denial. 
(a)  The City may deny an application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to submit any or all required application documents and information. 
(2)  Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements. 
(3)  Conflict with the historic nature or character of the surrounding area pursuant to Federal or State law. 
(4)  The use or construction of a communications facility which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use designation. 
(5)  The placement and location of the communications facility would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, businesses, City employees, or employees of the wireless service provider. 
(6)  Conflict with a public health, safety and welfare issue, including, but not limited to, violation of noise ordinance, flashing or other light nuisance, and conflict with required sidewalk widths (including ADA accessibility requirements). 
(7)  Conflict with planned future public improvements. 
(8)  Conflict with or violation of any provision contained within this Chapter or any other applicable City code or with any applicable Federal or State law. 
(b)  In the event of a denial, the Approval Authority or the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the City's final decision, supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record and issued contemporaneously. Such notice shall be made within the applicable timeframe set forth in Section 15-585. 
(c)  Any denial shall not discriminate against the applicant with respect to the placement of communications facilities of other investor-owned utilities, wireless service providers, wireless infrastructure providers or wireless carriers. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-590. - Emergencies and disasters. 
    In the event of a declared emergency or disaster, the City Manager or the Director may authorize any temporary towers, base stations, transmission equipment or accessory equipment necessary to temporarily restore wireless services. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 15-591. - Performance standards for communications facilities. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable Federal, State and local laws and standards regulating communications facilities. In the event any Federal or State law or standard is mandatory or is more stringent than provisions of this chapter, then such provisions shall be revised accordingly. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unenforceable by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1681 , § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Secs. 15-592-15-623. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Antennae 

Sec. 15-624. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antennae, dish receiving, means a conical, circular or similar shape element of any material, and all of its supporting structure and devices, used for the reception of signals of any frequency from an Earth satellite. 
    Antennae, radio transmitting and receiving, means an array or system of wires, tubing and supporting members mounted on a mast, tower or building, used for transmitting and/or receiving radio signals whose transmission requires an FCC license including but not limited to amateur citizens band and other special frequencies. 
    Antennae, standard residential receiving, means an array made up of small size metal tubing and supporting members which are commonly installed on or near residential buildings for the purpose of receiving television or radio signals. 
    Mast means any structure or part of a structure whose vertical dimension is greater than five (5) times its horizontal dimension that supports or lends support to any part of an antenna. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.501) 
Sec. 15-625. - Restrictions. 
    No residential antenna shall be constructed or maintained that is not in compliance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  No part of any antenna or mast may be higher than sixty feet (60') above ground level directly below the antenna or higher than twenty feet (20') above the highest point of any structure on which it is mounted. 
(2)  No standard residential receiving antenna or radio transmitting and receiving antenna shall have any vertical, horizontal or diagonal dimension greater than thirty feet (30'). 
(3)  Only one (1) mast shall be permitted on a residential lot. 
(4)  No mast shall be placed closer to any property line than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total height of mast and attached antenna. 
(5)  Only one (1) dish receiving antenna may be permitted per residential lot. 
(6)  The maximum chord of any dish receiving antenna shall not exceed ten feet (10'). 
(7)  No mast or dish receiving antenna or portion hereof may be located in a front yard or street side yard of a corner lot, or closer than ten feet (10') to any lot line. 
(8)  All antenna must comply with the standards promulgated by the Electrical Institute of America (EIA) and those specified in the National Electrical Code (NEC). 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.502) 
Sec. 15-626. - Permit. 
    A standard residential receiving antenna does not require a permit. However, no radio transmitting and receiving antenna and no dish receiving antenna shall be erected or placed on lot, plot, tract or premises until a permit therefore has been issued by the City. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.503) 
Secs. 15-627-15-655. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Nonconformities[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Nonconformities, K.S.A. 12-758, 12-770, 12-771. 

Sec. 15-656. - Generally. 
(a)  Within the zoning districts established by this article or its subsequent amendment, there exist: 
(1)  Lots; 
(2)  Structures; 
(3)  Uses of land; 
(4)  Uses of structures; 
(5)  Uses of land and structures in combination; and 
(6)  Characteristics of use, which were lawful before the zoning regulations of the ordinance from which this article is derived were adopted or amended, but which would now be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of the zoning regulations or their subsequent amendment. 
Such instances shall hereafter be considered lawful nonconformities. 
(b)  A nonconformity that was never established as lawful cannot now be deemed as lawful solely by reason of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the extent that said nonconformity is in conflict with the requirements of this article. The burden of proof to establish the lawfulness of a nonconformity or the entitlement to continue a nonconformity shall be on the property owner or the developer. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.601) 
Sec. 15-657. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this subdivision to recognize the legitimate interest of owners of lawful nonconformities by allowing such lawful nonconformities to continue, subject to the provisions contained herein. At the same time, it is recognized that lawful nonconformities may substantially and adversely affect the orderly development, maintenance, use and value of other property in the same zoning district, property that is itself subject to the regulations and terms of this article. To secure eventual compliance with the comprehensive plan and with the standards of the zoning regulations, it is therefore necessary to carefully regulate lawful nonconformities and to prohibit the re-establishment of any nonconformities that have discontinued. 
(b)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in the zoning regulations shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. The term "actual building construction" is hereby defined to include the placement of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.602) 
Sec. 15-658. - Lawful nonconformities. 
(a)  Lots . 
(1)  Any lot having insufficient area, width or depth for the zoning district in which it is located, or insufficient frontage on an improved public or private street of a planned district, or any combination thereof, shall be considered a lawful nonconforming lot only if: 
a.  It was lawfully platted and recorded and on file in the office of the County Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived; or 
b.  There has been a building permit issued on that lot. No such lot or portion thereof shall be used or sold in a manner that will increase its degree of nonconformity. 
(2)  A lawful nonconforming lot that has an area, width or depth that does not conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located can be used in conformity with all other applicable regulations as if its area, width or depth were conforming; provided that no use is permissible that requires a larger lot size than the established minimum lot size for such zoning district. 
(3)  Where the use of a lawful nonconforming lot conforms in all other respects but the applicable setback requirements, an exception to the setback requirements may be made by the Board of Zoning Appeals for non-planned districts or by the Planning Commission for planned districts when it is found that: 
a.  Development of the lot is not reasonably possible for the proposed use without such exception; 
b.  The exception is necessitated by the size or shape of the lot; 
c.  The property can be developed as proposed without any significant adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Structures . Structures that were lawfully constructed prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but which could not be constructed under the terms of this article by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, setbacks, location on the lot or other requirements concerning structures, shall hereafter be considered lawful nonconforming structures. As such, they may continue to exist so long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided that no reconstruction, enlargement or alteration of these structures shall occur that will increase their nonconformity either in degree of nonconformity or in the portion of the structure that is nonconforming, except as provided for in this subdivision. However, any lawful nonconforming structure or portion thereof may be altered to reduce its nonconformity. 
(c)  Uses . A primary use of land, structures or combination thereof lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived that occurs when property is used for a purpose or in any manner made unlawful by the use regulations or performance and design standards applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located. The term does not refer to accessory use of property. 
(1)  Uses of land. Any use of land that would not be permitted under the terms of this article but was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall hereafter be considered a lawful nonconforming use of land. As such, it may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful and provided that no enlargement, increase or extension of the lawful nonconforming use of land occurs so that a greater area of land is occupied than that which was occupied at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and that no additional structures or additions to structures existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be constructed on the same zoning lot. Further, no such lawful nonconforming use of land shall be moved or relocated in whole or in part to any other portion of the zoning lot on which it is located, other than that portion occupied at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. If any lawful nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the terms of this article. 
(2)  Uses of structures. Any use of a structure that would not be permitted under the terms of this article but was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall hereafter be considered a lawful nonconforming use of that structure. As such, it may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful and provided that the structure in which the lawful nonconforming use is located shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, relocated or structurally altered except in changing the use to a permitted use in the applicable district or as otherwise provided for in this article. However, a lawful nonconforming use of a structure may be extended throughout any part of the structure in which it is located where the structure or parts thereof were manifestly arranged or designed for this use at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but no lawful nonconforming use of a structure shall be extended to occupy any land outside such structure or to require a greater nonconformity in overall parking requirements. If any lawful nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for any reason for a period of more than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days, the structure shall only thereafter be used in conformity with the terms of this article. 
(3)  Uses of land and structures in combination. Any use of land in combination with a structure that would not be permitted under the terms of this article but was lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall hereafter be considered a lawful nonconforming use of land and structure in combination. As such, it may continue so long as it remains otherwise lawful and provided the use complies with the provisions herein. 
(4)  Characteristics of use. When an otherwise lawful existing use is permitted generally in any given zoning district, but where, due to adoption or amendment of this article, required off-street parking, paving of residential driveway, paving of commercial drive access and parking area, landscaping, screening and similar regulations are not provided, such deficiencies attributable to the use shall be considered lawful, nonconforming characteristics of use. Said deficiencies shall be brought into conformance when the use they are attributable to is expanded, enlarged or the intensity is increased, even though the use is permitted generally. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.603) 
Sec. 15-659. - Repair, maintenance and reconstruction. 
(a)  Repairs and maintenance . Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of structures and property, where nonconforming situations exist, are permitted and encouraged. Major renovation (i.e., work estimated to cost more than fifty percent (50%) of the structural value of the structure to be renovated) shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Destruction of structure . Should any lawful nonconforming structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, it may only be reconstructed and used in conformance with the zoning regulations of this chapter. 
(c)  Destruction of use and structure in combination . Where nonconforming status applies to a use and structure in combination, and where removal or destruction of the structure was caused by an accident or act of God after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and where removal or destruction exceeded fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost, the re-establishment of the nonconforming use shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Reconstruction . Reconstruction of a lawful nonconformity, where permitted, must commence within six (6) months of destruction. In such case where reconstruction does not commence within this limited time-frame, the nonconformity will be considered abandoned and the structure shall only be reconstructed as a permitted use. 
(e)  Costs . For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "cost" shall mean the total fair-market value of all intended materials, work and services necessary to accomplish a repair, renovation or restoration, and no person may avoid the intent of this definition by doing the intended work incrementally. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.604) 
Sec. 15-660. - Lawful nonconforming uses superseded. 
    Anywhere a lawful nonconforming use is superseded by or changed to a permitted use, such lawful nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.605) 
Sec. 15-661. - Change of nonconforming use of a structure. 
    The existing lawful nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another nonconforming use upon the review and finding of the Planning Commission using the following criteria: 
(1)  Such a change will not adversely affect the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
(2)  The proposed use is no more intensive than the existing use; 
(3)  The proposed use occupies no more area of the structure than the existing use; 
(4)  The proposed use requires no more off-street parking than the existing use; and 
(5)  Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, all signage for the existing use shall be removed and all signage for the proposed use shall conform to the underlying district in which it is located as provided in the sign ordinance codified as Division 3, Subdivision IV of this article. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-3.606) 
Secs. 15-662-15-680. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 15-681. - Statement of intent. 
    Certain uses of land or buildings are not appropriate under all circumstances in any zoning district, but may be appropriate where adequate precautions can be taken to ensure the compatibility of the use with surrounding uses. These uses may be authorized at a particular location through the approval of a special use permit where the impact of these uses do not inappropriately affect or impair the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.101) 
Sec. 15-682. - Special use permit required. 
    A special use permit shall be required for any use authorized in the applicable zoning district as requiring a special use permit on the Use Table (see Section 15-264) or in any other applicable regulation of this chapter. A special use permit is prohibited and may not be granted for any use not specifically authorized by the Use Table or any other applicable regulation of this chapter. A special use permit shall allow the specified use by the permittee only and shall not run with the land or be transferable, unless otherwise approved by the Governing Body by stipulation in the special use permit approval. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.102) 
Sec. 15-683. - Special use permit procedure. 
(a)  A special use permit application shall be accompanied by any applicable fee and made on any forms provided by the City. The requirements for the application and the procedure for the review of the same shall follow those specified for a rezoning (see Section 15-234); provided that the application shall also include: 
(1)  A statement of the reasons why the special use permit is being requested, including how the request conforms with the City's comprehensive plan and the purposes, intent, and standards of this chapter; and 
(2)  A statement of the nature and character of the current zoning district, and immediate vicinity of the project, and justification on how the requested use will conform to that character. 
(b)  A special use permit in a district requiring a development plan (R-2P or B-3P districts) may only be issued when the development plan provides for such use. The approval of a special use permit may be included in an ordinance approving a development plan. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.103) 
Sec. 15-684. - Standards of review. 
    The following factors shall be considered in the review of a special use permit request: 
(1)  The compatibility and impact of the use and site design with use, enjoyment, property values or character of neighboring properties, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Any similarity or dissimilarity in scale, bulk, lot coverage, or street frontage; 
b.  Any architectural designs minimizing the impact of the proposed use; 
c.  Any site design techniques minimizing the impact of any required parking or other necessity; 
d.  Any generation of traffic and the ability to mitigate the impact of the same; and 
e.  Any external impact detectable from adjacent properties, including noise, dust, dirt, heat, smoke, odor, vibration, electrical inference, glare, light or radio or television transmission interference compared with those of other existing uses in the vicinity; 
(2)  The consistency of the use and site design with purpose and standards of the zoning district; 
(3)  The conformance of the use and site design with the comprehensive plan; 
(4)  The conformance of the use and site design with any specified conditions for the particular use; 
(5)  Recommendations of professional staff; and 
(6)  Any other specific factor that is relevant to the proposed use and its impact to the community. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.104) 
Sec. 15-685. - Conditions. 
(a)  In granting a special use permit, the Governing Body may impose any conditions on the special use it deems appropriate to meet the requirements of approval. Such conditions must serve a legitimate zoning purpose and: 
(1)  Be clearly expressed with sufficient clarify to give notice of the limitations on the use; 
(2)  Relate directly to the proposed use; and 
(3)  Address a legitimate zoning purpose that bears a relationship to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Further the Governing Body may require periodic review to ensure the permittee continues to meet all permit conditions. 
(b)  Unless otherwise set forth in the express provisions of the special use permit, each special use permit shall be deemed to have a duration of ten (10) years, after which such special use shall terminate if no new special use permit is applied for and granted by the City. 
(c)  Renewal of a special use permit is not a matter of right. The same discretion shall attach to a decision to renew a special use permit as existed in the original decision to grant or deny that permit; provided that in consideration the decision to grant or deny renewal, any factor which would be relevant to consideration of revocation shall also be relevant to consideration of renewal. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.105) 
Sec. 15-686. - Revocation of a special use permit. 
(a)  Basis for revocation . Any special use permit granted under the authority of this chapter is subject to revocation for any or all of the following reasons: 
(1)  Noncompliance with any applicable requirement; 
(2)  Noncompliance with any special condition imposed at the time of approval of the special use permit; 
(3)  Violation of any provisions of the law pertaining to the use of the land, construction or uses of buildings or structures or activities conducted on the premises by the permittee or its agent; or 
(4)  Violation of any other applicable provisions of any local, State or Federal law or regulation by the permittee or its agent; provided that such violations related to the conduct or activity authorized by the special use permit or the qualifications of the permittee or its agent to engage in such conduct or activity. 
(b)  Procedure for revocation . 
(1)  Revocation proceedings may be initiated by the Governing Body. 
(2)  Unless the permittee and landowner agree in writing that the permit may be revoked, the Governing Body shall hold a public hearing to consider the revocation of the special use permit. At such hearing, the permittee and landowner shall be given the opportunity to present evidence or testimony. 
(3)  The City shall give the permittee and landowner certified mail notice, return receipt requested, of the scheduled revocation hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date scheduled for such hearing. Notice must be published in the official newspaper a minimum of five (5) days but not greater than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. 
(4)  No special use permit shall be revoked unless a majority of the Governing Body is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that grounds for revocation exist. Any motion of the revocation must clearly State the grounds for revocation. Adoption of any motion to revoke a special use permit may be made subject to subsequent adoption of written findings of fact and conclusions of law, at the discretion of the Governing Body. 
(5)  An appeal of any decision of the Governing Body to revoke a special use permit may be filed in the County District Court of within thirty (30) days following the final decision of the Governing Body. Any appeal taken shall not suspend the order of revocation during the pending appeal unless so ordered by the County District Court. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.106) 
Secs. 15-687-15-715. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEVELOPMENT PLANS 

Sec. 15-716. - Development plan required. 
    A development plan shall be required when any property is rezoned to a planned zoning district (R-2P or B-3P); or any change of use of land or buildings occurs in a planned zoning district. However, the Governing Body may rezone property to a planned district on its own initiative without a development plan and defer the preparation of a development plan to a future date. In this instance review of deferred development plans shall occur according to the procedures and criteria in this subdivision. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.301) 
Sec. 15-717. - Development plan contents. 
(a)  Preliminary development plan contents. A preliminary development plan shall include: 
(1)  Legal description for all property included in the preliminary plan boundaries. 
(2)  A preliminary site plan meeting the requirements of Division 1 of this article plus the following additional requirements: 
a.  A schedule of all proposed land uses including square footage of buildings and square footage of land areas dedicated to the categories and types of uses proposed in the plan, and the total plan area; 
b.  Specific location and dimension of proposed building lines and building footprints; 
c.  Any phases for the proposed for the entire buildout of the plan area clearly and specifically outlined with expected dates for beginning construction and completing construction in each phase; 
d.  The proposed location and dimension of all public or private circulation patterns, including pedestrian and vehicle routes; and 
e.  Supplemental report indicating how the plan meets the goals, intent and purposes of the City's comprehensive plan, the zoning district, and the planning criteria of the zoning district, including indications of where the plan proposes modifications from any standards for the zoning district, and justification why the modification is necessary for implementation of the purposes of the planned district; and 
(3)  Detailed existing conditions of property within five hundred feet (500') of the plan boundaries including: 
a.  Buildings and structures; 
b.  Public streets, rights-of-way lines, and pedestrian areas; 
c.  Parking lots, drive aisles, and private lanes; 
d.  General location of utilities and easements; 
e.  Public areas such as parks, trails, or other open space; 
f.  Landscaping and screening including type and size of plant materials; and 
g.  Property lines with designation of zoning districts and existing land uses. 
(b)  Final development plan contents. A final development plan shall include: 
(1)  A legal description for all property included in the final development plan boundaries. A final development plan shall include all property in the preliminary development plan, except where phases were approved in the preliminary development plan a final development plan may be submitted for one (1) or more phases. 
(2)  A final site plan meeting the requirements of Division 1 of this article plus the following additional requirements: 
a.  A schedule of all proposed land uses including square footage of buildings and square footage of land areas dedicated to the categories and types of uses proposed in the plan, and the total plan area; 
b.  Final location and dimension of proposed building lines and building footprints; 
c.  Identification of the phase of the preliminary plan, if any, and the relation to the phasing schedule approved with the preliminary development plan; 
d.  Final location and dimensions of all public or private circulation patterns, including pedestrian and vehicle routes; and 
e.  A statement of substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan, or where any modifications are requested in accordance with Section 15-718, specific reference to those changes and justification for those changes. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.302) 
Sec. 15-718. - Criteria for modifications. 
    The Planning Commission may recommend, and the Governing Body may approve, modifications to the regulations and guidelines of the planned district, through the development plan process, if it is found that a proposed preliminary development plan: 
(1)  Will provide substantial value to the City; 
(2)  Incorporates sound planning principles and design elements compatible with surrounding properties and consistent throughout the proposed project; 
(3)  Effectively utilizes the land upon which the development is proposed; 
(4)  Furthers the goals, purposes, and intent of this chapter, article, and the planned district better than a plan that does not contain modifications; and 
(5)  Includes modifications which are the minimum necessary to implement the purpose and intent of the district. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.303) 
Sec. 15-719. - Preliminary development plan procedures. 
(a)  Preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan shall be submitted with any application to rezone property to a planned (R-2P and B-3P) zoning district. The plan shall be approved in conjunction with rezoning of property and be a condition of the rezoning ordinance. Any change to a preliminary development plan that can not be considered under a final development plan according to the provisions of this subdivision shall be treated as an amendment to the zoning for the property. 
(b)  Criteria for approval of preliminary development plan . In addition to the criteria for approval of a rezoning, in approving a preliminary development plan the Planning Commission and Governing Body shall consider the following criteria prior to approval of a preliminary development plan: 
(1)  The degree that the plan and any proposed modification to standards further the goals of the comprehensive plan and whether they meet the purposes and intent of this chapter, article, and the planned district; 
(2)  Whether changes or alterations to the proposed preliminary development plan could better meet the goals of the comprehensive plan and the purposes and intent of this chapter, article and the planned district; 
(3)  Whether the plan represents sound planning principles and design elements throughout the project that: 
a.  Create meaningful public or common areas; 
b.  Establish effective land use transitions to adjacent property; 
c.  Create architectural character that is compatible throughout the project and with surrounding property; and 
d.  Efficiently balance safe pedestrian and vehicle traffic; and 
(4)  The compatibility of the plan, the land uses, public and common spaces, and building designs with surrounding areas, and effect on surrounding land areas. 
(c)  Validity of preliminary development plan . Preliminary development plan approval by the Governing Body shall not be valid for a period longer than twenty-four (24) months from the date of such approval, unless within such period a final development plan is submitted. In the case of phased development plans, a final development plan shall be submitted for at least one (1) phase within this period, and validity of the remainder of the preliminary development plan shall be according to the phasing schedule of the approved preliminary development plan. The Governing Body may grant one (1) extension not exceeding twelve (12) months upon written request. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.304) 
Sec. 15-720. - Final development plan procedures. 
(a)  Final development plan. A final development plan shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures for a final site plan in Division 1 of this article. 
(1)  The Planning Commission may approve a final development plan provided it is in substantial conformance with an approved preliminary development plan. A plan in substantial conformance may include the following minor deviations, provided they are consistent with all criteria and any conditions of the approval of the preliminary development plan: 
a.  A change in the total floor area of non-commercial buildings that is less than five percent (5%) per building of the total floor area of the approved plan; 
b.  A change in the number of residential units that results in a density that is less than one-half (1/2) dwelling units per acre different from the approved plan; 
c.  An increase in the height of a building between zero percent (0%) and five percent (5%); 
d.  A change in location of any building line or setback line of less than two feet (2') provided it is due to the subsequent discovery of site conditions, such as topography or subsurface conditions, which could not have been reasonably discovered in development of the preliminary plan and do not result in any increase in the approved building footprints beyond what is provided in the preliminary plan and by this section; or 
e.  A change in landscape or open space design, pedestrian or vehicle circulation, or signage that still meets all minimum requirements of the zoning district and any conditions of approval of the preliminary development plan. 
(2)  If the Planning Commission determines that a final development plan that is not in substantial conformance with an approved preliminary development plan, it shall be resubmitted as a new preliminary development plan in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this subdivision. 
(b)  Combination of final development plan approval. If an applicant has provided a detailed plan set meeting both the preliminary development plan requirements and final development plan requirements, the review procedures may be combined into one (1) proceeding. If the Planning Commission determines that the preliminary development plan and final development plan submittal requirements and development standards have been meet, it may recommend approval of the preliminary development plan and approve a final development plan conditioned upon the Governing Body's approval of the preliminary development plan. In this case, final approval shall occur upon the Governing Body's approval of the preliminary development plan. 
(c)  Validity of final development plan. Final development plan approval shall not be valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of approval, unless within that period a building permit is obtained and substantial constructions is commenced. All other building permits within the approved final development plan area must be obtained in a timely fashion as determined by the Codes Administrator to ensure the continuing validity of a final development plan beyond this period. The Governing Body may grant one (1) extension of no more than twelve (12) months upon written request of the applicant, if the request is filed prior to expiration of the final development plan. The Governing Body has the authority to attach new conditions to the final development plan in granting any extension. 
(d)  Recording of approved final plan. An approved final development plan shall be signed by the Codes Administrator, or his designee, and filed by the applicant with the County Register of Deeds. A copy of the recorded plan shall be returned and placed on file with the City Clerk. No building permit shall be issued until the recorded plan is on file with the City Clerk. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.305) 
Secs. 15-721-15-738. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Floodplain zones, K.S.A. 12-766 et seq. 

Sec. 15-739. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, and purposes. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. 
(1)  Approval of draft ordinance by the State Chief Engineer prior to adoption. The following floodplain management regulations, as written, were approved in draft form by the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources of the Kansas Department of Agriculture on April 7, 2009. 
(2)  State statutory authorization. The State Legislature has, in K.S.A. 12-741 et seq. , and specifically in K.S.A. 12-766, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  Flood losses resulting from periodic inundation. The special flood hazard areas of the City are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  General causes of the flood losses. These flood losses are caused by: 
a.  The cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and 
b.  The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(3)  Methods used to analyze flood hazards. The flood insurance study (FIS) that is the basis of this division uses a standard engineering method of analyzing flood hazards, which consist of a series of interrelated steps. 
a.  Selection of a base flood that is based upon engineering calculations, which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated, and the depth of inundation. The base flood selected for this division is representative of large floods, which are characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this division. The base flood is the flood that is estimated to have a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one (1) year as delineated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's FIS, and illustrative materials dated August 3, 2009, as amended, and any future revisions thereto. 
b.  Calculation of water surface profiles that are based on a standard hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the regulatory flood. 
c.  Computation of a floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than one foot (1') at any point. 
d.  Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no development is permitted that would cause any increase in flood height. 
e.  Delineation of floodway fringe (i.e., that area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the base flood). 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this division to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in Subsection (b)(1) of this section; to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 CFR 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(d) and K.A.R. 5-44-4 by applying the provisions of this division to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)  Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.401; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-740. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which division applies. This division shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City, identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones, AE, AO, and AH zones, on the index map dated August 3, 2009, of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) as amended and any future revisions thereto. In all areas covered by this division, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the City Council or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Section 15-742. 
(b)  Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard areas of the City shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this division and other applicable regulations. 
(c)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this division to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this division imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this division shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this division are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
(d)  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this division shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes. 
(e)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This division does not imply that areas outside the floodway and flood fringe or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This division shall not create a liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
(f)  Severability. If any section; clause; provision; or portion of this division is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this division shall not be affected thereby. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.402; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-741. - Administration. 
(a)  Floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in Section 15-740(a). No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial-improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. 
(b)  Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Officer of the City is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to ensure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this division have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local law; 
(3)  Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(4)  Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications; 
(5)  Notify adjacent communities and the Division of Water Resources, State Department of Agriculture, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(6)  Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished and shall be maintained within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse; 
(7)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(8)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved nonresidential structures have been floodproofed; and 
(9)  When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular nonresidential structure, the floodplain administrator shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(d)  Application for floodplain development permit. To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(1)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed structure or work; 
(2)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; 
(3)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(4)  Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement; 
(5)  Specify whether development is located in designated flood fringe or floodway; 
(6)  Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development; 
(7)  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Floodplain Administrator; 
(8)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and 
(9)  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.403; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-742. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any numbered or unnumbered A zones, AE, AO, and AH zones, unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
(2)  All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the FIRM are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this division. If flood insurance study (FIS) data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other sources. 
(3)  Until a floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, including fill, shall be permitted within any unnumbered or numbered A zones, or AE zones on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community. 
(4)  All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial-improvements, prefabricated structures, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
a.  Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
b.  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
d.  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
e.  New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination from them during flooding; and 
f.  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to ensure that: 
1.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
4.  All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(5)  Storage, material, and equipment. 
a.  The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
b.  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(6)  Nonconforming use. A structure, or the use of a structure or premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance from which this division is derived, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this division, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
a.  If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future use of the building shall conform to this division. 
b.  If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty percent (50%) of the pre-damaged market value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas identified as numbered and unnumbered A zones, AE, and AH zones, where base flood elevation data have been provided, as set forth in Section 15-472(b)(2), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial-improvement of any residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed to a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Section 15-741(7) through (9). 
(3)  Design. Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
b.  The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(c)  Manufactured homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes to be placed within all unnumbered and numbered A zones, AE, and AH zones, on the community's FIRM shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered or numbered A zones, AE, and AH zones, on the community's FIRM on sites: 
a.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
b.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
c.  In an expansion to and existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(3)  Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within all unnumbered and numbered A zones, AE and AH zones, on the community's FIRM, that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15-740(c)(2), be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood level; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer. 
(d)  Areas of shallow flooding (AO and AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard as described in Section 15-738(a) are areas designated as AO zones. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  AO zones. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified). 
b.  All new construction and substantial-improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structures, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community FIRM (at least two feet (2') if no depth number is specified) or together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to that level so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
c.  Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes, in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(2)  AH zones. 
a.  The specific standards for all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation has been provided shall be required as set forth in Section 15-740(b). 
b.  Adequate drainage paths shall be required around structures on slopes, in order to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15-738(a)(2) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The community shall select and adopt a regulatory floodway based on the principle that the area chosen for the regulatory floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot (1') at any point. 
(2)  The community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If Section 15-738(e)(2) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial-improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15-740. 
(4)  In unnumbered A zones, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other sources as set forth in Section 15-739(a)(2). 
(f)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within all unnumbered and numbered A zones, AE, AH, and AO zones on the community's FIRM either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred and eighty (180) consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(3)  Meet the permitting, elevation, and anchoring requirements of this division for manufactured homes. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.404; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-743. - Floodplain management variance procedures. 
(a)  Establishment of Appeal Board . The Board of Zoning Appeals ("Appeal Board"), as established by the City shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this division. 
(b)  Responsibility of Appeal Board. 
(1)  Where an application for a floodplain development permit is denied by the Floodplain Administrator, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit directly to the Appeal Board, as defined in Section 7-741(a). 
(2)  The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this division. 
(c)  Further appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in K.S.A. 12-759 and 12-760. 
(d)  Floodplain management variance criteria. In passing upon such applications for variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this division, and the following criteria: 
(1)  Danger to life and property due to flood damage; 
(2)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges. 
(e)  Conditions for approving floodplain management variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, providing Subsections (e)(2) through (6) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the state inventory of historic places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination, provided that the proposed activity will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any significant increase in flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon showing of good and sufficient cause, determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this division. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.405; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-744. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this division or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this division or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than that amount set forth in the City fee schedule as adopted by the Governing Body by resolution; and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues, shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing in this division contained shall prevent the City or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.406; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-745. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this division may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973; provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. At least twenty (20) days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the FEMA Region VII office. The regulations of this division are in compliance with the NFIP regulations. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.407; Ord. No. 1450) 
Sec. 15-746. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory structure. See Appurtenant structure . 
    Actuarial rates . See Risk premium rates. 
    Administrator means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
    Agency means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Appeal means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this division or a request for a variance. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot (1') to three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the structure having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building . See Structure. 
    Chief Engineer means the Chief Engineer of the Division of Water Resources, State Department of Agriculture. 
    Chief Executive Officer or Chief Elected Official means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
    Community means any state or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Eligible community or participating community means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding from the overflow of inland waters. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community on which the Administrator has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the designated regulatory floodway. 
    Flood elevation determination means a determination by the Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood (that is, the flood level that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of occurrence in any given year). 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Flood fringe means the area outside the floodway encroachment lines, but still subject to inundation by the regulatory flood. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
    Flood hazard map means the document adopted by the Governing Body showing the limits of the floodplain, the floodway, streets, stream channel, and other geographic features. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flooding ). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term "flood management regulations" describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1'). 
    Floodway encroachment lines means the lines marking the limits of floodways on Federal, State and local floodplain maps. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this division. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Map means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), flood insurance rate map (FIRM), or the flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
    Market value or fair market value means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
    NFIP means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
    100-year flood . See Base flood. 
    Participating community , also known as an eligible community , means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
    Permit means a signed document from a designated community official authorizing development in a floodplain, including all necessary supporting documentation such as the site plan; an elevation certificate; and any other necessary or applicable approvals or authorizations from local, State or Federal authorities. 
    Person includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies. 
    Principally above ground means that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently able to be towed by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
    Risk premium rates means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations, which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. The term "risk premium rates" includes provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
    Special flood hazard area . See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Special hazard area means an area having special flood hazards and shown on an FHBM, FIRM or FBFM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A, AO, AE, or AH. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory structures, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimension of the building. 
    State coordinating agency means the Division of Water Resources, State Department of Agriculture, or other office designated by the Governor of the State or by State statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) in the State. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. The term "structure," for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation, or a travel trailer, without wheels on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term "structure" includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures, which have incurred substantial damage , regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this division is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain riverine areas. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.408; Ord. No. 1450) 
Secs. 15-747-15-775. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Board of zoning appeals, K.S.A. 12-759 et seq. 

Sec. 15-776. - Membership; meetings; records; powers and duties. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor and with the consent of the City Council. The members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years each; provided that appointments shall be so staggered that no more than three (3) members' terms shall expire in any given year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Members may be removed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council or upon a motion by a member of the City Council that is adopted by a two-thirds (?) majority vote of the City Council. Members shall remain in office until their successor takes office. 
(b)  Officers. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall elect one (1) member as Chairperson and one (1) member as Vice-Chairperson who shall serve one (1) year and until their successors have been elected. A Secretary also shall be elected who may be an officer or an employee of the City. 
(c)  Rules. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and hearing procedures. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all action by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall require a quorum of the membership and a majority vote of those present. 
(d)  Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine. 
(e)  Records. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing evidence presented, findings of fact by the Board of Zoning Appeals, decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the vote upon each question. Records of all official actions of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be filed at City Hall and shall be a public record. 
(f)  Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the powers granted and duties delegated to it by this chapter and by statute, including: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning regulations; 
(2)  To grant exceptions to the zoning regulations on the basis and in the manner specifically provided for by the zoning regulations; 
(3)  To grant variances to the zoning regulations on the basis and in the manner provided for by this division and by statute; and 
(4)  To the extent so authorized in the appropriate ordinance, the Board of Zoning Appeals may also act as the appeals board for any appeal of an alleged error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative official in the enforcement of the City's building codes or property maintenance regulations. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.501; Ord. No. 1616 , § 3, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-777. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
(a)  Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide appeals by any person, officer of the City, governmental agency or body affected by any decision of the officer administering the provisions of the zoning regulations where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by said officer in the enforcement of the zoning regulations. An appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the order, requirement, decision or determination by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the City Clerk, specifying the grounds for the appeal, along with any applicable fee. 
(b)  Hearing and notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal. Notice of the time, place and subject of such hearing shall be published once in the official City newspaper at least twenty (20) days prior to the date fixed for hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to each party of the appeal. 
(c)  Record. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals all papers constituting the record of the matter being appealed. 
(d)  Action by Board. In exercising these powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board of Zoning Appeals may attach any appropriate conditions and may order the issuance of a permit. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.502) 
Sec. 15-778. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant, in specific cases, a variance from the specific terms of the zoning regulations, which will not be contrary to the public interest and where, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the zoning regulations, in an individual case, results in unnecessary hardship; and provided that, the spirit of the zoning regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Variance shall permit any use not permitted by the zoning regulations for the applicable district. A request for a variance may be granted in this case upon a finding that all the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  That the variance requested arises from a condition that is unique to the property in question and that is not ordinarily found in the same zone or district, and is not created by an action or actions of the property owners or the applicant; 
(2)  That the granting of the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents; 
(3)  That the strict application of the zoning regulations from which a variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application; 
(4)  That the variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or general welfare; and 
(5)  That granting the variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of the zoning regulations. 
(b)  Applications for variance. An application shall be made in writing on the form provided by the City, and accompanied by the applicable fee. It shall contain: a statement of the reasons for the request, including any justification for the same; a plan of the site indicating specifically the character, location, and dimensions of the site element that is the subject of the request; and any additional information that may reasonably be pertinent to the request. 
(c)  Placement on the agenda. When the City receives a completed application, including applicable fees, the request shall be placed on the Board of Zoning Appeal's next agenda, giving allowance for such time as necessary to allow for any required notice. 
(d)  Hearing and notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall conduct a public hearing regarding the request. Notice of the time, place and subject of the hearing shall be published once in the official city newspaper at least twenty (20) days prior to the date fixed for hearing. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to each party of the request. Additionally, at least ten (10) days before the hearing the applicant shall mail by registered mail, return receipt request, written notice of the hearing and the nature of the request to all owners of record of real property located within two hundred feet (200') of the affected land. 
(e)  Action by board. On the date set by notice, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on the request. The hearing may be continued to a date certain for reasonable cause. Upon completion of the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall take action on the request, subject to the standards set forth above. Any approval may include any appropriate conditions. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.503; Ord. No. 1582 , § 19, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-779. - Appeals of decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
    Any person, official or governmental agency dissatisfied with any order or determination of the Board of Zoning Appeals may bring an action in the County District Court to determine the reasonableness of any such order or determination within thirty (30) days of the final decision. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-4.504) 
Secs. 15-780-15-796. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 15-797. - Interpretation generally. 
    All standards, regulations, and guidelines in this article shall be interpreted to bring about the general purpose of this article. All words used in this article shall have the customary dictionary meaning, unless specifically defined or described by this division or unless context requires a different meaning. The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. Graphics used in this article are to aid interpretation of the text, unless otherwise specifically stated. In the event of a conflict or ambiguity between a graphic and the text, the text shall control. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-501) 
Sec. 15-798. - Defined terms. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words shall have the specific meaning given below: 
    Abutting. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by a right-of-way. 
    Accessory building. A building detached from a principal building located on the same lot and clearly and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
    Accessory structure, accessory use. Any structure or use that is: 
(1)  Clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with the principal building or use; 
(2)  Subordinate to and serves a principal building or use; 
(3)  Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal building or use served; and 
(4)  Located on the same lot and under the same ownership as the principal building or use served. 
    Alteration. As applied to a building or structure, is a change or rearrangement in the structural parts of an existing building or structure, or an enlargement, increase in height, or the movement from one location or position to another. 
    Antenna. For the purposes of this article regarding wireless communication facilities, towers and antennae, "antenna" shall mean any device used to transmit or receive electromagnetic signals for communication purposes. It shall not include antenna and satellite dishes used solely for home television or radio reception purposes, or transmitting and receiving antennae for amateur purposes. It shall include micro-cells and repeaters. 
    Antenna, micro-cell. A low-power mobile radio service communications facility used to provide increased capacity in high call demand areas or to improve coverage in areas of weak coverage. 
    Antenna, omni-directional. An antenna that is equally effective in all directions and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it is designed. (a.k.a. whip antenna) 
    Antenna, panel. An antenna that transmits signals in specific directions and is typically square or rectangular in shape. 
    Antenna, repeater. A low-power mobile radio service communications facility that extends coverage of a cell to areas not covered by the originating cell. 
    Antenna, slim-line. A panel antenna which mounts directly to and parallel with a monopole or alternative tower structure. 
    Antenna support structure. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower tripod, or any other structure which supports a device or antenna used in the transmission or receipt of radio frequency energy. 
    Architectural relief. A structural building element that breaks up a wall plane by creating a projection or recession of at least eighteen (18) inches and occurring cumulatively over at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the wall plane requiring relief. Examples include dormers projecting from a roof, projecting front porches, or projections or recessions in the facade building line. 
    Block. The land area bounded by the centerline of intersecting public streets, or where public streets do not provide a complete boundary, the centerline of intersecting public streets and private lanes. 
    Block faces. The area made up of the building line or street edge along a single side of a block. 
    Board or Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). The Board of Zoning Appeals of the City, as authorized by statute and established by this article. 
    Building. A structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, whether or not completely enclosed. 
    Co-location. Placement of wireless communication facilities, towers or antennae by more than one wireless service provider on a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
    Disability. Disability means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment. Such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
    Drive aisles. Areas within a parking lot which provide access to parking spaces or other vehicle storage and service points on the lot. 
    Dumpster. Any container used for the collection of big item or bulk refuge, rubbish or waste disposal, which is placed upon any real property, and is typically rented to owners or occupants of real property for their use by a collector or contractor (whether or not appropriately permitted by the City under Article 1 of Chapter VI of this Code), and is delivered or can then be transported to another location by an appropriate truck, tractor trailer or other motorized equipment. 
    Effective radiated power (ERP). The product of the antenna power input and the numerically equal power output gain. 
    Encroachment. An extension beyond a required or established line. To advance beyond the usual or proper limits established by zoning regulations or other city codes. 
    EPA. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Facade. The exterior of the architectural face of a building lying between the grade and the lowest level of the roofline. (Also referred to as the elevation.) A facade shall be considered as an entire composition of a building elevation and may involve multiple wall planes. (See wall plane) 
    Family. Any number of people occupying a single dwelling unit living together as a single housekeeping unit, related by blood, marriage, formal adoption, in a legal foster family relationship, or other recognized housekeeping unit entitled by law to the benefits of single-family residential surroundings, plus not more than two (2) additional people not so related. 
    FAA. Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC. Federal Communications Commission. 
    Floor area. The total of all gross horizontal areas of the interior floors in a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls. Floor area shall exclude any space where floor-to-ceiling height is less than five feet (5'). Floor area shall also exclude stairs, equipment rooms, garages, and floors below the ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for human habitation. 
    Frontage. In describing a lot or building area which is generally oriented to the street or public area and is thought of as providing a primary access point for the lot or structure. 
    Garage. An attached or individual structure for the storage of motor vehicles accessory to a dwelling unit. 
    Governing Body. Shall be as defined in Section 1-101 of this Code. 
    Ground floor area. All habitable space of a structure exclusive of porches, patios, attached garages or other accessory structures. 
    Group home. Any dwelling occupied by not more than ten (10) persons, including eight (8) or fewer persons with a disability who need not be related by blood or marriage and not to exceed two (2) staff residents who need not be related by blood or marriage to each other or to the residents of the home, which dwelling is licensed by a regulatory agency of the state. 
    Impervious surface. Any area of a lot that is covered with a structure, material, or other fixed physical element that does not allow the infiltration of ground water and cannot be planted with landscape materials. 
    Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
    Maintenance easement. An easement providing legal rights of access to the grantee onto adjacent property for the upkeep of any portion of a structure. 
    Manufactured home. A structure which is subject to the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 5403. 
    Mixed-use. A combination of uses, either within a building or on a single integrated parcel, designed and intended for the uses by more than one use category described in this article. 
    New house. A new house shall be any construction that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: (New house construction fees are calculated on total square footage of the finished project, including main and second floors, garage, and basement.) 
(1)  Construction of a new dwelling unit; 
(2)  Repair or reconstruction resulting from the demolition of more than seventy percent (70%) of the structural components of an existing dwelling unit; 
(3)  New construction and/or structural demolition totaling more than seventy percent (70%) of the total square footage, including the main and second floors, garage, and basement, of the existing dwelling unit. 
For the purposes of determining applicable permit fees, all other work will be considered a remodel and based upon valuation unless a set building permit fee has been established. 
    Party wall. A common shared wall between two (2) separate structures, buildings, or dwelling units. 
    Permeable surface. A surface that allows water to infiltrate through itself into the material immediately below the surface and through the ground surface before disposal into the groundwater. 
    Planning Commission or Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Fairway, as authorized by statute and established by Article II. 
    Portable storage unit. Any container designed for the storage of personal property, which is placed upon any real property, and is typically rented to owners or occupants of real property for their temporary use, and is delivered or can then be transported to another location by an appropriate truck, tractor trailer or other motorized equipment (a.k.a. portable storage container, portable on demand storage, and PODS). 
    Principal building. A building located on a lot which is used for the primary purpose of the applicable zoning district. (For example, the dwelling unit on a residentially zoned lot is the principal building.) 
    Primary entrance. The entrance to a building which is designed to accommodate the majority of patrons, residents, or visitors to the building. 
    Primary entrance feature. Significant architectural or structural details which signify prominence of the primary entrance. 
    Primary entrance feature, unenclosed. An entry feature with a floor and a ceiling, but where walls, rails, screens, windows, or other obstructions occupy no more than forty percent (40%) of the total wall area between the ceiling and floor. 
    Private lane. A private vehicle access point located and designed to mimic public street standards, including landscaping, pedestrian access, potential on-street parking, curb-cuts, and crosswalks. Private lanes are typically used on larger sites where public streets are unable to provide the access and block design standards called for in the zoning ordinance. 
    Public building. A building designed exclusively for city purposes. 
    Public open space. Any space dedicated for public use, exclusive of right-of-way and easements, and open from the ground to the sky. Public open space does not include any impervious surfaces designated for automobile use. 
    Residential-design manufactured homes. A manufactured home on permanent foundation which has (A) minimum dimensions of twenty-two (22) body feet in width, (B) a pitched roof and (C) siding and roofing materials which are customarily used on site-built homes. 
    Sport court. A use accessory to a residential use, where an area of a lot is altered primarily for the purpose of athletic play, whether through placement of structures such as special fencing or lighting, or through provision of a differentiated playing surface. 
    Structural components. The supporting members of a building including exterior walls, load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, joists, rafters or girders. 
    Street edge. A conceptual line that gives definition and consistency to a street or private lane by assembling physical elements across all lots along a block into a uniform pattern and providing a pedestrian scale to streets and private lanes. A street edge is typically made up of building facades but can incorporate alternative elements where building locations and site conditions dictate. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. Excluded from this definition are retaining walls, sidewalks, pavement and public improvements such as utility poles, street light fixtures and street signs. 
    Tower. A structure designed to support at least one (1) or more antennae. This does not include structures owned and operated by amateur radio personnel licensed by the FCC. 
    Tower, alternative tower structure. Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, buildings and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or facilities. 
    Tower, guyed. A tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Tower, lattice. A three- or four-sided tower constructed of open steel framing. 
    Tower, monopole. A tower of single-pole design, constructed without support (guy) wires or anchors. 
    Wall plane. The exterior portion of the massing of a building, lying between the grade and the lowest level of the roofline and comprising a single vertical plane. Several wall planes offset horizontally may make up a facade. (See facade.) 
    Wireless communication facility. Any complex, including tower, antennae, antenna support structure, cabinet, building, screen walls, transmission equipment, power source or other equipment constructed on the ground and used to assist antennae in the generation or receipt of electromagnetic communication signals, or used for the transmission or receipt of electromagnetic communication signals. 
    Wireless service provider (provider). Any provider of cellular or wireless communication service (digital, PCS, and PCN) allowing customers to use mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmitter sites, either to the public switched network or to other mobile telephones. Such providers shall be licensed by the FCC in a specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into discrete channels. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-502; Ord. No. 1487; Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 12-12-2011; Ord. No. 1582 , § 21, 12-8-2014) 
Sec. 15-799. - Dimensional standards. 
    For the purposes of this article, the dimensional standards shall have the meanings and be given interpretations in accordance with the following definitions and rules. In a case where the definitions and rules below do not strictly apply to the specific circumstances, an interpretation shall be given that is most consistent with the rules and definitions, and which brings about the purposes and intent of the specific ordinance provisions and of the zoning district. 
    Build-to line means the line specified as a distance from the right-of-way or other public easement or private lane at which structures are required to be constructed for some portion of the lot. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the lesser of: finished grade of the previous structure measured at the previous threshold or current finished grade measured at the current threshold, to the highest ridge of the roofline of a building, exclusive of chimneys. Where a maximum building height is established in both stories and feet, each shall apply as a maximum, neither of which may be exceeded. When measuring any single facade or wall plane for purposes other than the overall building height, the distance used for building height shall be from the lowest grade to the highest point on the wall plane. 
    Building line means the actual line at which a building on a lot is constructed. 
    Lot, corner , means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of a street which form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the right-of-way lines is the corner. 
    Lot, depth , means the mean (average) horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured at right angles to the front right-of-way lines. 
    Lot, interior , means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot width , means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the right angles to the lot depth and measured parallel to the front lot line. A minimum lot width shall be applied at the front setback line and the rear setback line. In calculating the lot width for purposes of determining a required side setback, the largest width between the front setback and the rear setback line shall be the applicable lot width. 
    Lot line, front , means the lot line contiguous to the right-of-way line of the street on which the lot has least dimension. 
    Lot line, rear , means the lot line opposite to, parallel or nearly parallel with, and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of triangular or otherwise irregular shaped lots, where no lot line is nearly parallel with the front lot line, the rear lot line shall be interpreted as a line ten feet (10') in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side , means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line of a corner lot separating a lot from a right-of-way is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is called an interior lot line. 
    Setback lines means a line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and establishes the area on the lot within which a building or structure shall be built, except where specifically permitted otherwise. In cases where a setback line for a principal building is listed as a range having a minimum setback and a maximum setback, the maximum setback shall be interpreted as a built-to line at or within that distance a building line must be established. 
    Story means the portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, generally not exceeding more than fourteen feet (14') total height. 
    Story, half , means a space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof and wall supporting the roof not more than three feet (3') above the floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet (5') or less occupies between thirty percent (30%) and seventy percent (70%) of the total floor area of the story directly beneath. 
    Tower height means the vertical distance measured from the base of the tower or alternative tower structure at grade to the highest point of the tower or alternative tower structure. If the tower or alternative tower structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the tower height. 
    Wall plane means any plane of continuous vertical and horizontal orientation not set off by projections or recessions. The term "wall plane" includes any plane on an angle or incline, such as a roof surface. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-4-503; Ord. No. 1314; Ord. No. 1455; Ord. No. 1517; Ord. No. 1530, § 7, 7-9-2012; Ord. No. 1542, § 1, 11-13-2012) 
Secs. 15-800-15-821. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 15-822-15-850. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING PERMITS 

Sec. 15-851. - Required; contractor's license requirements. 
(a)  In general. To protect the safety, health and welfare of the community, no building, structure or driveway shall be constructed, erected, altered, restored, remodeled, demolished or moved unless the owner, contractor or duly authorized agent of either shall have first received from the City a building permit therefor, unless exempted therefrom under the provision of any uniform code adopted by the City and applicable thereto. Any applicant for a building permit shall present satisfactory evidence that such work is in compliance with the applicable provisions, if any, of the City Code and this chapter, including any uniform codes adopted by the City that may be applicable thereto. 
(b)  Contractor license . Before a contractor may perform any work within the City that requires a building permit, said contractor must first submit to the Building Inspector sufficient proof that the contractor has a current and valid contractor's license with the County, in accordance with County Resolution 058-01, as may be amended. The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to deny or withhold any building permit when this requirement has not been met. Additionally, both the contractor and property owner shall be held legally responsible to the City for compliance with any conditions of the building permit, and may be cited for any violations of this Code or zoning regulations pertaining to that permit, including any uniform codes may be applicable thereto. 
(1)  Performance surety. Before issuance of a building permit, an applicant may be required to provide the City with good and sufficient performance surety in the form of bond or cash escrow guaranteeing that the property owner and the contractor (collectively the "permittee") shall be and are in fact guarantors that during the construction period the permittee will not cause or allow dirt, mud, gravel or other debris on the streets, sidewalks and public ways of the City, and will not cause damage thereon. The Building Inspector will established a policy to be approved by the Governing Body that delineates the criteria for when such surety is necessary. 
(2)  If the Building Inspector, or his designee, determines that the streets, sidewalks or public ways of the City have been damaged by the permittee, or that the permittee has caused or allowed dirt, mud, gravel or other debris to be deposited thereon as a result of the permitted work, the Building Inspector or his designee shall notify the permittee. Upon notification, the permittee shall have a period of two (2) hours to remove any dirt, mud, gravel or other debris, or in the event of damage, to contact the Building Inspector or his designee regarding arrangements for repair of such damage. If such action is not timely taken or fails to adequately remedy the matter, then the Building Inspector or his designee may direct the City to perform such duties. 
(3)  The City shall then give notice to the permittee by restricted mail of the total cost incurred by the City, including the cost of providing notice, and the City shall assess its total cost against any performance surety. The City's total cost will be based upon its actual cost as determined by the Building Inspector. If the City's total cost exceeds any performance surety amount, such notice shall state that payment of the remaining balance is due and payable to the City within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice. If such balance is not paid within this period, it shall be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk, who shall then extend this amount on the County tax roll against the property, and it shall be collected and paid to the City by the County as other taxes are collected and paid. 
(4)  At the time of the issuance of the building permit, a contractor for a project not constituting a significant construction project may be required to provide the City a good and sufficient surety bond in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The City Building Inspector will establish a policy approved by the Governing Body which delineates the criteria for when such a bond is necessary. 
(5)  A performance bond will be approved by the City Building Inspector predicated and guaranteed upon the fact that the permit applicant shall be and is in fact a guarantor that during the construction period the permittee will not cause or allow dirt, mud, gravel or other debris on the streets, sidewalks and public ways of the City and will not cause damage to the streets, sidewalks and public ways of the City. If upon inspection, at any time during the construction period or thereafter, the City Building Inspector or his authorized representative determines that the streets, sidewalks or public ways of the City have been damaged by the permittee or that the permittee has caused or allowed dirt, mud, gravel or other debris to be deposited thereon, the City Building Inspector shall provide notice of same to the permittee. 
(6)  Upon receipt of such notification, the permittee shall be allowed a period of two (2) hours in which to remove any dirt, mud, gravel or other debris or in the event of damage, to contact the City Building Inspector making arrangements for repair of such damage. If action as set forth in this section has not been taken within the two (2) hour period, or if such action fails to adequately remedy the defects in the affected area, then the City Building Inspector or his authorized representative may direct the City to perform such duties and assess all costs thereof against the performance bond. The cleanup or repair costs will be based upon the cost to the City of the actual clean up as determined by the City Building Inspector. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.101; Ord. No. 1391; Ord. No. 1615 , § 3, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-852. - Application procedure. 
    Applications for building permits shall be filed with the City Clerk or his designated representative on a form furnished by the City for such purpose. The application shall be accompanied by any applicable fee. A building permit for a proposed project may be issued by the City if the application sets forth in reasonable detail all information required to determine that the construction, erection, alteration, restoration, remodeling or improvement shall in all respect conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Expiration of building permit. Every building permit issued by the City shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the project authorized by the building permit is not completed within one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of issuance of the building permit. Before any such project can recommence after the building permit has expired, a renewal permit shall be first obtained. The renewal fee shall be one half (1/2) the amount required for a new building permit for the project; provided that no change has been or will be made to the original plans and specifications for the project. The renewal permit is valid for one hundred and eighty (180) days. 
(2)  New residential construction permits. New residential construction permits may be issued for three hundred and sixty (360) days from the date of issuance at the discretion of the Building Official and/or his appointed designees. 
(3)  Extension. The City may extend the permit up to an additional one hundred and eighty (180) days if it is determined that the project will require more than three hundred and sixty (360) days to complete, given reasonably diligent pursuit of construction of the project and extenuating circumstances. The fee to extend up to an additional one hundred and eighty (180) days is based on one-half (1/2) the amount of the original permit fee for the project. No building permit shall be renewed more than one hundred and eighty (180) days beyond the initial three hundred and sixty (360) day permit without the expressed authorization and approval of the City Council. 
(4)  Abandoned permits. Any project that is left unattended for a period of thirty (30) days may be considered abandoned and the permit(s) may be revoked. Any further work on the property may require that (a) new building permit(s) with the associated fee(s), be issued. The approval of said permit issuance may require approval by the City Council, at the discretion of the Building Official and/or his appointed designees. 
(5)  Appeal. In the event of the refusal of the City to issue a building permit, the applicant upon request shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and State statutes. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.102; Ord. No. 1391; Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 2-13-2012; Ord. No. 1636 , § 1, 10-10-2016; Ord. No. 1659 , § 1, 11-13-2017) 
Sec. 15-853. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Application. Applications for a building permit for a proposed project must meet the following requirements: 
a.  Identify and describe all work of the proposed project to be covered by the building permit; 
b.  Describe the land on which the proposed project will be done by legal description, as well as the street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building and/or project; 
c.  Show the location of the proposed project on the site, and if required by the Building Inspector/Codes Administrator, be accompanied by a site survey from a State licensed surveyor; 
d.  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed project is intended; 
e.  Be accompanied by any and all necessary plans (including grades and elevation lines of both existing and proposed buildings and site topography, delineated by one foot (1') elevation lines), diagrams, computations, specifications, and other necessary data as required; an architect or engineer's seal shall be required as set forth in Subsection (b)(1) of this section; 
f.  Show the materials to be used; 
g.  State the valuation of any new building or structure or any addition, remodel or alteration to an existing building (including labor charges); 
h.  Show satisfactory evidence that water runoff from the proposed project will not adversely affect other property. For demolition permits, a site survey depicting grades and topography elevations delineated by one foot (1') elevation lines for both existing and proposed topographical and structure changes shall be required; 
i.  Give the other data and information as may be required by the Building Inspector/Codes Administrator; and 
j.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(2)  Exception. The Building Inspector/Codes Administrator, at his discretion, may waive the submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection requirements and other data if it is found that the nature of the proposed project is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with the City's currently adopted building code. 
(b)  Plan and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. All plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale and be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the proposed project and to show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the City's currently adopted building code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. All plans and specifications shall also be sealed by a State licensed architect or engineer, unless the plans and specifications are for the following: 
a.  One (1) story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, play houses, and similar uses; provided the floor area does not exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet; 
b.  Fences not exceeding six feet (6') in height; 
c.  Moveable cases, counters and partitions not exceeding five (5) feet, nine (9) inches in height; 
d.  Retaining walls not exceeding three feet (3') in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge; 
e.  Platforms, decks, walks and driveways not exceeding thirty inches (30") in height above grade and not over any basement or story below; or 
f.  Pre-fabricated swimming pools accessory to single-family homes in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade and the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons. 
(2)  Exception. The Building Inspector/Codes Administrator, at his discretion, may require plans and specifications for the above to be sealed by a licensed State architect or engineer depending upon the complexity of the project. 
(c)  Inspections. Applications for building permits impliedly authorize the Building Inspector/Codes Administrator to enter upon the premises at any reasonable time to inspect the site and/or the project. The Building Inspector/Codes Administrator has the authority to: 
(1)  Suspend activities if the project is not being done in accordance with the approved plans upon which the building permit was issued. 
(2)  Order the removal of any completed or partially completed project which was not done in accordance with the approved plans upon which the building permit was issued. The cost of the removal shall be paid by the party responsible for the violation. 
(3)  Inspect the completed project and issue a certificate of satisfactory completion or a certificate of occupancy as appropriate. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.103; Ord. No. 1391 ; Ord. No. 1530, § 9, 7-9-2012)) 
Sec. 15-854. - Construction on governmentally held easements. 
    No private building or structure shall be constructed or maintained on any governmentally held easement. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.104; Ord. No. 1391) 
Sec. 15-855. - Utility construction and maintenance within public and private easements. 
    All work on utility facilities within the City shall be performed so as to provide for the safety of workers and the residents of the City. All work is subject to the excavation and electrical permitting requirements of the City and must be performed in accordance with adopted codes, statutes, ordinances, laws, regulations and industry standards for the particular utility performing work. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided, no utility maintenance crew, or excavator, surveyor, or other contractor employed by any utility (for purposes of this division, all collectively hereinafter referred to as "utility"), whether public or private, may perform work, conduct any repair, construction, or reconstruction of facilities on public or private property in the City, regardless of whether within an easement the utility has a right to utilize or occupancy, without first having complied with the notice provisions of this section and having obtained a permit from the Public Works Department whenever a permit is required in accordance with adopted codes. 
(2)  An emergency situation does not relieve a utility from permitting requirements where a permit is required. If due to an emergency it is necessary for the utility to immediately perform work on its infrastructure on public or private property, and it is impractical for the utility to first obtain the appropriate permit, the work may be performed, and the required permit must be obtained as soon as possible during the next City working day. 
a.  Where a permit is required it shall be conspicuously displayed by the utility at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the Public Works Director, other City employees and the public. 
b.  Regardless of whether a permit is required, where excavation will occur in conjunction with work on public or private property by a utility, prior to the commencement of work the utility shall identify and locate any buried facilities to be spray painted according to the Uniform Color Code required by Kansas One Call. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.105; Ord. No. 1391) 
Sec. 15-856. - Notice required. 
(a)  Every utility working on public or private property, regardless of whether a permit is required for work to be performed, shall notify the occupants of all properties within two hundred feet (200') of the work the utility is performing in advance of the work; provided, the Public Works Director may waive or modify the notification requirement in those limited instances where the Director determines the modification or waiver will not adversely impact the public health, safety or general welfare. There shall be a first notification, in the form of a letter, which must be sent to each occupant as stated above no later than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work. This letter notification shall include: 
(1)  Scope of project; 
(2)  Construction schedule, including the date of commencement and expected completion of work; 
(3)  Name of field superintendent; and 
(4)  Telephone numbers (office and mobile) and electronic mail addresses for personnel of the utility who can timely provide additional project information as needed. 
(b)  In addition, there shall be a second notification to each such occupant, which notification may be in the form of a door hanger and shall be received by each occupant no later than the day before the commencement of work. This second notification shall include the same information as specified in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  While performing work, the utility shall carry proper identification as to the utility's licensure or employment and shall display that identification to anyone upon request. 
(d)  Any utility that is found to be working without a permit, where a permit is required, or without having complied with the above notice provisions, will be directed to stop work until compliance with either or both is attained. The only exception allowed is for emergency repair work, but in any event the requirements of Section 15-855(2) shall be met. 
(e)  The notice requirements of this section may be waived where a utility is an invitee on to a property by the owner thereof and has obtained a written acknowledgement from the owner of the utility's right to work on the property, which acknowledgement shall serve as a waiver of the notice requirements to adjacent property owners. 
(f)  Excavation in the public right-of-way is governed by Chapter 9, Article III. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.106; Ord. No. 1391) 
Sec. 15-857. - Notification of work performed by engineers, surveyors, and other professionals. 
(a)  Every engineer, surveyor, or other technical professional and their agents and employees (for purposes of this section all hereinafter referred to as "professionals") working in the right-of-way or on public or private property, regardless of whether a permit is required for work to be performed, shall notify the occupants of all properties within two hundred feet (200') of the work the professional is performing in advance of the work; provided that the Public Works Director may waive or modify the notification requirement in those limited instances where the Director determines the modification or waiver will not adversely impact the public health, safety or general welfare. There shall be a first notification, in the form of a letter, which must be sent to each such occupant no later than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of work to be performed by the professional. This letter notification shall include: 
(1)  Scope of project; 
(2)  Work schedule, including the date of commencement and expected completion of work; 
(3)  Name of professional performing the work, or field superintendent; and 
(4)  Telephone numbers (office and mobile) and electronic mail addresses for personnel of the utility who can timely provide additional project information as needed. 
(b)  In addition, there shall be a second notification to each such occupant, which notification may be in the form of a door hanger and shall be received by each occupant no later than the day before the commencement of work. This second notification shall include the same information as specified hereinabove. 
(c)  While performing work, all professionals shall carry proper identification as to such professional's licensure or employment and shall display such identification to anyone upon request. 
(d)  The notice requirements of this section may be waived where a professional is an invitee on to a property by the owner thereof and has obtained a written acknowledgement from the owner of the professional's right to work on the property, which acknowledgement shall serve as a waiver of the notice requirements to adjacent property owners. 
(e)  All work performed by the professional shall be performed in accordance with standard practices of the industry in which the professional is employed. 
(f)  Any professional who is found to be working in the City without having provided the notice required in Subsections (a) and (b) of this section will be deemed to have failed to make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner in possession pursuant to K.S.A. 74-7046, to the extent that statute applies, and will directed to stop work until such notices have been provided and will be cited for trespass in accordance with Section 6.7 of the Uniform Public Offense Code. 
(g)  Any professional working in the right-of-way and found to be working without providing for required safety and traffic control will be directed to stop work until the appropriate measures are implemented in accordance with the current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-1.107; Ord. No. 1391) 
Secs. 15-858-15-877. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 15-878. - Adoption of building code. 
(a)  General incorporation of building code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Building Code (IBC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1608 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to building code as published. The following provisions of the International Building Code (IBC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section [A] 101.1 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas." 
(2)  Section [A] 103.2 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Appointment, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. 
The building official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Section [A] 105.2 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Work exempt from permit, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Buildings: 
1.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, flooring, cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work. 
2.  Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
3.  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
4.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project fore than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
5.  Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1753 MM) in height. 
6.  Patching holes in plaster or gypsum board and the repair or replacement of damaged and/or deteriorated trim or moldings provided the dimensions remain the same. 
7.  Repair or replacement of non-fire rated windows and doors provided that any replacement is the same size and shape as the original and no modification is made in any structural member of the structure. 
8.  Retaining walls constructed of pre-cast wall blocks, railroad ties, landscape timbers or other similar material not exceeding 2 feet in height measured from the bottom of the first course of such material which may be buried. 
9.  Repair of fences provided that no change is made in the location, height or material of the fence. 
Electrical: 
1.  Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
2.  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor. 
3.  Replacement of general use switches in the same location. 
4.  Replacement of luminaire (lighting fixtures) but not the lighting outlet therefor. 
5.  Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
6.  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
7.  Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
8.  The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installation of towers and antennas. 
9.  A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliances. 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
3.  In-kind replacement of toilets, sinks, faucets, and tubs. 
(4)  Section [A] 105.3 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Application for permit, is replaced with the provisions found in Section 15-853 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. Sections [A] 105.3.1 Action on application, and [A] 105.3.2 Time limitation of application, remain unchanged. 
(5)  Section [A] 105.5 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Expiration, is replaced with the provisions found in Section 15-852(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
(6)  Section [A] 109.2 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Schedule of permit fees, is hereby amended as to read as follows: 
[A] 109.2 Schedule of permit fees. 
The Schedule of Permit Fees shall be established by the Governing Body by resolution. 
(7)  Section [A] 109.6 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Refunds, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 109.6 Refunds. 
The code official shall authorize the refunding of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. 
(8)  Section [A] 111.3 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Temporary occupancy, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 111.3 Temporary occupancy. 
The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The time period for temporary occupancy shall not exceed 30 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions as required by jobsite conditions. 
(9)  Section [A] 113.1 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, General, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 113.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(10)  Section [A] 113.3 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Qualifications, is hereby omitted in full. 
(11)  Section 1809.5 of the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Frost Protection, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1809.5 Frost protection. 
Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundations and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be protected from frost by one or more of the following methods: 
1.  Extending below the frost line of thirty-six (36) inches; 
2.  Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or, 
3.  Erecting on solid rock with supporting documentation from a geo-technical report. 
Exception: Free standing, non-habitable buildings of light frame construction less than four hundred (400) square feet in area shall not be required to be protected. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.101; Ord. No. 1608 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-879. - Adoption of energy conservation code. 
(a)  General incorporation of energy conservation code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1609 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to energy conservation code as published. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section C101.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, Title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas". 
(2)  Section C101.2 Scope, C101.3 Intent, C101.4 Applicability, C101.4.1 Existing buildings, C101.4.2 Historic buildings, C101.4.3 Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs, C101.4.4 Change in occupancy or use, C101.4.5 Change in space conditioning, C101.4.6 Mixed occupancy, C101.5 Compliance, C101.5.1 Compliance materials, and C101.5.2 Low energy buildings, of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby re-designated as C101.3 Scope, C101.4 Intent, C101.5 Applicability, C101.5.1 Existing buildings, C101.5.2 Historic buildings, C101.5.3 Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs, C101.5.4 Change in occupancy or use, C101.5.5 Change in space conditioning, C101.5.6 Mixed occupancy, C101.6 Compliance, C101.6.1 Compliance materials, and C101.6.2 Low energy buildings; and new Section C101.2, Appointment, is hereby added to read as follows: 
C101.2 Appointment. 
The code official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Section C109.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, General, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
C109.1 General. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(4)  Section C109.3 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, Qualifications, is hereby omitted in full. 
(5)  Table R402.1.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component a 
Climate Zone: 4 Fenestration U-Factor 0.35 Skylight U-Factor b 0.55 Glazed Fenestration SHGC 0.4 Ceiling R-Value f 49 Wood Frame Wall R-Value 13 Mass Wall R-Value 8/13 Floor R-Value 19 Basement Wall R-Value e 10/ 13 Slab R-Value & Depth d NR Crawl Space Wall R-Value e 10/13  
a.  R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When insulation is installed in a cavity which is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table. 
b.  The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration. 
c.  "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement walls. 
d.  R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs. 
e.  No change. 
f.  No change. 
g.  No change. 
h.  Refers to wall cavity insulation minimum standards only. 
i.  No change. 
j.  Loose-fill insulation shall be installed at the rate recommended by the manufacturer's statement "so many bags per 1,000 square feet." Where the pitch of the roof restricts the minimum thickness at the exterior wall line, the insulation shall be blown into the cavity as to achieve a great compacted density to a point where the "minimum thickness" can be achieved. An alternative is to install high density batts around the perimeter edge per R1102.2. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.102; Ord. No. 1609 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-880. - Adoption of residential code. 
(a)  General incorporation of residential code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Residential Code (IRC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc., including appendices A, B, C, G, and J, but excluding its other appendices. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1610 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to residential code as published. The following provisions of the International Residential Code (IRC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Title is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas." 
(2)  Section R103.2 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Appointment, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R103.2 Appointment. 
The building official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Section 105.2 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Work exempt from permit, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. 
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Buildings: 
1.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, flooring, cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work. 
2.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground. 
3.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
4.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
5.  Patching holes in plaster or gypsum board and the repair or replacement of damaged and/or deteriorated trim or moldings provided the dimensions remain the same. 
6.  Repair or replacement of non-fire rated windows and doors provided that any replacement is the same size and shape as the original and no modification is made in any structural member of the structure. 
7.  Retaining walls constructed of pre-cast wall blocks, railroad ties, landscape timbers or other similar material not exceeding 2 feet in height measured from the bottom of the first course of such material which may be buried. 
8.  Repair of fences provided that no change is made in the location, height or material of the fence. 
Electrical: 
1.  Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
2.  Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor. 
3.  Replacement of general use switches in the same location. 
4.  Replacement of luminaire (lighting fixtures) but not the lighting outlet therefor. 
5.  Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
6.  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
7.  Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating appliance. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliances. 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot- or chilled-water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval of equipment or make it unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration system containing 10 pounds (5 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  Portable-fuel-cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
3.  In-kind replacement of toilets, sinks, faucets, and tubs. 
(4)  Section R105.3 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Application for permit, is replaced with the provisions found in Section 15-853 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
Sections R105.3.1 Action on application, R105.3.1.1 Determination of substantially improved or substantially damaged existing buildings in flood hazard areas, and R105.3.2 Time limitation of application, remain unchanged. 
(5)  Section R105.5 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Expiration, is replaced with the provisions found in Section 15-852(1) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
(6)  Section R108.2 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Schedule of permit fees, is hereby amended as to read as follows: 
R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. 
The Schedule of Permit Fees shall be established by the Governing Body by resolution. 
(7)  Section R109.5 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Refunds, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R108.5 Refunds. 
The code official shall authorize the refunding of the full amount of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. 
(8)  Section R110.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Use and occupancy, is hereby amended as follows: 
R110.1 Use and occupancy. 
No new residential building or structure shall be used or occupied until the building official has issued a certificate of satisfactory completion or an Inspection Notice indicating satisfactory final inspection and satisfactory occupancy. No remodel for which a permit is required shall be considered complete until the building official has issued a certificate of satisfactory completion or an Inspection Notice indicating satisfactory final inspection and satisfactory occupancy. 
(9)  Sections R110.2 Change in use, R110.3 Certificate issued, R110.4 Temporary occupancy, and R110.5 Revocation, of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby omitted in full: 
(10)  Section R112.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Board of appeals, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R112.1 Board of appeals. 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(11)  Section R112.3 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Qualifications, is hereby omitted in full: 
(12)  Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria 
a. Ground Snow Load 20 lbs. per sq. ft. b. Wind Speed 90 MPH c. Topographic Effects No d. Seismic Design Criteria A e. Weathering Severe f. Frost Depth Line 36 Inches g. Termite Damage Moderate to Heavy h. Decay Slight to Moderate i. Winter Design Temperature Six Degrees Fahrenheit j. Ice Barrier Underlayment Required No k. Flood Hazards Latest Adopted FIRM and FBFM documents l. Air Freezing Index 1,000 m. Mean Annual Temperature 54.7 degrees Fahrenheit  
(13)  Section R303.4 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Mechanical ventilation, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R303.4 Mechanical ventilation 
Where the air infiltration rate of a dwelling unit is less than three (3) air changes per hour when tested with a blower at a pressure of 0.2 inch wick (50 Pa) in accordance with Section N1102.4.1.2, the dwelling unit shall be provided with whole-house mechanical ventilation in accordance with Section M1507.3. 
(14)  Section R309.5 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Fire Sprinklers, is hereby omitted in its entirety. 
(15)  Section R313 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, including all subsections, is hereby omitted in its entirety. 
(16)  Section R315.3 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Where required in existing dwellings, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R315.3 Where required in existing dwellings. 
Where work requiring a permit occurs in existing dwellings that have attached garages or in existing dwellings within which fuel-fired appliances exist, carbon monoxide alarms shall be provided in accordance with Section R315.1 
Exception: Work involving only exterior items such as roofs, siding, windows, decks, etc., are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(17)  Section R401.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Application, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R401.1 Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for all buildings. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations shall be designed and installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF. 
Exception: The provisions of this chapter shall be permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations: 
1.  In buildings that have no more than two floors and a roof. 
2.  When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding 50 feet (15,240 mm). 
3.  Foundation designs for one and two family dwellings may use the approved standards and designs provided in the Johnson County Residential Foundation Guidelines in lieu of the prescriptive requirements of Chapter 4 of this Code as approved by the building official. 
(18)  Section R403.1.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Minimum size, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R403.1.1 Minimum size. 
The minimum size for all residential concrete footings shall be 8 inches in depth and 16 inches in width. Steel shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch in size with two (2) bars running parallel in the footing. Single story trench footings are to be a minimum of 12 inches in width. Footing projections shall be at least 2 inches and shall not exceed the thickness of the footing. Consistent with table R401.4.1 IRC, the minimum bearing pressure value shall be 1,500 psf unless a geotechnical report is provided that would allow a higher load bearing value. Footings for all structures three stories or more shall be designed by a licensed Kansas engineer. 
(19)  Section R501.3 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Fire protection of floors, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R501.3 Fire protection of floors. 
Floor assemblies not required elsewhere in this code to be fire resistance rated shall be provided with a 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) gypsum wallboard membrane, 5/8 inch (16 mm) wood structural panel membrane or equivalent on the underside of the floor framing member for open web-type floor truss systems and I-joist systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Floor systems located directly over a space protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section P2904 NFPA 13D or other approved systems. 
2.  Floor systems located directly over a crawlspace not intended for storage and without fuel fired appliances. 
3.  The aggregate area of the unprotected portions shall not exceed 80 square feet. 
(20)  Section R507.4 of the International Residential Code Section, 2012 Edition, Alternate design, is hereby added to read as follows: 
R507.4 Alternate design. 
In lieu of the requirements of this Section R507, Decks, the construction of decks and balconies may use the approved standards and designs provided in the latest edition of the Johnson County Building Officials Deck Design publication. 
(21)  Section R602.6.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Drilling and notching of top plate, is hereby added to read as follows: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. 
When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than fifty percent (50%) of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (16 ga) and one and one-half inches (11/2") at each side shall be fastened across and to the top plate at each side of the opening with not less than four 10d (0.148 inch diameter) nails having a minimum length of one and one-half inches (1 1/2") at each side or equivalent. The metal tie must extend a minimum a minimum of six inches (6") past the opening. See Figure R602.6.1. 
Exception: When the entire side of the wall with the notch or cut is covered by wood structural panel sheathing. 
(22)  Section R907.3 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Recovering versus replacement, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
R907.3 Recovering versus replacement. 
New roof coverings shall not be installed without first removing all existing layers of roof coverings to the roof decking. 
Exception: Where the existing roof assembly includes an ice barrier membrane that is adhered to the roof deck, the existing ice barrier membrane shall be permitted to remain and be covered by an additional layer of ice barrier membrane in accordance with Section R905. 
(23)  Section N1101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Scope, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
N1101.1 Scope. 
This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by this code. 
As an alternative to the provisions of Chapter 11 of this code, structures validated by an accepted certified energy code auditor to meet a HERS rating score of 85 or less shall be deemed to meet this Code. The energy auditor shall present their national certification credentials for review and approval by the building official prior to issuance of the permit. 
Failure to meet with the compliance rating of 85 or less shall result in a "notice" to the owner that the structure has failed to comply with this Code. Such "notice" shall be signed by the contractor and the owner. 
(24)  Table N1102.1.1 (R402.1.1) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition is hereby amended as follows: 
Climate Zone 4 Fenestration U-Factor 0.35 Skylight U-Factor * b 0.55 Glazed Fenestration SHGC 0.4 Ceiling R-Value * f 49 Wood Frame Wall R-Value 13 Mass Wall R-Value 8/13 Floor R-Value 19 Basement Wall R-Value * e 10/13 Slab R-Value & Depth * d NR Crawl Space Wall R-Value * e 10/13  
a.  R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When insulation is installed in a cavity which is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-value of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table. 
b.  The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed fenestration. 
c.  "10/13" means R-10 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at the interior of the basement walls. 
d.  R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs. 
e.  No change. 
f.  No change. 
g.  No change 
h.  Refers to wall cavity insulation minimum standards only. 
i.  The second R-value applies when more than half the insulation is on the interior of the mass wall. 
j.  Loose-fill insulation shall be installed at the rate recommended by the manufacturer's statement "so many bags per 1,000 square feet." Where the pitch of the roof restricts the minimum thickness at the exterior wall line, the insulation shall be blown into the cavity so as to achieve a greater compacted density to a point where the "minimum thickness" can be achieved. An alternative is to install high density batts around the perimeter edge per 1102.2. 
Section N1102.2.8 (R402.2.8) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Basement walls, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
N1102.2.8 (R402.2.8) Basement walls. 
Walls associated with finished space in conditioned basements shall be insulated from the top of the basement wall down to 10 feet (3048 mm) below grade or to the basement floor, whichever is less. Walls associated with unconditioned basements shall meet this requirement unless the floor overhead is insulated in accordance with Sections N1102.1.1 and N1102.2.7 
(25)  Section N1102.4.1.2 (R1102.4.1.2) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Testing, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
N1102.4.1.2 (R1102.4.1.2) Testing. 
The building or dwelling unit shall be tested as having an air leakage rate not exceeding 5 air changes per hour. Testing shall be conducted with a blower door at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where required by the Code Official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the building official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations of the building thermal envelope. 
During Testing. 
1.  Exterior windows and doors, fireplaces and stove doors shall be closed, but not sealed beyond the intended weather stripping or other infiltration control measures; 
2.  Dampers, including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft and flue dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures; 
3.  Interior doors, if not installed at the time of the test, shall be opened; 
4.  Exterior doors for continuous ventilation; 
5.  Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of the test shall be turned off; and 
6.  Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of the test, shall be fully open. 
(26)  Section N1103.2.2 (R1103.2.2) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Sealing (Mandatory), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
N1103.2.2 (R1103.2.2) Sealing (Mandatory). 
Ducts, air handlers and filters boxes shall be sealed. Joints and seams shall comply with Section M1601.4.1 of this code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Air impermeable spray foam products shall be permitted to be applied without additional joint seals. 
2.  Where a duct connections is made that is partially inaccessible, three screws or rivets shall be equally spaced on the exposed portion of the joint so as to prevent a hinge effect. 
3.  Continuously welded and locking type longitudinal joints and seams in ducts operating at static pressure classification shall not require additional closure systems. 
Duct tightness shall be verified by either of the following: 
1.  Post construction test: Total leakage shall be less than or equal to 4 cfm per 100 square feet of the conditioned floor area when tested at a pressure differential of 0.1 inches wg (25 Pa) across the entire system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure. All register boots shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. 
2.  Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be less than or equal to 4 cfm per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area when tested at a pressure differential of 0.1 inches wg (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. If the air handler is not installed at the time of the test, total air leakage shall be less than or equal to 3 cfm per 100 square feet of conditioned floor area. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The total leakage test is not required for ducts and air handlers located entirely within the building thermal envelope. 
2.  On the post-construction test it is permissible to test for "leakage to the outdoors" versus a "total leakage." Leakage to the outdoors shall be less than or equal to 8 cfm per 100 square feet of conditioned floor space. 
N1103.2.2.1 (R403.2.2.1) Sealed air handler. 
Air handlers shall have a manufacturer's designation for an air leakage of no more than 2 percent of the design air flow rate when tested in accordance with ASHRAE 193. 
(27)  Section N1103.2.3 (R403.2.3) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Building cavities (Mandatory) is hereby omitted in its entirety. 
(28)  Section N1103.4.2 (R403.4.2) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Hot water pipe insulation (Prescriptive), is hereby omitted in its entirety. 
(29)  Section N1104.1 (R404.1) of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Lighting equipment (Mandatory), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory). 
Fuel gas lighting systems shall not have continuously burning pilot lights. 
(30)  Section P2503.4 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Building sewer testing, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2503.4 Building sewer testing. 
The building sewer shall be tested by insertion of a test plug at the point of connection with the public sewer and filling the building sewer with water, testing with not less than a ten-foot (10') head of water and be able to maintain such pressure for fifteen (15) minutes or by air, maintain five (5) PSI for fifteen (15) minutes. This testing will be required when ordered by the building official. 
(31)  Section P2503.5 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, DWV systems testing, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2503.5 DWV system testing. 
Rough and finished plumbing installations shall be tested in accordance with Sections P2503.5.1 and P2503.5.2. This testing will be required when ordered by the building official. 
(Sections P2503.5.1 Rough plumping and P2503.5.2 Finished plumbing remain unchanged.) 
(32)  Section P2903.4 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Thermal expansion control, including all subsections, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P2903.4 Thermal expansion control. 
A means for controlling increased pressure caused by thermal expansion shall be installed in each dwelling unit. A thermal expansion tank shall be the means by which to control thermal expansion. At the time a water heater is new or replaced, a thermal expansion tank shall be installed. 
Exception: In cases where a thermal expansion tank is not feasible, the building official shall determine an approved method of thermal expansion control. 
(33)  Section P3114.1 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, General, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
P3114.1 General. 
Vent systems using air admittance valves shall comply with this section. Individual and branch type air admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1051. Stack-type air admittance valves shall conform to ASSE 1050. The use of air admittance valves shall only be done so by the approval of the building official. 
(34)  Section E3601.8 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Underground wires required, is hereby added to read as follows: 
E3601.8 Underground wires required. 
(A) Purpose. The Governing Body finds that suspended power lines are susceptible to being pulled from their support systems during severe weather or as a result of an accident, and that the resulting power outages and potential for contact with live power lines is dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and guests of the City. Therefore, the Governing Body desires to regulate the placement of electrical service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider to reduce the incidence of downed power lines by requiring the underground placement of these facilities in certain circumstances. 
(B) Generally. Every person shall place all or any portion of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider underground in subsurface conduits, pipes or any other suitable and acceptable method or type of underground installation meeting any and all existing technical and safety standards, based upon the International Residential Code (IRC) and the National Electrical Code (NEC), when hereinafter installing or replacing these service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider in the following situations: 
(1)  As part of new construction of a structure; or 
(2)  Construction of an expansion greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the existing structure; or 
(3)  Repair, renovation, reconstruction or restoration of an existing structure is required due to damage caused by fire, accident, acts of nature or similar occurrences, except in circumstances where, as determined in the full discretion of the building official, the spirit and intent of this section can be met without the placement of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors underground. 
(C) Temporary relief. 
(1)  The building official may grant temporary relief from the application of these requirements to permit the temporary installation, erection, construction or maintenance of poles, service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services and other overhead structures for the provision of temporary electrical power or communication services, provided that, the relief shall be granted only where reasonably required for emergency, building construction or other temporary purposes for a time period not to exceed one (1) year in duration. 
(2)  Written requests for the extension of the one-year period shall be submitted to the building official for consideration. Upon review and comment from the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, the building official may approve, or approve with conditions, the request for an extension unless it is determined that due diligence would have allowed the person requesting the extension to complete the undergrounding, as required herein, within the initial one (1) year period. 
(D) Permanent relief. Permanent relief from the requirements of 3601.8 (B) may be granted by the building official when it is determined, in the sole discretion of the building official, that the specific characteristics of the site make it impractical to comply. 
(E) Effect of undergrounding on building permit fees. For purposes of establishing the total fee for a building permit, as set forth in the fee schedule established by ordinance, the cost of initially placing service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services, underground, shall not be included in calculating the project cost. In the circumstance where the initial placement of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services, underground, is the sole work to be undertaken in the project, the City shall waive the building permit fee for electrical work as set forth in the fee schedule established by the City Council. 
(35)  Section E3902.2 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Garage and accessory building receptacles, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
E3902.2 Garage and accessory building receptacles. 
All 125-volt single phase 15 or 20 ampere receptacles installed in garages grade level portions of accessory buildings used for storage or work areas shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Receptacles that are not readily accessible such as a ceiling mounted receptacle for a garage door opener. 
2.  A single receptacle supplying a dedicated branch circuit that is located and identified for specific use by a cord and plug appliance such as a refrigerator, freezer, central vacuum system or a sump pump system. 
(36)  Section E3902.5 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Unfinished basement receptacles is hereby amended to read as follows: 
E3902.5 Unfinished basement receptacles. 
All 125-volt shingle phase 15 and 20 ampere receptacles installed in unfinished basements shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection for personnel. For purposes of this section, unfinished basements are defined as portions or areas of the basement not intended as habitable rooms and limited to storage areas, work areas, and the like. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A receptacle supplying only a permanently installed fire alarm or burglar alarm system. 
2.  A single receptacle supplying a permanently installed sump. 
3.  A single receptacle supplied by a dedicated branch circuit that is located and identified for a specific use by a cord- and plug-connected appliance such as a refrigerator, freezer, a central vacuum system or a sump pump system. 
(37)  Section E3902.12 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Arc-fault circuit interrupter Protection, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
E3902.12 Arc-fault circuit-interrupter protection. 
All branch circuits that supply 120-volt single phase 15 and 20 ampere outlets installed in libraries, dens, bedrooms, closets and similar rooms or areas shall be protected by a combination type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed to provide protection of the branch circuit. Other rooms, such as family rooms, dining rooms, living rooms, parlors, sunrooms, recreation rooms, hallways and similar rooms or areas are exempt from this requirement. For these purposes a smoke alarm shall not be considered an outlet and shall not be on an arc-fault circuit. Isolated circuits serving smoke detectors and/or carbon monoxide detectors shall be exempt from arc-fault protection. Smoke detectors shall not be included in a branch circuit protected by an arc-fault circuit interrupter. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where an outlet branch circuit type AFCI is installed at the first outlet to provide protection for the remaining portion of the branch circuit, the portion of the branch circuit between the branch circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet shall be installed with metal outlet and junction boxes and RMC, IMC, EMT, type MC, or steel armored type AC cables meeting the requirements of Section E3908.8. 
2.  Where an outlet branch circuit type AFCI is installed at the first outlet to provide protection for the remaining portion of the branch circuit between the branch circuit overcurrent device and the first outlet shall be installed with metal or nonmetallic conduit or tubing that is encased in not less than 2 inches of concrete. 
3.  AFCI protection is not required for an individual branch circuit supplying only a fire alarm system where the branch circuit is wired with metal outlet and junction boxes and RMC, IMC, EMT, or steel-sheathed armored cable, Type AC or Type MC, meeting the requirements of Section E3908.8. 
(38)  Section E3902.13 of the International Residential Code, 2012 Edition, Arc-Fault Circuit Interrupter Protection for Branch Circuits is hereby amended to read as follows: 
E3902.13 Arc-fault circuit interrupter protection for branch circuit extensions or modifications. 
Where branch-circuit wiring is modified, replaced, or extended in any of the areas specified in Section E3902.12 the branch circuit shall be protected by one of the following: 
1.  A combination-type AFCI located at the origin of the branch circuit 
2.  An outlet branch-circuit type AFCI located at the first receptacle outlet of the existing branch circuit. 
Exception: 
This section will not apply where existing dwelling unit premises wiring circuits make the application of this section impracticable, as deemed by the building official. 
Informational note: Two examples of the application of this exception are where the existing dwelling unit has a multi-wire branch circuit or utilizes a listed panelboard for which there is no listed device for the application of AFCI protection. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.103; Ord. No. 1610 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-881. - Adoption of electrical code. 
(a)  General incorporation of electrical code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the National Electrical Code (NEC), 2011 Edition, prepared and published by the National Fire Protection Association. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1611 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to electrical code as published. The provisions of the National Electrical Code (NEC), edition 2011, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section 90.4 of the National Electrical Code 2011 Edition, Enforcement, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
90.4 Enforcement. 
(A) The Code is intended to be suitable for mandatory application by governmental bodies that exercise legal jurisdiction over electrical installations, include signaling and communication systems, and for use by insurance inspectors. The authority having jurisdiction for enforcement of the Code has the responsibility for making interpretations of the rules, for deciding on the approval of equipment and materials and for granting the special permission contemplated in a number of the rules. 
(B) By special permission, the authority having jurisdiction may waive special requirements in this Code or permit alternative methods where it is assured that equivalent objectives can be achieved by establishing and maintaining effective safety. 
(C) This code may require new products, constructions, or materials that may not yet be available at the time the Code is adopted. In such event, the authority having jurisdiction may permit the use of the products, constructions, or materials that comply with the most recent previous edition of this Code adopted by the jurisdiction. 
(D) Existing equipment electrical conductors and equipment lawfully installed prior to the effective date of this Code may have their existing use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and location and is not a hazard to life, health or property. The owner or his/her designated agent shall be responsible for adequate maintenance of electrical conductors and equipment. 
(2)  Section 210.12 (A) Dwelling Units, of the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, Dwelling Units is hereby amended to read as follows: 
210.12(A) Dwelling Units. All 120-volt, single phase, 15- and 20-ampere branch circuits supplying outlets installed in dwelling unit bedrooms, dens, libraries, closets and similar rooms or areas shall be protected by a listed combination-type arc-fault circuit interrupter installed to provide protection of the branch circuit. Combination type arc-fault circuit interrupters will not be required for family rooms, dining rooms, living rooms, parlors, sunrooms, recreation rooms, hallways or similar rooms or areas. Smoke detectors and/or carbon monoxide detectors shall be exempt from arc-fault protection and shall not be included in a branch circuit protected by an arc-fault circuit interrupter. 
(3)  Section 310.1 of the National Electrical Code, 2011 Edition, Scope, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
310.1 Scope. This article covers general requirements for conductors and their type designations, insulations, markings, mechanical strengths, ampacity ratings and uses. These requirements do not apply to conductors that form an integral part of equipment such as motors, motor controllers, and similar equipment, or to conductors specifically provided for elsewhere in this code. 
Informational note: For flexible cords, and cables, see Article 400. For fixture wires, see Article 402. 
The use of nonmetallic sheathed cable with aluminum or copper clad aluminum conductors size 8 or smaller will not be permitted for branch circuit wiring in construction, alteration or repair. This shall apply to branch circuits from the distribution point. 
(4)  The following new section shall be added to the National Electrical Code, Edition 2011: 
230.11. Underground Wires Required. 
(A) Purpose. The Governing Body finds that suspended power lines are susceptible to being pulled from their support systems during severe weather or as a result of an accident, and that the resulting power outages and potential for contact with live power lines is dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and guests of the City. Therefore, the Governing Body desires to regulate the placement of electrical service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider to reduce the incidence of downed power lines by requiring the underground placement of these facilities in certain circumstances. 
(B) Generally. Every person shall place all or any portion of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider underground in subsurface conduits, pipes or any other suitable and acceptable method or type of underground installation meeting any and all existing technical and safety standards, based upon the National Electrical Code (NEC), when hereinafter installing or replacing these service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services provider in the following situations: 
(1)  As part of new construction of a structure; or 
(2)  Construction of an expansion greater than fifty percent (50%) of the square footage of the existing structure; or 
(3)  Repair, renovation, reconstruction or restoration of an existing structure is required due to damage caused by fire, accident, acts of nature or similar occurrences, except in circumstances where, as determined in the full discretion of the building official, the spirit and intent of this section can be met without the placement of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors underground. 
(C) Temporary relief. 
(1)  The building official may grant temporary relief from the application of these requirements to permit the temporary installation, erection, construction or maintenance of poles, service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services and other overhead structures for the provision of temporary electrical power or communication services, provided that, the relief shall be granted only where reasonably required for emergency, building construction or other temporary purposes for a time period not to exceed one (1) year in duration. 
(2)  Written requests for the extension of the one-year period shall be submitted to the building official for consideration. Upon review and comment from the Director of Public Works or City Engineer, the building official may approve, or approve with conditions, the request for an extension unless it is determined that due diligence would have allowed the person requesting the extension to complete the undergrounding, as required herein, within the initial one (1) year period. 
(D) Permanent relief. Permanent relief from the requirements of 230.11(B) may be granted by the building official when it is determined, in the sole discretion of the building official, that the specific characteristics of the site make it impractical to comply. 
(E) Effect of undergrounding on building permit fees. For purposes of establishing the total fee for a building permit, as set forth in the fee schedule established by ordinance, the cost of initially placing service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services, underground, shall not be included in calculating the project cost. In the circumstance where the initial placement of service drop conductors and/or service entrance conductors connecting a structure to the facilities of a utility services, underground, is the sole work to be undertaken in the project, the City shall waive the building permit fee for electrical work as set forth in the fee schedule established by the City Council. 
(c)  Administration of the electrical code. 
(1)  General. The official in charge of the enforcement of the National Electrical Code, 2011 edition as adopted by the City of Fairway, Kansas, shall be known as the building official. 
(2)  Appointment. The building official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official. 
(4)  Liability. The building official or any employee charged with the enforcement of this Code acting in good faith without malice for the jurisdiction in the discharge of his/her duties shall not thereby render himself liable personally and he/she hereby is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reasons of any act or omission in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against the building official or his/her employees because of such act or omission performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provisions of this Code shall be defended by legal representation of the City until final termination of the proceeding. 
(5)  Inspections. All work shall be subject to inspection by the building official or his/her appointed designee. Any portion of equipment which will be concealed prior to completion shall be subject to inspection prior to such work being concealed. 
(6)  Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or his/her duly authorized representatives may enter any building structure or premises in the City at reasonable hours to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this Code. 
(7)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this Code. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on hereunder when in violation of this Code, or of any other ordinance, or from revoking any certificate of approval when issued in error 
(8)  Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the building official shall notify in writing the persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done of violations found specifying a period of time allowed to bring the work into code conformance. 
(9)  Authority to condemn equipment. 
a.  Whenever the building official learns or ascertains that any electrical conductor or equipment as defined in this Code has become hazardous to life, health or property, he/she shall order in writing that such equipment be restored to a condition of safety or be dismantled or removed from its present location. The written notice shall fix a time limit for compliance with such order. 
b.  The building official is authorized to have electrical current and/or fuel supply to equipment as defined in this Code seal off by the proper utility supplier where such installation is done without permit or does not meet the provisions of this Code. Where electric current or fuel supply has been sealed off, it shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break such seal. Upon corrections being made to meet requirements set forth in this Code, the building official shall contact the proper utility supplier to approve the removal such seal. 
(10)  Authority to abate. 
a.  Any portion of an electrical system found by the building official to be unsafe as defined herein is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
b.  Where a nuisance exists or an electrical system is maintained in violation of this Code, or any notice issued pursuant to this section, the building official shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and where necessary shall seek such abatement in the manner provided by Law. 
(11)  Means of appeal. 
a.  A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the building official within 20 days after the notice was served. 
b.  The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.104; Ord. No. 1279; Ord. No. 1344; Ord. No. 1611 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-882. - Adoption of plumbing code. 
(a)  General incorporation of plumbing code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1612 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to plumbing code as published. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section [A] 101.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, Title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas". 
(2)  Section [A] 103.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, Appointment, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. 
The code official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Section[A] 106.2 or the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, Exempt work, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 106.2 Exempt work. 
The following work shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
3.  In-kind replacement of toilets, sinks, faucets, and tubs. 
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
(4)  Section [A] 109.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition, Membership of board, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 109.2 Membership of board. 
The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(5)  Sections [A] 109.2.1 Qualifications, [A] 109.2.2 Alternate members, [A] 109.2.3 Chairman, [A] 109.2.4 Disqualification of member, [A] 109.2.5 Secretary, [A] 106.2.6 Compensation of members, [A] 109.3 Notice of meeting, [A] 109.4 Open hearing, [A]109.4.1 Procedure, [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing, [A] 109.6 Board decision, [A] 109.6.1 Resolution, [A] 109.6.2 Administration, and [A] 109.7 Court review, of the international Plumbing Code, edition 2012, are hereby omitted in full. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.105; Ord. No. 1612 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-883. - Adoption of fuel gas code. 
(a)  General incorporation of fuel gas code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1613 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to fuel gas code as published. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code (IFGC), 2012 edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section [A] 101.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, Title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas". 
(2)  Section [A] 103.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. 
The code official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Sections [A] 109.2.1 Qualifications, [A] 109.2.2 Alternate members, [A] 109.2.3 Chairman, [A] 109.2.4 Disqualification of member, [A] 109.2.5 Secretary, [A] 106.2.6 Compensation of members, [A] 109.3 Notice of meeting, [A] 109.4 Open hearing, [A]109.4.1 Procedure, [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing, [A] 109.6 Board decision, [A] 109.6.1 Resolution, [A] 109.6.2 Administration, and [A] 109.7 Court review, of the international Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby omitted in full. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.106; Ord. No. 1613 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Sec. 15-884. - Adoption of mechanical code. 
(a)  General incorporation of mechanical code. There is hereby incorporated by reference the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2012 Edition, prepared and published by the International Code Council, Inc. Provided that, parts or portions thereof shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as specified by the following Subsection (b). At least one (1) copy of this Code shall be marked or stamped "Official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1614 ," with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted, amended, replaced, or supplemented clearly marked to show any such omission, amendment, replacement, or supplementation, and to which shall be attached a copy of the incorporating ordinance, and filed with the City Clerk to be open for inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. Provided that, no official copy filed with the City Clerk shall be removed from City Hall. All departments of the City charged with the enforcement of this Code shall be supplied, at the expense of the City, such number of official copies of this Code similarly marked as may be deemed expedient by the governing body. Should any provision of this Code conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Fairway, Kansas, then the more restrictive of the two (2) provisions shall take precedence. 
(b)  Amendment to mechanical code as published. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2012 Edition, shall be omitted, amended, replaced or supplemented as follows: 
(1)  Section [A] 101.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, Title, is hereby amended by replacing the words "[NAME OF JURISDICTION]" with the words "the City of Fairway, Kansas". 
(2)  Section [A] 103.2 of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 103.2 Appointment. 
The code official shall be the Building Inspector appointed by the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council. 
(3)  Section [A] 109.2 of the International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
[A] 109.2 Membership of board. 
The board of appeals shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals of the City of Fairway Kansas. 
(4)  Sections [A] 109.2.1 Qualifications, [A] 109.2.2 Alternate members, [A] 109.2.3 Chairman, [A] 109.2.4 Disqualification of member, [A] 109.2.5 Secretary, [A] 106.2.6 Compensation of members, [A] 109.3 Notice of meeting, [A] 109.4 Open hearing, [A]109.4.1 Procedure, [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing, [A] 109.6 Board decision, [A] 109.6.1 Resolution, [A] 109.6.2 Administration, and [A] 109.7 Court review, of the international Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby omitted in full. 
(Development Ord. 2004, § 15-5-2.106; Ord. No. 1614 , § 1, 12-14-2015) 
Appendix A - CHARTER ORDINANCES 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 14-201 OF THE GENERAL STATUTES OF 1961, RELATING TO THE ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 4, PASSED AUGUST 3, 1970) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE GENERAL STATUTES OF 1949, 14-205, RELATING TO THE FILLING OF VACANCIES ON THE CITY COUNCIL. 
(PROVISIONS OF CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2 ABROGATED BY REPEAL OF K.S.A. 14-801, AND PASSAGE OF K.S.A. 12-4101 ET. SEQ., L. OF 1973, CH. 61) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM SECTION 14-801 OF THE GENERAL STATUTES OF KANSAS, 1949, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO THE APPOINTMENT OF A POLICE JUDGE PRO-TEM. 
(PROVISIONS OF CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 ABROGATED BY REPEAL OF K.S.A. 14-801, AND PASSAGE OF K.S.A. 12-4101 ET SEQ., L. OF 1973, CH. 61) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 4 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 1967 SUPP., 14-201, RELATING TO THE ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5, PASSED JAN. 6, 1969) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 7, 8, AND 32, CHAPTER 274, LAWS OF KANSAS, 1968, RELATING TO THE ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICES AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7, PASSED AUGUST 3, 1970.) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 6 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM K.S.A. 79-1952; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT: AND REMOVING CERTAIN LIMITATIONS OF TAX LEVY. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1: The City of Fairway, Kansas, a City of the Second Class, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from, and make inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 79-1952, and provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this ordinance. K.S.A. 79-1952 is applicable to this City but is not applicable uniformly to all cities of the second class, and the legislature has not established classes of cities for the purpose of imposing tax limitations and prohibitions under said constitutional provisions. 
Section 2: The Governing Body of the City of Fairway, Kansas, is hereby authorized and empowered to levy taxes in each year on each dollar of assessed tangible valuation of said City for the following City purposes; provided that the City purposes specifically authorized by other statutes are not excluded because they are not enumerated herein: 
General operating fund (which shall include the following activities): General government, Police Department, Fire Department; health and sanitation, including refuse collection and disposal; highways (all public traveled ways, including bridges); storm sewer maintenance; parks; street lighting; restrooms; hydrant rental; forestry; military memorial maintenance; civil defense; recreation; flood control and community buildings. 
Said Governing Body may levy an amount necessary to meet the requirements of its adopted budget. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY, NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS-ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF, THE 6TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 1969. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 1969 SUPP. 14-201 (SECTIONS 7, 8 AND 32, CHAPTER 274, LAWS OF KANSAS 1968) AND THE LAST PARAGRAPH OF K.S.A. 1969 SUPP. 14-103 (SECTION 31, CHAPTER 274, LAWS OF KANSAS 1968) RELATING TO THE ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICES AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1: The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 112, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 1969 Supp. 14-201 (Sections 7, 8, and 32, Chapter 274, Laws of Kansas, 1968) and the last paragraph of K.S.A. 1969 Supp 14-103 (Section 31, Chapter 274, Laws of Kansas, 1968) which applies to said City but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities and provides substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
Section 2: There shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of each odd numbered year one councilman from each of the four wards in the City as hereinafter provided. There shall be an elected Mayor every four years beginning on the first Tuesday in April, 1969. The Mayor shall appoint by and with the consent of the Council the City Treasurer, a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, a City Marshal-Chief of Police, City Clerk, City Attorney, and may appoint policeman and such other officers as they may deem necessary. Officers so appointed and confirmed shall hold their offices for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The Council shall by ordinance specify their duties and compensation and by ordinance may abolish any office created by them whenever they may deem it expedient. The Council may retain a licensed professional engineer to act in the capacity of the City Engineer for specifically defined duties and provide for reasonable compensation for the services rendered. 
Section 3. The Mayor and Councilmen shall hold their offices for a term of four years. Councilmen elected in April of 1967 shall have terms expiring in 1969. Councilmen elected in April of 1968 shall have terms expiring in 1971, except for the one councilman in Ward 2 who was elected only for an unexpired term for one year until the April 1969 election. 
Section 4. There shall be no primary elections for City officers. The general election of City officers shall be held on the first Tuesday in April of each odd-numbered year commencing with the 1969 election and the four-year terms of City officers shall begin with those elected in 1969. 
SECTION 5. CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5 AND SECTION 4-101 AND 4-102, REVISED ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, 1967, ARE HEREBY REPEALED. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY BY NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF THIS 3RD DAY OF AUGUST, 1970. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8 
AN ORDINANCE LEVYING AND IMPOSING TAXES OR FEES UPON AND FOR THE PRIVILEGE OF ENGAGING IN ANY BUSINESS, TRADE, OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION OR RENDERING OR FURNISHING ANY SERVICE FOR PROFIT OR LIVELIHOOD IN THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, TO PROVIDE REVENUE TO DEFRAY A PART OF THE EXPENSES OF SAID CITY; DEFINING TERMS USED IN THE ORDINANCE; PRESCRIBING LICENSING AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE AND PENALTIES. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8 OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, RELATING TO THE LEVYING AND IMPOSING TAXES OR FEES UPON AND FOR THE PRIVILEGE OR ENGAGING IN ANY BUSINESS, TRADE, OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION OR RENDERING OR FURNISHING ANY SERVICE FOR PROFIT IN THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, Subdivision (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby repeals Charter Ordinance No. 8. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY, BY NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF, THIS 2ND DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 1975. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-4112 AND REPEALING SECTION 8-111 OF ARTICLE 1 OF CHAPTER VIII OF THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, PROHIBITING THE ASSESSMENT OF COURT COSTS AND PROVIDING AUTHORIZATION FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF SUCH COSTS AND PROVIDING AUTHORIZATION FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF SUCH COSTS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-4112, which applies to said City, but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities, and provide substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
Section 2. The City of Fairway, Kansas, does hereby repeal Section 8-111 of Article 1 of Chapter VIII of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas, prohibiting the assessment of Court costs. 
Section 3. Any person found guilty of violating the Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas, by the Municipal Judge or Judge Pro Tempore may be assessed Court costs, including but not limited to Court Reporter or stenographic charges, fees and mileage of witnesses, expenses incurred in the service of process, costs of publication of notices, and such other charges as are authorized by the Statutes of the State of Kansas. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY BY NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF THIS 5TH DAY OF MARCH, 1979. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 11 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 79-5001 TO 79-5017, INCLUSIVE, AND ANY AMENDMENTS THERETO. 
(REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 933, PASSED SEPTEMBER 4, 1990.) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 12 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE PRODUCTS AND FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF SERVICE FEES IN THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, a City of the Second Class, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby provides for the collection of recyclable products and for the assessment of fees. 
Section 2. Collection of Recyclable Products. The City shall provide for and regulate the collection of recyclable products from all residences in the City. The City may provide for the collection service contracting with a person, firm, corporation, Homes Association, County, another City, or any combination thereof for the benefit of the entire City, or portions thereof, as deemed to be in t the best interest of the City and its inhabitants. 
Section 3. Rules and Regulations. Rules and regulations pertaining to collecting and transporting recyclable products in the City shall be as follows: 
a.  Any person engaging in the business of collecting or transporting recyclable products within the corporate limits of the City shall first obtain a permit therefore from the City. Each applicant for any such permit shall state in his/her application the following: 
1.  The characteristics of the recyclable products to be collected and transported; 
2.  The number of recyclable product vehicles and equipment to be operated thereunder; 
3.  The precise location or locations of recyclable product collection; 
4.  The boundaries of the collection area; 
5.  The dates and/or frequency of the collection; 
6.  The amount of the proposed fee to be charged. 
b.  Before a permit shall be issued by the City, the applicant must furnish the City a certificate of insurance showing a minimum public liability insurance coverage of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person injured or killed, in amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in the event of injury or death of two or more persons in any single accident and in an amount of not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for damage to property. In the event the insurance is canceled during the term of the permit, the insurance carrier shall notify the City in writing no less than (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company agrees to so notify the City, and further, the insurance policy shall contain a written provision that shall place the responsibility for the ten (10) day written notice upon the company issuing the policy in order that coverage be considered proper. 
c.  The Governing Body may define and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and regulations governing recyclable product management system, which rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City. 
Section 4. Assessment and Collection of Fees. The City shall assess collection fee for each dwelling unit as hereinbefore provided and City Clerk shall at the time of certifying City Taxes, certify the amount thereof and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the County against the real property. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY BY NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF THIS 2ND DAY OF JULY, 1990. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 13 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-4203 AND K.S.A. 12-4207 RELATING TO THE ISSUANCE AND SERVICE OF WARRANTS AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207, which apply to said City, but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities and provides substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
Section 2. In addition to the authority of the City Attorney, Municipal Judge and law enforcement officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas, as specifically provided by K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207, authority to issue warrants and service notice to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Fairway, Kansas is hereby extended to the following Officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas subject to the limitations herein provided. 
Section 3. The Prosecuting Attorney or any Prosecuting Attorney Pro Tem of the City of Fairway, Kansas, is hereby granted the same authority to issue or refuse to issue warrants as is conferred upon the City Attorney by the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4203. 
Section 4. The following officers are hereby authorized to issue a complaint or warrant for the violation of the City Ordinances as hereinafter provided, to be served upon the accused person by the officer authorized to issue such warrant or complaint or in accordance with the service provisions of K.S.A. 12-4207: 
a.  The City Clerk is authorized to issue and serve a warrant for violations of Chapter VI entitled "Health, Sanitation and Welfare", Chapter VII entitled "Sewer Regulations", Chapter XIII entitled "Streets, Sidewalks, fences, and Walls" and Chapter XV entitled "Zoning and Planning" for the City Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
b.  The duly appointed Animal Control Officer is authorized to issue and serve complaints and warrants for violations of Chapter II entitled "Animals and Fowls" for the City Ordinances of Fairway, Kansas. 
c.  The Public Officer of the City of Fairway, Kansas, is authorized to issue and serve warrants and complaints for violation of the provisions of Article 5 entitled "Unfit Structures" of Chapter VI entitled "Health, Sanitation and Welfare" of the City of Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
Section 5. Nothing herein shall be construed to modify or restrict the authority of the City Officers of Fairway, Kansas, conferred by the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY BY NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF THIS 5TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 1990. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 14 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE K.S.A. 14-205 RELATING TO THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE OFFICERS, APPOINTMENT OF NON-RESIDENTS; REMOVAL OF OFFICER, EFFECT, OATHS AND BONDS. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16, PASSED MARCH 11, 2002.) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 15 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM K.S.A. 12-4207 PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, RELATING TO SERVICE OF UNIFORM NOTICES TO APPEAR AND COMPLAINTS FILED WITH THE FAIRWAY MUNICIPAL COURT. 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from K.S.A. 12-4207 relating to service of the complaints filed in the Municipal Court, which applies to said City by no uniformly to all Cities, and provides substitute and additional provisions on this same subject as herein provided. 
Section 2. COMPLAINTS AND NOTICES TO APPEAR; SERVICE. Complaints and notices to appear shall be served upon the accused persons by delivering a copy to him or her personally, or by leaving it at the dwelling house of the accused person or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or by mailing it to the last known address of said person, A complaint and Notice to Appear may be served by a law enforcement officer, fire marshal or duly appointed Fairway City building official, code enforcement officer or zoning enforcement officer, animal control officer or public service officer, with the State and if mailed, shall be mailed by a Fairway law enforcement officer of the Clerk of the Municipal Court. No provisions of this Charter Ordinance shall be construed to empower fire marshals, building officials, code enforcement officers, zoning enforcement officers, animal control officers, public service officer, or court clerks with powers of arrest, search, detention, or other powers of law enforcement officers, except as provided by law. Upon service by mail, the law enforcement officer or court clerk shall execute a verification to be filed with a copy of the Notice to Appear. Said Verification shall be deemed sufficient if in substantially the following form: 
The undersigned hereby certifies that on the _____ day of ________, 19_____, a copy of the Complaint and Notice to Appear was mailed to ______________ at 

______________ 
Signature of Law Enforcement 
Officer or Court Clerk  
Section 3. PUBLICATION: This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper. 
Section 4. EFFECTIVE DATE: This Charter Ordinance shall take effect sixty (60) days after it's final publication. 
PASSED BY TWO-THIRDS ( 2/3 ) VOTE OF THE CITY COUNCIL THIS 5TH DAY OF JANUARY, 1998. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING CHARTER ORDINANCE NUMBER 14 EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-205 RELATING TO THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE OFFICERS, APPOINTMENT OF NON-RESIDENTS; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS, EFFECT, OATHS AND BONDS. 
(REPEALED BY CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17, PASSED APRIL 14, 2003.) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NUMBER 16 EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-205 RELATING TO THE QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS, APPOINTMENT OF NON-RESIDENTS; REMOVAL OF OFFICERS, EFFECT, OATHS AND BONDS. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
SECTION 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Kansas Constitution, hereby elects to and does amend existing Section 2 of Charter Ordinance No. 16, and add supplemental provisions on the same subject. 
SECTION 2. Section 2 of Charter Ordinance No. 16 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section 2.  All officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas, elected or appointed, shall be residents of the State of Kansas or Missouri. If any such officer shall change residence and no longer reside in either the State of Kansas or of Missouri, a vacancy shall be created in such office. The Clerk shall enter every appointment to office and the date thereof on the journal of the proceedings. The City Council may require all City officers, elected or appointed, to take and subscribe an oath and give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties. 
Section 3.  This charter ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper. 
SECTION 3. This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after its final publication, unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance, as provided in Article 12, Section 5, subdivision (c)(3) of the Kansas Constitution, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by the majority of the electors voting thereof. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY, NOT LESS THAN TWO-THIRDS OF THE MEMBERS-ELECT VOTING IN FAVOR THEREOF, THIS 14 TH DAY OF APRIL, 2003. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 18 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF THE WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT, K.S.A. 12-3101 THROUGH K.S.A. 12-3107, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ESTABLISHMENT, OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, IMPROVEMENT, AND REGULATION OF SEWER SYSTEMS, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO, STORM AND SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS AND FLOOD PROTECTION WORKS, AND TO THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING FOR THE PROPERTY AND IMPROVEMENTS NECESSARY FOR ALL ASPECTS OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THESE SYSTEMS. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Fairway, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, may exempt itself from the provisions of a statutory enactment that is not uniformly applicable to all cities, and may adopt substitute and additional provisions thereto; and 
WHEREAS, the Water Pollution Control Act, K.S.A. 12-3101 et seq., is applicable to the City, but not uniformly applicable to all cities; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS 
SECTION 1.  The City of Fairway, Kansas (the "City"), by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it Sections 12-3101, 12-3102, 12-3103, 12-3104, 12-3105, 12-3106, and 12-3107 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, which apply to the City, acting as a city of the second class, and which are not uniformly applicable to all cities, and the City hereby provides further substitute and additional provisions as set forth herein. 
SECTION 2.  Definitions. For the purpose of this Charter Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "Person" shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, political unit, or organization. 
B.  "Sewer," "Sewer System," and "Sewer Systems" shall mean surface water and storm sewers that exist at the time this Charter Ordinance is adopted or that are hereafter established and all appurtenances necessary in the maintenance, operation, regulation, and improvement of the same, including, but not limited to, pumping stations; enclosed storm sewers; outfall sewers; surface drains; street, curb and alley improvements associated with storm or surface water 
C.  improvements; natural and manmade wetlands; channels; ditches; rivers; streams; other storm water conveyances; detention and retention facilities; and other flood control facilities and works for the collection, conveyance, pumping, treating, controlling, managing and disposing of water carried pollutants or storm or surface water. 
D.  "Storm Water Customer" shall mean the owner of any real property served or benefited, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, by the function of any Sewer, Sewer System, or Sewer Systems, which captures, controls, conveys, discharges, manages, or regulates the flow or water quality of storm and surface waters within and from the City, or is served or benefited by the administration, activities and operation of the Storm Water Management Program of the City. This service or benefit shall include, but not be limited to, capturing, controlling, conveying, discharging, improving, managing and regulating the flow and water quality of storm and surface water from a property or from other properties situated at higher or lower elevations that might otherwise be subservient in right, and the administrative, planning, technical, regulatory and enforcement actions necessary to provide these services and/or benefits. 
E.  "Storm Water Management Program" shall mean all aspects of work necessary to perform and provide storm and surface water services in the City, including, but not limited to, administration, planning, engineering, operations, maintenance, best management practices, control measures, public education, citizen participation, regulation and enforcement, protection, and capital improvement of sewer systems and facilities, plus such non-operating expenses as reserves and bond debt service coverage associated with provision of the Storm Water Management Program. 
SECTION 3.  Sewer Systems; Powers of the City. The City shall have all powers necessary or convenient to plan, study, design, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, protect, manage, and regulate and enforce the proper use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems, including the powers that the City may, from time to time, establish by way of ordinances and/or resolutions adopted by the Governing Body of the City and including, but not by way of limitation, the following powers: 
A.  To impose service, user, impact, in lieu of construction, buy in and plan review and inspection fees, special assessments, system development and other charges and/or taxes on Storm Water Customers. The method of calculating and fixing these charges and/or taxes shall be as established by regular ordinances or by rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted; 
B.  To provide that charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph (A) above may be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk of Johnson County, Kansas, to be placed on the tax roll for collection, subject to the same penalties and to be collected in like manner as taxes; 
C.  To use the proceeds of the charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph above, together with any other available revenues, to pay the costs of the Storm Water Management Program, including, but not limited to, the costs to plan, study, design, engineer and operate the Storm Water Management Program and to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for, and regulate and enforce the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; 
D.  To use and to pledge the proceeds of the charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph (A) above, and any available taxes, to pay the principal and interest on general obligation or revenue bonds heretofore or hereafter issued; and pending the issuance of the general obligation bonds or revenue bonds to issue temporary financing for these purposes; 
E.  To contract with agencies of the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state, or other states, or with any person to jointly plan, study, design, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; regulate the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; and to plan, study, design, engineer, operate, administer, maintain, and manage the Storm Water Management Program; 
F.  To contract with agencies of the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state, or other states, or with any person for receiving and treating storm or surface water from outside the limits of the City; 
G.  To carry out the Storm Water Management Program, including, but not limited to, the power to plan, study, engineer, design, administer, manage, maintain, and operate the Storm Water Management Program and to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for and regulate the use of Sewer System or Sewer Systems within or outside the City; 
H.  To borrow money and to apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions, or any other form of financial assistance from the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, or any other public body for the purposes of this act, and the City may, when contracting with the federal government for financial assistance, include in any contract the conditions imposed pursuant to federal law as the City may deem reasonable and appropriate; 
I.  To, under the authority granted herein, establish a storm and surface water utility to be accounted for as a separate enterprise fund or special revenue fund of the City, as deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Governing Body of the City; and 
J.  To utilize any mechanism deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Governing Body of the City to deliver billings to Storm Water Customers for services. 
SECTION 4.  Rules and Regulations Authorized; Billing and Collection of Charges and/or Taxes. The City shall have the power by ordinance or resolution to adopt rules and regulations that shall relate to the management and operation of its Storm Water Management Program and Sewer System or Sewer Systems; the method of calculating and fixing the charges and/or taxes applicable to properties served by the Sewer System or Sewer Systems or activities associated therewith; security for the payment thereof, and methods and rules of collection; and the disposition of the revenue therefrom. In the event any person by the City's Sewer System or Sewer Systems shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay service fees fixed by the Governing Body of the City, as authorized by rules and regulations adopted under the authority of this section and if a billing system has been established for the delivery and collection of service fees, the City may take any action authorized by law to collect any fees that are due and owing. 
SECTION 5.  Issuance of Sewer System revenue bonds; requirements. 
A.  The Governing Body of the City shall have the power to use any unencumbered municipal revenues or to issue revenue bonds from time to time in its discretion, without an election, to finance the planning, altering, enlarging, extending, improving, constructing, and reconstructing of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems under this Charter Ordinance. These bonds shall be made payable, as to both principal and interest, solely from the income, proceeds, revenues, and funds of the City derived from or held in connection with its Sewer System or Sewer Systems; provided, however, that payment of these bonds, both as to principal and interest, may be further secured by a pledge of other unencumbered municipal revenues and of any loan, grant or contribution from the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state or other states or any person. 
B.  Bonds issued under this section shall constitute an indebtedness within the meaning of any constitution or statutory debt limitation or restriction, and shall not be subject to the provisions of any other law relating to the authorization, issuance or sale of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this Charter Ordinance are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and, together with interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempted from all taxes. 
C.  Bonds issued under this section shall be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the governing body and may be issued in one or more series and shall bear such date or dates, be payable on demand or mature at such time or times, bear interest at such rate or rates, not exceeding the maximum rate of interest prescribed by K.S.A. 10-1009, be in such denomination or denominations, be in such form, have such rank or priority, be executed in such manner, and be subject to such terms of redemption (with or without premium), be secured in such manner, and have such other characteristics as may be provided by such ordinance or resolution. 
D.  Pending the issuance of revenue bonds authorized by this Charter Ordinance, the Governing Body of the City may issue revenue anticipation bonds of the City for the purpose of providing interim financing for a project, these revenue anticipation bonds being payable from revenue bonds issued to provide permanent financing for activities authorized by this Charter Ordinance and the income, proceeds, revenues and funds of the City derived from or held in connection with its Sewer System or Sewer Systems. 
SECTION 6.  Powers Supplemental and Additional. The power granted herein with respect to the Storm Water Management Program, including but not limited to the power to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for, and regulate the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems and to issue bonds shall be supplemental to and not amendatory of the provisions of all other laws heretofore or hereafter in force and shall not be construed to limit the City's authority under the provisions of any other laws. 
SECTION 7.  Severability. In the event that any portion or section of this Charter Ordinance is determined to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not in any manner affect the remaining portions or sections of this ordinance or chapter which shall remain in full force and effect. 
SECTION 8.  Publication. This ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the office City newspaper. 
SECTION 9.  Effective Date; Filing. 
THIS IS A CHARTER ORDINANCE AND SHALL TAKE EFFECT 61 DAYS AFTER FINAL PUBLICATION UNLESS WITHIN 60 DAYS OF ITS FINAL PUBLICATION A PETITION SIGNED BY A NUMBER OF ELECTORS OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY EQUAL TO NOT LESS THAN TEN PERCENT OF THE NUMBER OF ELECTORS WHO VOTED AT THE LAST PRECEDING REGULAR CITY ELECTION SHALL BE FILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK OF FAIRWAY DEMANDING AN ELECTION ON THE CHARTER ORDINANCE, IN WHICH CASE THE CHARTER ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE ONLY IF AND WHEN APPROVED BY A MAJORITY OF THE ELECTORS VOTING THEREON. 
PASSED by the Governing Body of the City of Fairway, Kansas, with not less than two-thirds of members elect voting in favor thereof the 26 day of July 2004. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 19 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-4112, AND ANY AND ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO, OF THE CODE FOR MUNICIPAL COURTS, RELATING TO ASSESSMENT OF COSTS IN MUNICIPAL COURT AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
    WHEREAS, the City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, may exempt itself from the provisions of a statutory enactment that is not uniformly applicable to all cities, and may adopt substitute and additional provisions on the same subject; and 
    WHEREAS, K.S.A. 12-4112 et seq., is part of an entire statutory enactment, the Kansas Code of Procedure for Municipal Courts, that is applicable to the City, but not uniformly applicable to all cities; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS 
SECTION 1.  The City of Fairway, Kansas (the "City"), by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it Section 12-4112 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, which apply to the City, acting as a city of the second class, and which are not uniformly applicable to all cities, and the City hereby provides further substitute and additional provisions as set forth herein. 
SECTION 2.  The governing body, as a revenue producing measure, shall provide by ordinance for the assessment of a portion of the costs and fees in municipal court. 
SECTION 3.  Publication. This ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the office City newspaper. 
SECTION 4.  Effective Date; Filing. 
THIS IS A CHARTER ORDINANCE AND SHALL TAKE EFFECT 61 DAYS AFTER FINAL PUBLICATION UNLESS WITHIN 60 DAYS OF ITS FINAL PUBLICATION A PETITION SIGNED BY A NUMBER OF ELECTORS OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY EQUAL TO NOT LESS THAN TEN PERCENT OF THE NUMBER OF ELECTORS WHO VOTED AT THE LAST PRECEDING REGULAR CITY ELECTION SHALL BE FILED IN THE OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK OF FAIRWAY DEMANDING AN ELECTION ON THE CHARTER ORDINANCE, IN WHICH CASE THE CHARTER ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE ONLY IF AND WHEN APPROVED BY A MAJORITY OF THE ELECTORS VOTING THEREON. 
PASSED by the Governing Body of the City of Fairway, Kansas, with not less than two-thirds of the members elect voting in favor thereof the 13th day of July 2009. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 20 
    A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10 EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM K.S.A. 12-4112 RELATING TO THE ASSESSMENT OF COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE MUNICIPAL COURT. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
SECTION 1:  The City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Kansas Constitution, hereby elects to amend existing Section 3 of Charter Ordinance No. 10 relating to the assessment of costs associated with the Municipal Court, and add supplemental provisions on the same subject. 
SECTION 2:  That Section 3 of Charter Ordinance No. 10 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
1.  The following schedule of costs, assessments and fees, are established for the administration of justice in the Municipal Court of Fairway, Kansas: 
(a)  Costs may be assessed for each complaint issued for the violation of any city ordinance except in those cases where the defendant is found not guilty. Each ordinance violation shall be considered a separate complaint for purposes of assessing court costs; 
(b)  The court may assess a fee for each warrant issued to arrest a defendant who has failed to appear in court or failed to satisfy the orders of the court; 
(c)  A monitoring fee may be assessed against a defendant in any case in which the Municipal Court Judge orders said defendant placed on probation or parole; 
(d)  A monitoring fee may be assessed against a defendant in any case in which the defendant is placed on diversion or given a suspended sentence; 
(e)  A fee may be assessed for the operation of the victim assistance program or when restitution is ordered by the court; 
(f)  A fee may be assessed for processing a motion for expungement or motion to set aside judgment or for entry of a nunc pro tunc order; 
(g)  A fee may be assessed against the defendant upon conviction in each case for which the Municipal Court Judge appoints counsel. All complaints against an individual arising from the same incident shall be treated as one case in determining this assessment; 
(h)  A fee may be assessed against persons convicted of or diverted from ordinance violations; 
(i)  A fee may be assessed for fingerprinting persons as required by statute; 
(j)  A daily incarceration fee may be assessed against a defendant for each day of incarceration pursuant to an order of the Municipal Court Judge; 
(k)  A fee may be assessed for the processing of returned checks; 
(l)  Costs, assessments and fees shall be assessed as may be required by state statutes; 
(m)  A fee may be assessed in any case where the defendant has been charged with violation of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act (K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto and the complaint is dismissed after the defendant produces evidence of financial security (insurance coverage) for the motor vehicle operated prior to the court date. 
2.  The specific amount of the above-mentioned court costs, assessments and fees shall be established by the Judge of the Municipal Court. Such costs, assessments and fees may be revised as necessary by the court. Copies of the current court costs, assessments and fees shall be on file in the offices of the City Clerk and the Municipal Court Clerk. 
3.  Such costs, assessments and fees may be assessed as part of a judgment, diversion agreement, or order and, if assessed, shall be collected by the Municipal Court Clerk. 
4.  The costs, assessments and fees assessed pursuant to this section shall be separate from and in addition to any other costs, assessments, fees, fines, restitution, penalties or judgments imposed. 
SECTION 3:  That existing Section 3 of Charter Ordinance No. 10 is hereby repealed. 
SECTION 4:  This is a Charter Ordinance and shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
SECTION 5:  This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after the final publication unless within sixty (60) days of its final publication a petition signed by a number of electors of the City of Fairway equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the number of electors who voted at the last preceding regular City election shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk of Fairway demanding an election on the Charter Ordinance, in which case the Charter Ordinance shall become effective only if and when approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY , with not less than two-thirds of the members elect voting in favor thereof, this 12 day of March 2007. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 21 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 25-2108a RELATING TO PRIMARY ELECTIONS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
SECTION 1.  The City of Fairway by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 25-2108a which applies to this city, but is part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
SECTION 2.  There shall be a primary election of city officers on the Tuesday preceding by five weeks the first Tuesday in April of every year that the City of Fairway has a city election, except as otherwise provided in Section 3. 
SECTION 3.  No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding such primary one or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than two candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for such office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot. Two candidates for each position shall advance to the general election. 
SECTION 4.  This charter ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
SECTION 5.  This charter ordinance shall take effect 61 days after final publication, unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of Kansas, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by the majority of the electors voting thereon. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY , not less than two-thirds of the members-elect voting in favor thereof, the 14 day of September, 2009. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 22 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1808 AND K.S.A. 12-1809 RELATING TO THE REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: FAIRWAY CODE CHARTER ORDINANCES 
SECTION 1.  The City of Fairway by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. Sections 12-1808 and 12-1809, which apply to this city, but are part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
SECTION 2.  It shall be the duty of the owner of the abutting property to keep the sidewalk in repair; provided, however, that the City may construct and make any and all repairs and perform any maintenance necessary to sidewalks within the City at the City's expense after providing notice to the owner of the abutting property or its agent, if known, five (5) days prior to constructing the sidewalks, making any repairs, or performing any maintenance thereto. Repairs may be made by force account or by contract and an account of the cost thereof shall be kept and reported to the governing body. 
The city may by ordinance levy a special assessment against the lot or piece of land abutting on the sidewalk so repaired for the cost of repairs, and if the abutting property owner does not pay the assessment within thirty days, upon the city clerk mailing to the owner or his or her agent, if known, a printed or written notice of the amount of such repairs, the full amount shall be certified by the city clerk to the county clerk to be put on the tax rolls for collection like other taxes. The temporary financing of repairs may be borne by the city out of the fund for maintaining streets or out of the general fund or general improvement fund. 
Nothing in this Section shall preclude the use of the procedure provided by K.S.A. Chapter 12, Article 6a or any statute relating to the construction, repair or reconstruction of sidewalks. 
SECTION 3.  Section 2 of this charter ordinance shall be codified in Chapter 13, Article 2, by separate ordinance. 
SECTION 4.  This charter ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
SECTION 5.  This charter ordinance shall take effect 61 days after final publication, unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of Kansas, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by the majority of the electors voting thereon. 
PASSED BY THE GOVERNING BODY , not less than two-thirds of the members-elect voting in favor thereof, the 13 day of May, 2013. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 23 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF L. 2015, CHAPTER 88, SECTION 71, RELATING TO THE FILLING OF GOVERNING BODY VACANCIES. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it L. 2015, Chapter 88, Section 71, relating to the filling of governing body vacancies, which enactment applies to this city, but does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. This charter ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
Section 3. This charter ordinance shall take effect 61 days after final publication unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by the majority of the electors thereon. 
    Passed by the Governing Body, not less than two-thirds of the members-elect voting in favor thereof, this 12th day of April, 2016. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 24 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-103, K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-205, K.S.A. 19-2646, AND K.S.A. 25-2108a, RELATING TO THE CREATION OF WARDS, THE ELECTION OF OFFICERS, THEIR TERMS OF OFFICE, TRANSITIONS TO NOVEMBER ELECTIONS, THE APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, AND NOMINATION PETITIONS; AND, PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT; AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7, CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17, AND CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 21. 
Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Kansas Constitution, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 14-103, K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-205, K.S.A. 19-2646, and K.S.A. 25-2108a, that apply to this city, but are parts of enactments which do not apply uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. The City of Fairway shall be divided into four wards which shall be established by ordinance. The wards shall be as equal in population as possible and the territory of each ward shall be contiguous and compact. No ordinance redefining wards shall become effective less than 30 days prior to the next regular city election. 
Section 3. The Governing Body of the City of Fairway shall consist of a Mayor and eight Council Members, two Council Members from each ward. The Mayor and Council Members shall have terms of four years and until successors are elected and qualified. 
Section 4. The terms of Governing Body positions expiring in April 2017, shall be extended till and expire on the second Monday in January of 2018, when the city officials elected in the November 2017 general election take office. The terms of Governing Body positions expiring in April 2019, shall be extended till and expire on the second Monday in January of 2020, when the city officials elected in the November 2019 general election take office. 
Section 5. A general election of city officers shall take place on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November 2017. Succeeding elections shall be held every two years on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November for all Governing Body positions having a term that expires on the second Monday of the immediately following January. 
Section 6. The Mayor shall, by and with the consent of the City Council, appoint a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, a Chief of Police, a City Clerk, a City Attorney, and may appoint a City Engineer, police officers and any other officers deemed necessary. Officers appointed and confirmed shall hold an initial term of office not to exceed one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The council shall by ordinance specify the duties and compensation of the office holders and by ordinance may abolish any office created by the council whenever deemed expedient. Appointed officers may be removed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council or upon a motion by a member of the City Council that is adopted by at least a 2/3 majority vote of the City Council. 
Section 7. All elected officers shall be qualified electors of the City of Fairway. All appointed officers shall be residents of either the State of Kansas or the State of Missouri and of Douglas County, Kansas, Franklin County, Kansas, or one of the nine counties served by the Mid-America Regional Council, provided that the City Attorney must be admitted to practice law in the State of Kansas and be in good standing, and the City Engineer must hold an active Kansas Professional Engineering license. If any officer shall change residence and no longer meets the residency or professional requirements set forth above, a vacancy shall be created in such office. The Clerk shall enter every appointment to office and the date thereof on the journal of the proceedings. The City Council may require all City officers, elected or appointed, to take and subscribe an oath and give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties. 
Section 8. No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding such primary one or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than two candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for such office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot. In the event that there are more than two candidates for one office, their names shall appear on the primary election ballots and the two candidates receiving the most votes shall advance to the general election. 
Section 9. In accordance with K.S.A. 25-205, and amendments thereto, any person may become a candidate for city office elected at large by having filed on their behalf, a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy, accompanied by any fee required by law. The nomination petition must be signed by 3% of the qualified electors of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
Section 10. All elections for the City of Fairway, Kansas shall be nonpartisan. 
Section 11. Charter Ordinance No. 7, Charter Ordinance No. 17, and Charter Ordinance No. 21 are hereby repealed. 
Section 12. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
Section 13. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect 61 days after the final publication unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed, requiring a referendum to be held on the ordinance as provided by Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this Charter Ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the majority of electors voting thereon. 
    Passed by the Governing Body, not less than two-thirds of the members elect voting in favor thereof, this 12th day of September, 2016. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 25 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-570 AND K.S.A. 14-571 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND THE ISSUANCE OF BONDS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PAYING FOR SAID IMPROVEMENTS. 
    WHEREAS, Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas (the "Act"), provides that cities may exercise certain home rule powers, including passing charter ordinances which exempt such cities from non-uniform enactments of the Kansas Legislature; and 
    WHEREAS, the City of Fairway, Kansas (the "City") is a city, as defined in the Act, duly created and organized, under the laws of the State of Kansas; and 
    WHEREAS, K.S.A. 14-570 and K.S.A. 14-571 are part of an enactment of the Kansas Legislature (K.S.A. 14-570 et seq.) relating to public improvements and the issuance of bonds for such purposes, which enactment is applicable to the City, but is not uniformly applicable to all cities within the State of Kansas; and 
    WHEREAS, the governing body of the City (the "Governing Body") desires, by charter ordinance, to exempt the City from the provisions of K.S.A. 14-570 and K.S.A. 14-571, and to provide substitute and additional provisions therefor. 
    NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS: 
    Section 1.   Exemption . The City, by virtue of the powers vested in it by the Act, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 14-570 and K.S.A. 14-571, and shall be governed by the following substitute and additional provisions contained herein. 
    Section 2.   Master Plan for Public Improvements. Whenever the City Administrator or their designee has filed with the Governing Body a master capital improvements plan (the "Plan") for the physical development of the City and City facilities, including but not limited to the acquisition of land necessary therefore, the acquisition of equipment, vehicles or other personal property to be used in relation thereto, or the assumption and payment of benefit district indebtedness previously created for public improvements, and which Plan may require a number of years to execute, and such Plan is approved by the Governing Body, the City is hereby authorized to issue its general obligation bonds (the "Bonds") in an amount sufficient to carry out such Plan and associated costs. 
    Section 3.   Procedure for Issuance of Bonds. Before any Bonds are authorized or issued pursuant to this Charter Ordinance, the City shall adopt a resolution specifying the amount of such Bonds and the purpose of the issuance thereof. 
    Section 4.   Severability. If any provision or section of this Charter Ordinance is deemed or ruled unconstitutional or otherwise illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this Charter Ordinance. In such instance, this Charter Ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provision had not been contained herein. 
    Section 5.   Effective Date. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper, and shall take effect sixty (60) days after final publication, unless a petition signed by a number of electors of the City equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the number of electors who voted at the last preceding regular City election shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk demanding that this Charter Ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors, in which event this Charter Ordinance shall take effect when approved by a majority of the electors voting at an election held for such purpose. 
    PASSED with at least a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the entire governing body of the City of Fairway, Kansas, on October 10, 2016 and APPROVED AND SIGNED by the Mayor. 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF FAIRWAY, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 14-103, K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-205, K.S.A. 19-2646, K.S.A. 25-2108a, AND K.S.A. 25-2110a, RELATING TO THE CREATION OF WARDS, THE ELECTION OF OFFICERS, THEIR TERMS OF OFFICE, TRANSITIONS TO NOVEMBER ELECTIONS, THE APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS, AND NOMINATION PETITIONS; AND, PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT; AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 24. 
    Section 1. The City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Kansas Constitution, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 14-103, K.S.A. 14-201, K.S.A. 14-205, K.S.A. 19-2646, K.S.A. 25-2108a, and, K.S.A. 2110a that apply to this city, but are parts of enactments that do not apply uniformly to all cities. 
    Section 2. The City of Fairway shall be divided into four wards that shall be established by ordinance. The wards shall be as equal in population as possible and the territory of each ward shall be contiguous and compact. No ordinance redefining wards shall become effective less than 30 days prior to the next regular city election. 
    Section 3. The Governing Body of the City of Fairway shall consist of a Mayor and eight Council Members, two Council Members from each ward. The Mayor and Council Members shall have terms of four years and until successors are elected and qualified. 
    Section 4. The terms of Governing Body positions expiring in April 2019, shall be extended till and expire on the second Monday in January of 2020, when the city officials elected in the November 2019 general election take office. 
    Section 5. Elections shall be held every two years on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November in that year for all Governing Body positions having a term that expires on the second Monday of the immediately following January. 
    Section 6. The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint office holders for such offices as the City Council has established by ordinance, specifying the duties of the office holder. Officers appointed and confirmed shall hold the office for an initial term not to exceed one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The council by ordinance may abolish any office created by the council whenever deemed expedient. Appointed officers may be removed by the Mayor or upon a motion by a member of the City Council that is adopted by at least a 2/3 majority vote of the City Council. Appointed officers removed by the Mayor may request that their removal be considered by the City Council in which case the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership of the City Council shall be required to retain the appointed officer. Such requests must be made to the City Administrator within the 30 day period following removal and the City Council shall act upon the request within 31 days following its receipt. 
    Section 7. All elected officers shall be qualified electors of the City of Fairway. All appointed officers shall be residents of Johnson, Wyandotte, Leavenworth, Miami, Douglas, or Franklin County in the State of Kansas; or Jackson, Clay, Platte, or Cass County in the State of Missouri; provided that the City Attorney must be admitted to practice law in the State of Kansas and be in good standing, and the City Engineer must hold an active Kansas Professional Engineering license. If any officer shall change residence and no longer meets the residency or professional requirements set forth above, a vacancy shall be created in that office. The Clerk shall enter every appointment to office and the date thereof on the journal of the proceedings. The City Council may require all City officers, elected or appointed, to take and subscribe an oath and give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties. 
    Section 8. No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding the primary one or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than two candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for that office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for that office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot. In the event that there are more than two candidates for one office, their names shall appear on the primary election ballots and the two candidates receiving the most votes shall advance to the general election. 
    Section 9. Any person may become a candidate for city office elected at large by having filed on their behalf, in accordance with K.S.A. 25-205, and amendments thereto, a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy, accompanied by any fee required by law. The nomination petition must be signed by 3% of the qualified electors of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
    Section 10. Any person may become a candidate for city office elected by ward by having filed on their behalf, in accordance with K.S.A. 25-205, and amendments thereto, a nomination petition or a declaration of candidacy, accompanied by any fee required by law. The nomination petition must be signed by at least 3% of the qualified electors of the ward. 
    Section 11. All elections for the City of Fairway, Kansas shall be nonpartisan. 
    Section 12. Charter Ordinance No. 24 is hereby repealed. 
    Section 13. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
    Section 14. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect 61 days after the final publication unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed, requiring a referendum to be held on the ordinance as provided by Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this Charter Ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the majority of electors voting thereon. 
    Passed by the Governing Body, not less than two-thirds of the members elect voting in favor thereof, this 13th day of November, 2018. 
Appendix B - CHARTER ORDINANCE COMPILATIONS 

Sec. 1. - Governing body and appointment of officers. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 112, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 1969 Supp. 14-201 (Sections 7, 8, and 32, Chapter 274, Laws of Kansas, 1968) and the last paragraph of K.S.A. 1969 Supp 14-103 (Section 31, Chapter 274, Laws of Kansas, 1968) which applies to said City but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities and provides substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
(b)  There shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of each odd-numbered year one councilman from each of the four wards in the City as hereinafter provided. There shall be an elected Mayor every four years beginning on the first Tuesday in April, 1969. The Mayor shall appoint by and with the consent of the Council the City Treasurer, a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, a City Marshal-Chief of Police, City Clerk, City Attorney, and may appoint policeman and such other officers as they may deem necessary. Officers so appointed and confirmed shall hold their offices for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The Council shall by ordinance specify their duties and compensation and by ordinance may abolish any office created by them whenever they may deem it expedient. The Council may retain a licensed professional engineer to act in the capacity of the City Engineer for specifically defined duties and provide for reasonable compensation for the services rendered. 
(c)  The Mayor and Councilmen shall hold their offices for a term of four years. Councilmen elected in April of 1967 shall have terms expiring in 1969. Councilmen elected in April of 1968 shall have terms expiring in 1971, except for the one councilman in Ward 2 who was elected only for an unexpired term for one year until the April 1969 election. 
(Charter Ord. No. 7, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 2. - Primary elections. 
(a)  The City of Fairway by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 25-2108a which applies to this city, but is part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
(b)  There shall be a primary election of city officers on the Tuesday preceding by five weeks the first Tuesday in April of every year that the City of Fairway has a city election, except as otherwise provided in Section 3. 
(c)  No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding such primary one or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than two candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for such office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot. Two candidates for each position shall advance to the general election. 
(Charter Ord. No. 21, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 3. - Qualifications of officers, appointment of non-residents; removal of officers, effect, oaths and bonds. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Kansas Constitution, hereby elects to and does amend existing Section 2 of Charter Ordinance No. 16, and add supplemental provisions on the same subject. 
(b)  Section 2 of Charter Ordinance No. 16 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
    Section 2. All officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas, elected or appointed, shall be residents of the State of Kansas or Missouri. If any such officer shall change residence and no longer reside in either the State of Kansas or of Missouri, a vacancy shall be created in such office. The Clerk shall enter every appointment to office and the date thereof on the journal of the proceedings. The City Council may require all City officers, elected or appointed, to take and subscribe an oath and give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties. 
(Charter Ord. No. 17, § 1, 2) 
Sec. 4. - Issuance of warrants and service of notices to appear. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207, which apply to said City, but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities and provides substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
(b)  In addition to the authority of the City Attorney, Municipal Judge and law enforcement officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas, as specifically provided by K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207, authority to issue warrants and serve notices to appear before the Municipal Court of the City of Fairway, Kansas is hereby extended to the following Officers of the City of Fairway, Kansas subject to the limitations herein provided. 
(c)  The Prosecuting Attorney or any Prosecuting Attorney Pro Tem of the City of Fairway, Kansas, is hereby granted the same authority to issue or refuse to issue warrants as is conferred upon the City Attorney by the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4203. 
(d)  The following officers are hereby authorized to issue a complaint or warrant for the violation of the City Ordinances as hereinafter provided, to be served upon the accused person by the officer authorized to issue such warrant or complaint or in accordance with the service provisions of K.S.A. 12-4207: 
(1)  The City Clerk is authorized to issue and serve a warrant for violations of Chapter 6 entitled "Health and Sanitation," Chapter 9 entitled "Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Places," Chapter 12 entitled "Utilities and Pollution Control" and Chapter 15 entitled "Zoning" for the City Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas. 
(2)  The duly appointed Animal Control Officer is authorized to issue and serve complaints and warrants for violations of Chapter 4 entitled "Animals" for the City Ordinances of Fairway, Kansas. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be construed to modify or restrict the authority of the City Officers of Fairway, Kansas, conferred by the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4203 and K.S.A. 12-4207. 
(Charter Ord. No. 13, § 1-5) 
Sec. 5. - Manner of service of complaints and of notices to appear. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to make inapplicable to it and exempts itself from K.S.A. 12-4207 relating to service of the complaints filed in the Municipal Court, which applies to said City by no uniformly to all Cities, and provides substitute and additional provisions on this same subject as herein provided. 
(b)  Complaints and notices to appear; service. Complaints and notices to appear shall be served upon the accused persons by delivering a copy to him or her personally, or by leaving it at the dwelling house of the accused person or usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein, or by mailing it to the last known address of said person, A complaint and Notice to Appear may be served by a law enforcement officer, fire marshal or duly appointed Fairway City building official, code enforcement officer or zoning enforcement officer, animal control officer or public service officer, with the State and if mailed, shall be mailed by a Fairway law enforcement officer of the Clerk of the Municipal Court. No provisions of this Charter Ordinance shall be construed to empower fire marshals, building officials, code enforcement officers, zoning enforcement officers, animal control officers, public service officer, or court clerks with powers of arrest, search, detention, or other powers of law enforcement officers, except as provided by law. Upon service by mail, the law enforcement officer or court clerk shall execute a verification to be filed with a copy of the Notice to Appear. Said Verification shall be deemed sufficient if in substantially the following form: 
The undersigned hereby certifies that on the _____ day of _____, 19___, a copy of the Complaint and Notice to Appear was mailed to ___________ ___________ at ___________ 
___________;b1; Signature of Law Enforcement 
Officer or Court Clerk 
(Charter Ord. No. 15, § 1, 2) 
Sec. 6. - Court costs. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, under the authority of Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 12-4112, which applies to said City, but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities, and provide substitute and additional provisions on the same subject. 
(b)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, does hereby repeal Section 8-111 of Article 1 of Chapter VIII of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas, prohibiting the assessment of Court costs. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating the Ordinances of the City of Fairway, Kansas, by the Municipal Judge or Judge Pro Tempore may be assessed Court costs, including but not limited to Court Reporter or stenographic charges, fees and mileage of witnesses, expenses incurred in the service of process, costs of publication of notices, and such other charges as are authorized by the Statutes of the State of Kansas. 
(1)  The following schedule of costs, assessments and fees, are established for the administration of justice in the Municipal Court of Fairway, Kansas: 
a.  Costs may be assessed for each complaint issued for the violation of any city ordinance except in those cases where the defendant is found not guilty. Each ordinance violation shall be considered a separate complaint for purposes of assessing court costs; 
b.  The court may assess a fee for each warrant issued to arrest a defendant who has failed to appear in court or failed to satisfy the orders of the court; 
c.  A monitoring fee may be assessed against a defendant in any case in which the Municipal Court Judge orders said defendant placed on probation or parole; 
d.  A monitoring fee may be assessed against a defendant in any case in which the defendant is placed on diversion or given a suspended sentence; 
e.  A fee may be assessed for the operation of the victim assistance program or when restitution is ordered by the court; 
f.  A fee may be assessed for processing a motion for expungement or motion to set aside judgment or for entry of a nunc pro tunc order; 
g.  A fee may be assessed against the defendant upon conviction in each case for which the Municipal Court Judge appoints counsel. All complaints against an individual arising from the same incident shall be treated as one case in determining this assessment; 
h.  A fee may be assessed against persons convicted of or diverted from ordinance violations; 
i.  A fee may be assessed for fingerprinting persons as required by statute; 
j.  A daily incarceration fee may be assessed against a defendant for each day of incarceration pursuant to an order of the Municipal Court Judge; 
k.  A fee may be assessed for the processing of returned checks; 
l.  Costs, assessments and fees shall be assessed as may be required by state statutes; 
m.  A fee may be assessed in any case where the defendant has been charged with violation of the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act (K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto and the complaint is dismissed after the defendant produces evidence of financial security (insurance coverage) for the motor vehicle operated prior to the court date. 
(2)  The specific amount of the above-mentioned court costs, assessments and fees shall be established by the Judge of the Municipal Court. Such costs, assessments and fees may be revised as necessary by the court. Copies of the current court costs, assessments and fees shall be on file in the offices of the City Clerk and the Municipal Court Clerk. 
(3)  Such costs, assessments and fees may be assessed as part of a judgment, diversion agreement, or order and, if assessed, shall be collected by the Municipal Court Clerk. 
(4)  The costs, assessments and fees assessed pursuant to this section shall be separate from and in addition to any other costs, assessments, fees, fines, restitution, penalties or judgments imposed. 
(Charter Ord. No. 10, §§ 1-3; Charter Ord. No. 20, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 7. - Collection of recyclable products and for the assessment of service fees. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, a City of the Second Class, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby provides for the collection of recyclable products and for the assessment of fees. 
(b)  Collection of Recyclable Products. The City shall provide for and regulate the collection of recyclable products from all residences in the City. The City may provide for the collection service contracting with a person, firm, corporation, Homes Association, County, another City, or any combination thereof for the benefit of the entire City, or portions thereof, as deemed to be in t the best interest of the City and its inhabitants. 
(c)  Rules and Regulations. Rules and regulations pertaining to collecting and transporting recyclable products in the City shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person engaging in the business of collecting or transporting recyclable products within the corporate limits of the City shall first obtain a permit therefor from the City. Each applicant for any such permit shall state in his/her application the following: 
a.  The characteristics of the recyclable products to be collected and transported; 
b.  The number of recyclable product vehicles and equipment to be operated thereunder; 
c.  The precise location or locations of recyclable product collection; 
d.  The boundaries of the collection area; 
e.  The dates and/or frequency of the collection; 
f.  The amount of the proposed fee to be charged. 
(2)  Before a permit shall be issued by the City, the applicant must furnish the City a certificate of insurance showing a minimum public liability insurance coverage of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person injured or killed, in amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in the event of injury or death of two or more persons in any single accident and in an amount of not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for damage to property. In the event the insurance is canceled during the term of the permit, the insurance carrier shall notify the City in writing no less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. The certificate of insurance shall provide that the insurance company agrees to so notify the City, and further, the insurance policy shall contain a written provision that shall place the responsibility for the ten (10) day written notice upon the company issuing the policy in order that coverage be considered proper. 
(3)  The Governing Body may define and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and regulations governing recyclable product management system, which rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk of the City. 
(d)  Assessment and Collection of Fees. The City shall assess collection fee for each dwelling unit as hereinbefore provided and City Clerk shall at the time of certifying City Taxes, certify the amount thereof and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the County against the real property. 
(Charter Ord. No. 12, §§ 1-4) 
Sec. 8. - Tax levy. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas, a City of the Second Class, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from, and make inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 79-1952, and provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this ordinance. K.S.A. 79-1952 is applicable to this City but is not applicable uniformly to all cities of the second class, and the legislature has not established classes of cities for the purpose of imposing tax limitations and prohibitions under said constitutional provisions. 
(b)  The Governing Body of the City of Fairway, Kansas is hereby authorized and empowered to levy taxes in each year on each dollar of assessed tangible valuation of said City for the following City purposes; provided that the City purposes specifically authorized by other statutes are not excluded because they are not enumerated herein: 
General operating fund (which shall include the following activities): General government, Police Department, Fire Department; health and sanitation, including refuse collection and disposal; highways (all public traveled ways, including bridges); storm sewer maintenance; parks; street lighting; restrooms; hydrant rental; forestry; military memorial maintenance; civil defense; recreation; flood control and community buildings. 
Said Governing Body may levy an amount necessary to meet the requirements of its adopted budget. 
(Charter Ord. No. 6, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 9. - Sewers and stormwater drainage systems. 
(a)  The City of Fairway, Kansas (the "City"), by virtue of the powers vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself and make inapplicable to it Sections 12-3101, 12-3102, 12-3103, 12-3104, 12-3105, 12-3106, and 12-3107 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, which apply to the City, acting as a city of the second class, and which are not uniformly applicable to all cities, and the City hereby provides further substitute and additional provisions as set forth herein. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Charter Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  "Person" shall mean any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, political unit, or organization. 
(2)  "Sewer," "Sewer System," and "Sewer Systems" shall mean surface water and storm sewers that exist at the time this Charter Ordinance is adopted or that are hereafter established and all appurtenances necessary in the maintenance, operation, regulation, and improvement of the same, including, but not limited to, pumping stations; enclosed storm sewers; outfall sewers; surface drains; street, curb and alley improvements associated with storm or surface water 
(3)  improvements; natural and manmade wetlands; channels; ditches; rivers; streams; other storm water conveyances; detention and retention facilities; and other flood control facilities and works for the collection, conveyance, pumping, treating, controlling, managing and disposing of water carried pollutants or storm or surface water. 
(4)  "Storm Water Customer" shall mean the owner of any real property served or benefited, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, by the function of any Sewer, Sewer System, or Sewer Systems, which captures, controls, conveys, discharges, manages, or regulates the flow or water quality of storm and surface waters within and from the City, or is served or benefited by the administration, activities and operation of the Storm Water Management Program of the City. This service or benefit shall include, but not be limited to, capturing, controlling, conveying, discharging, improving, managing and regulating the flow and water quality of storm and surface water from a property or from other properties situated at higher or lower elevations that might otherwise be subservient in right, and the administrative, planning, technical, regulatory and enforcement actions necessary to provide these services and/or benefits. 
(5)  "Storm Water Management Program" shall mean all aspects of work necessary to perform and provide storm and surface water services in the City, including, but not limited to, administration, planning, engineering, operations, maintenance, best management practices, control measures, public education, citizen participation, regulation and enforcement, protection, and capital improvement of sewer systems and facilities, plus such non-operating expenses as reserves and bond debt service coverage associated with provision of the Storm Water Management Program. 
(c)  Sewer Systems; Powers of the City. The City shall have all powers necessary or convenient to plan, study, design, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, protect, manage, and regulate and enforce the proper use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems, including the powers that the City may, from time to time, establish by way of ordinances and/or resolutions adopted by the Governing Body of the City and including, but not by way of limitation, the following powers: 
(1)  To impose service, user, impact, in lieu of construction, buy in and plan review and inspection fees, special assessments, system development and other charges and/or taxes on Storm Water Customers. The method of calculating and fixing these charges and/or taxes shall be as established by regular ordinances or by rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted; 
(2)  To provide that charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph (A) above may be certified by the City Clerk to the County Clerk of Johnson County, Kansas, to be placed on the tax roll for collection, subject to the same penalties and to be collected in like manner as taxes; 
(3)  To use the proceeds of the charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph above, together with any other available revenues, to pay the costs of the Storm Water Management Program, including, but not limited to, the costs to plan, study, design, engineer and operate the Storm Water Management Program and to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for, and regulate and enforce the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; 
(4)  To use and to pledge the proceeds of the charges and/or taxes authorized in subparagraph (A) above, and any available taxes, to pay the principal and interest on general obligation or revenue bonds heretofore or hereafter issued; and pending the issuance of the general obligation bonds or revenue bonds to issue temporary financing for these purposes; 
(5)  To contract with agencies of the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state, or other states, or with any person to jointly plan, study, design, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; regulate the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems; and to plan, study, design, engineer, operate, administer, maintain, and manage the Storm Water Management Program; 
(6)  To contract with agencies of the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state, or other states, or with any person for receiving and treating storm or surface water from outside the limits of the City; 
(7)  To carry out the Storm Water Management Program, including, but not limited to, the power to plan, study, engineer, design, administer, manage, maintain, and operate the Storm Water Management Program and to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for and regulate the use of Sewer System or Sewer Systems within or outside the City; 
(8)  To borrow money and to apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions, or any other form of financial assistance from the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, or any other public body for the purposes of this act, and the City may, when contracting with the federal government for financial assistance, include in any contract the conditions imposed pursuant to federal law as the City may deem reasonable and appropriate; 
(9)  To, under the authority granted herein, establish a storm and surface water utility to be accounted for as a separate enterprise fund or special revenue fund of the City, as deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Governing Body of the City; and 
(10)  To utilize any mechanism deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Governing Body of the City to deliver billings to Storm Water Customers for services. 
(d)  Rules and Regulations Authorized; Billing and Collection of Charges and/or Taxes. The City shall have the power by ordinance or resolution to adopt rules and regulations that shall relate to the management and operation of its Storm Water Management Program and Sewer System or Sewer Systems; the method of calculating and fixing the charges and/or taxes applicable to properties served by the Sewer System or Sewer Systems or activities associated therewith; security for the payment thereof, and methods and rules of collection; and the disposition of the revenue therefrom. In the event any person by the City's Sewer System or Sewer Systems shall neglect, fail or refuse to pay service fees fixed by the Governing Body of the City, as authorized by rules and regulations adopted under the authority of this section and if a billing system has been established for the delivery and collection of service fees, the City may take any action authorized by law to collect any fees that are due and owing. 
(e)  Issuance of Sewer System revenue bonds; requirements. 
(1)  The Governing Body of the City shall have the power to use any unencumbered municipal revenues or to issue revenue bonds from time to time in its discretion, without an election, to finance the planning, altering, enlarging, extending, improving, constructing, and reconstructing of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems under this Charter Ordinance. These bonds shall be made payable, as to both principal and interest, solely from the income, proceeds, revenues, and funds of the City derived from or held in connection with its Sewer System or Sewer Systems; provided, however, that payment of these bonds, both as to principal and interest, may be further secured by a pledge of other unencumbered municipal revenues and of any loan, grant or contribution from the federal government, the State of Kansas, other states, counties, cities, drainage districts, public bodies of the state or other states or any person. 
(2)  Bonds issued under this section shall constitute an indebtedness within the meaning of any constitution or statutory debt limitation or restriction, and shall not be subject to the provisions of any other law relating to the authorization, issuance or sale of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this Charter Ordinance are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and, together with interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempted from all taxes. 
(3)  Bonds issued under this section shall be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the governing body and may be issued in one or more series and shall bear such date or dates, be payable on demand or mature at such time or times, bear interest at such rate or rates, not exceeding the maximum rate of interest prescribed by K.S.A. 10-1009, be in such denomination or denominations, be in such form, have such rank or priority, be executed in such manner, and be subject to such terms of redemption (with or without premium), be secured in such manner, and have such other characteristics as may be provided by such ordinance or resolution. 
(4)  Pending the issuance of revenue bonds authorized by this Charter Ordinance, the Governing Body of the City may issue revenue anticipation bonds of the City for the purpose of providing interim financing for a project, these revenue anticipation bonds being payable from revenue bonds issued to provide permanent financing for activities authorized by this Charter Ordinance and the income, proceeds, revenues and funds of the City derived from or held in connection with its Sewer System or Sewer Systems. 
(f)  Powers Supplemental and Additional. The power granted herein with respect to the Storm Water Management Program, including but not limited to the power to plan, study, design, engineer, alter, enlarge, extend, improve, construct, reconstruct, develop, redevelop, operate, maintain, manage, protect, acquire real or personal property by purchase, lease, donation, condemnation, or otherwise for, and regulate the use of a Sewer System or Sewer Systems and to issue bonds shall be supplemental to and not amendatory of the provisions of all other laws heretofore or hereafter in force and shall not be construed to limit the City's authority under the provisions of any other laws. 
(Charter Ord. No. 18, §§ 1-6) 
Sec. 10. - Special assessments. 
    The City of Fairway by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. Sections 12-1808 and 12-1809, which apply to this city, but are part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
(Charter Ord. No. 22, § 1) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the Prior Code, as amended through April 14, 2014, which are included herein. 
Prior Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-104 2-21 1-105 2-22, 2-23 1-106 2-24 1-202 2-90 1-203 2-91 1-204 2-113 1-205 2-114 1-206 2-115 1-207 2-116 1-208 2-117 1-209 2-118 1-210 2-119 1-211 2-120 1-212 2-121 1-213 2-122 1-214 2-123 1-215 2-145 1-216 2-146 1-217 2-147 1-220 2-92 1-501 2-361 1-502 2-362 1-503 2-363 1-504 2-364 1-601 2-407 1-602 2-408 1-603 2-409 1-604 2-410 1-605 2-411 2-101 4-1 2-102 4-2 2-103 4-3 2-104 4-33, 4-34 2-105 4-6 2-201 4-32 2-202 4-31, 4-32 2-203 4-32 2-204 4-32 2-205 4-32 2-206 4-32 2-207 4-4, 4-5 2-208 4-37 2-209 4-38 2-210 4-39 2-211 4-35 2-212 4-40 2-213 4-40 2-214 4-40 2-215 4-41 2-216 4-41 2-217 4-42 2-218 4-34 2-301 4-75 2-302 4-76 2-304 4-78 2-305 4-79 2-306 4-80 2-401 4-106 2-402 4-107 2-403 4-108 2-404 4-109 2-405 4-110 2-406 4-112 2-407 4-113 2-501 4-140 2-502 4-141 2-503 4-142 2-504 4-143 2-505 4-144 2-506 4-145 2-508 4-146 3-101 3-1 3-102 3-2 3-103 3-3 3-104 3-4 3-107 3-5 3-201 3-29 3-202 3-30 3-203 3-31 3-301 3-32 3-302 3-53 3-303 3-54 3-304 3-33 3-401 3-83 3-402 3-84 3-403 3-85 3-404 3-86 3-405 3-55 3-501 3-117 3-502 3-118 3-503 3-119 3-504 3-120 3-505 3-87 3-601 3-139 3-602 3-140 3-603 3-141 3-604 3-142 3-605 3-143 3-606 3-144 3-607 3-145 3-608 3-146 3-609 3-147 3-610 3-148 3-611 3-149 3-612 3-150 3-613 3-151 3-614 3-152 3-615 3-153 3-616 3-154 4-201 2-54 4-202 2-55 4-203 2-56 4-204 2-57 4-205 2-58 5-101 5-2 5-102 5-3 5-103 5-4 5-104 5-5 5-105 5-1 5-106 5-2 5-107 5-6 5-201 5-31 5-202 5-32 5-203 5-33 5-204 5-34 5-301 5-57 5-302 5-58 5-303 5-59 6-101 12-21 6-102 12-19 6-103 12-69 6-104 12-70 6-105 12-71 6-106 12-72 6-107 12-22 6-108 12-23 6-109 12-24 6-110 12-25 6-111 12-26 6-112 12-27 6-113 12-28 6-114 12-29 6-115 12-105 6-116 12-106 6-117 12-107 6-118 12-30 6-119 12-31 6-120 12-32 6-121 12-33 6-122 12-34 6-123 12-35 6-124 12-36 6-126 12-37, 12-38 6-127 12-39 6-128 12-40 6-129 12-73 6-130 12-20 6-201 6-19 6-202 6-20 6-204 6-21 6-205 6-22 6-206 6-23 6-601 2-387 6-602 2-388 6-604 2-389 6-701 8-2 6-702 8-2 6-703 8-2 6-704 8-2 6-705 8-2 6-901 6-52 6-902 6-53 6-903 6-54 6-904 6-55 6-907 6-56 7-101 7-26 7-102 7-25 7-103 7-27 7-104 7-28 7-105 7-29 7-106 7-30 7-107 7-31 7-108 7-32 7-109 7-33 7-110 7-34 7-111 7-35 7-112 7-36 7-113 7-40 7-114 7-37 7-115 7-38 7-201 7-39 7-202 7-39 7-203 7-39 7-204 7-39 7-205 7-39 7-206 7-39 7-207 7-39 7-301 8-1 7-303 8-1 7-304 8-1 7-305 8-1 7-306 8-1 7-401 9-200 7-402 9-228 7-403 9-229 7-404 9-230 7-405 9-231 7-406 9-232 7-407 9-233 7-408 9-234 7-409 9-235 7-410 9-236 7-411 9-202 7-412 9-237 7-413 9-201 7-501 7-209 7-502 7-210 7-503 7-237 7-504 7-238 7-505 7-239 7-506 7-240 7-507 7-241 7-508 7-242 7-509 7-243 7-510 7-244 7-511 7-245 7-512 7-211 7-513 7-212 7-514 7-213 7-515 7-214 7-601 8-3 7-602 8-3 7-603 8-3 7-604 8-3 7-605 8-3 7-703 8-177 7-719 8-184 7-720 8-185 7-901 8-110 7-902 8-112 7-903 8-113 7-904 8-114 7-905 8-115 7-906 8-116 7-907 8-117 7-908 8-118 7-909 8-111 7-1101 7-100 7-1102 7-101 7-1103 7-102 7-1104 7-103 7-1105 7-104 7-1106 7-105 7-1107 7-106 7-1108 7-107 7-1109 7-108 7-1110 7-109 7-1111 7-110 7-1112 7-111 7-1113 7-112 7-1114 7-113 7-1115 7-114 7-1116 7-115 7-1117 7-116 7-1118 7-117 7-1119 7-118 7-1120 7-119 7-1121 7-120 7-1201 7-139 7-1202 7-140 7-1203 7-177 7-1204 7-178 7-1205 7-179 7-1206 7-180 7-1207 7-181 7-1208 7-143 7-1209 7-182 7-1210 7-144 7-1211 7-145 7-1212 7-183 7-1213 7-146 7-1214 7-185 7-1215 7-184 7-1216 7-147 7-1217 7-142 7-1220 7-141 7-1302 7-67 7-1303 7-68 7-1304 7-69 7-1305 7-70 7-1306 7-71 7-1307 7-72 7-1308 7-73 7-1309 7-74 7-1310 7-75 7-1311 7-76 7-1312 7-77 7-1313 7-78 7-1401 7-269 7-1402 7-271 7-1403 7-272 7-1404 7-273 7-1405 7-274 7-1406 7-275 7-1407 7-270 8-106 2-316 8-111 2-313 8-112 2-311 8-113 2-312 8-114 2-314 8-115 2-315 8-801 7-1 9-101 2-228 9-103 2-229 9-201 2-252 9-202 2-253 9-203 2-254 9-204 2-255 9-205 2-256 9-206 2-257 9-301 2-279 9-302 2-280 9-303 2-281 9-304 2-278 10-101 8-25 10-102 8-26 10-103 8-27 10-104 8-28 10-105 8-29 10-201 8-49 10-202 8-51 10-203 8-52 10-204 8-53 10-205 8-30 8-54 10-206 8-55 10-207 8-50 10-301 8-151 10-302 8-152 10-303 8-153 10-304 8-150 10-403 8-210 10-404 8-211 10-405 8-212 10-406 8-213 10-407 8-214 10-408 8-215 10-410 8-209 11-101 9-268 11-102 9-272 11-103 9-273 11-104 9-274 11-105 9-275 11-106 9-276 11-107 9-277 11-108 9-278 11-109 9-279 11-110 9-280 11-111 9-281 11-112 9-282 11-113 9-283 11-114 9-270 11-115 9-271 11-201 9-316 11-204 9-317 11-209 9-315 11-401 11-19 11-402 11-20 11-403 11-21 11-404 11-22 11-405 11-23 11-406 11-53 11-407 11-54 11-408 11-55 11-409 11-56 11-410 11-57 11-411 11-19 11-58 11-412 11-59 11-413 11-61 11-414 11-63 11-415 11-64 11-416 11-24 12-101 12-129 12-102 12-130 12-104 12-128 12-201 12-185 12-202 12-186 12-203 12-187 12-204 12-188 12-205 12-189 12-206 12-190 12-207 12-191 12-208 12-192 12-209 12-193 12-210 12-194 12-302 12-212 12-303 12-213 12-304 12-214 12-305 12-215 12-306 12-216 12-307 12-217 12-308 12-218 12-309 12-219 12-401 12-247 12-402 12-248 12-403 12-249 12-404 12-250 12-405 12-251 12-406 12-252 12-407 12-253 12-408 12-254 12-409 12-255 12-410 12-256 12-411 12-257 12-412 12-258 12-413 12-259 12-414 12-260 12-415 12-261 12-416 12-262 12-417 12-263 12-418 12-264 12-419 12-265 13-101 9-2 13-102 9-3 13-103 9-4 13-104 9-5 13-105 9-6 13-106 9-7 13-107 9-8 13-108 9-9 13-110 9-10 13-111 9-1 13-201 9-32 13-207 9-33 13-208 9-34 13-209 9-35 13-210 9-36 13-301 9-11 13-302 9-12 13-303 9-13 13-304 9-14 13-401 9-65 13-402 9-63 13-403 9-61 13-404 9-68 13-405 9-69 13-406 9-71 13-407 9-72 13-408 9-73 13-410 9-74 9-111 13-411 9-75 13-412 9-76 13-413 9-77 13-414 9-78 13-415 9-108 13-416 9-109 13-417 9-110 13-419 9-112 13-420 9-113 13-421 9-114 13-422 9-115 13-423 9-116 13-424 9-79 13-425 9-117 13-426 9-118 13-428 9-70 13-429 9-81 13-430 9-82 13-431 9-64 13-433 9-66 13-434 9-62 13-602 9-151 13-603 9-171 13-604 9-172 13-605 9-173 13-606 9-150 13-701 11-91 13-702 11-89 13-703 11-92 13-704 11-93 13-705 11-94 13-707 11-90 13-4270 9-80 13-4351 9-67 14-101 10-19 14-102 10-20 14-103 10-21 14-104 10-22 14-201 10-49 14-202 10-50 14-203 10-51 14-205 10-52 14-206 10-53 14-207 10-54 14-208 10-55 14-209 10-56 14-210 10-57 14-211 10-58 14-212 10-59 14-213 10-60 14-214 10-61 14-215 10-62 14-216 10-63 14-217 10-64 14-218 10-65 14-219 10-66 14-220 10-48  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 2004 Development Ordinance which are included herein. 
Dev. Ord. 
Section Section 
this Code 15-1-101 15-1 15-1-102 15-2 15-1-103 15-3 15-1-104 15-4 15-1-105 15-5 15-1-106 15-6 15-1-107 15-7 15-1-108 15-8 15-1-109 15-9 15-1-110 15-10 15-2-101 15-65 15-2-102 15-66 15-2-103 15-67 15-2-201 15-93 15-2-202 15-94 15-2-203 15-95 15-2-204 15-96 15-2-205 15-97 15-2-206 15-98 15-3-101 15-147 15-3-102 15-148 15-3-103 15-149 15-3-104 15-150 15-3-301 15-200 15-3-302 15-201 15-3-303 15-202 15-3-304 15-203 15-3-305 15-204 15-3-306 15-205 15-3-307 15-206 15-3-308 15-207 15-3-309 15-208 15-3-310 15-209 15-3-311 15-210 15-4-102 15-229 15-4-103 15-230 15-4-104 15-231 15-4-105 15-232 15-4-106 15-233 15-4-107 15-234 15-4-108 15-235 15-4-2.101 15-264 15-4-2.102 15-265 15-4-2.201 15-294 15-4-2.202 15-295 15-4-2.203 15-296 15-4-2.204 15-297 15-4-2.205 15-298 15-4-2.301 15-330 15-4-2.302 15-331 15-4-2.303 15-332 15-4-2.304 15-333 15-4-2.305 15-334 15-4-2.306 15-335 15-4-2.401 15-359 15-4-2.402 15-360 15-4-2.403 15-361 15-4-2.404 15-362 15-4-2.405 15-363 15-4-2.501 15-385 15-4-2.502 15-386 15-4-2.503 15-387 15-4-2.504 15-388 15-4-2.505 15-389 15-4-2.601 15-407 15-4-2.602 15-408 15-4-2.603 15-409 15-4-2.604 15-410 15-4-2.605 15-411 15-4-2.606 15-412 Art. 4, div. 2, pt. 7 15-438 15-4-3.101 15-487 15-4-3.102 15-488 15-4-3.103 15-489 15-4-3.104 15-490 15-4-3.105 15-491 15-4-3.106 15-492 15-4-3.201 15-523 15-4-3.202 15-524 15-4-3.203 15-525 15-4-3.204 15-526 15-4-3.205 15-527 15-4-3.301 15-548 15-4-3.302 15-549 15-4-3.303 15-550 15-4-3.304 15-551 15-4-3.305 15-552 15-4-3.306 15-553 15-4-3.307 15-554 15-4-3.308 15-555 15-4-3.309 15-556 15-4-3.310 15-557 15-4-3.311 15-558 15-4-3.312 15-559 15-4-3.401 15-582 15-4-3.402 15-583 15-4-3.403 15-584 15-4-3.404 15-585 15-4-3.405 15-586 15-4-3.406 15-587 15-4-3.407 15-588 15-4-3.408 15-589 15-4-3.409 15-590 15-4-3.410 15-591 15-4-3.411 15-592 15-4-3.412 15-593 15-4-3.413 15-594 15-4-3.414 15-595 15-4-3.501 15-624 15-4-3.502 15-625 15-4-3.503 15-626 15-4-3.601 15-656 15-4-3.602 15-657 15-4-3.603 15-658 15-4-3.604 15-659 15-4-3.605 15-660 15-4-3.606 15-661 15-4-4.101 15-681 15-4-4.102 15-682 15-4-4.103 15-683 15-4-4.104 15-684 15-4-4.105 15-685 15-4-4.106 15-686 15-4-4.201 15-169 15-4-4.202 15-170 15-4-4.203 15-171 15-4-4.204 15-172 15-4-4.205 15-173 15-4-4.301 15-716 15-4-4.302 15-717 15-4-4.303 15-718 15-4-4.304 15-719 15-4-4.305 15-720 15-4-4.401 15-739 15-4-4.402 15-740 15-4-4.403 15-741 15-4-4.404 15-742 15-4-4.405 15-743 15-4-4.406 15-744 15-4-4.407 15-745 15-4-4.408 15-746 15-4-4.501 15-776 15-4-4.502 15-777 15-4-4.503 15-778 15-4-4.504 15-779 15-4-501 15-797 15-4-502 15-798 15-4-503 15-799 15-5-1.101 15-851 15-5-1.102 15-852 15-5-1.103 15-853 15-5-1.104 15-854 15-5-1.105 15-855 15-5-1.106 15-856 15-5-1.107 15-857 15-5-2.101 15-878 15-5-2.102 15-879 15-5-2.103 15-880 15-5-2.104 15-881 15-5-2.105 15-882 15-5-2.106 15-883 15-5-2.106 15-884  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 4 2-92 5 10-51 58 1 9-171 2 9-172 3 9-173 72 2-255 125 1 2-22, 2-23 159 1 7-39 2 7-39 3 7-39 4 7-39 5 7-39 7 7-39 8 7-39 196 4-31, 4-35, 4-37, 4-40, 4-41 210 12-128-12-130 216 7-26 7-28 7-30, 7-31 7-34-7-36 229 2-58 247 3 9-316 5 9-317 6 9-317 7 9-317 8 9-317 9 9-317 10 9-317 272 4-39 273 4-32 311 4-3 333 10-49 10-54 335 10-65 373 2 2-362 5 2-363, 2-364 453 4-33, 4-34, 5-3 5-31 465 1 8-151 2 8-152 3 8-153 8-150 469 1 9-200 1 9-235 2 9-228 3 9-229 4 9-230 5 9-231 6 9-232 7 9-233 8 9-234 10 9-236 11 9-202 12 9-237 13 9-201 495 10-53 506 4-4, 4-5, 4-31, 4-32, 4-35, 4-37, 4-39, 4-40, 4-41 513 4-32 528 1 8-49 2 8-51 3 8-52 4 8-53 5 8-54 543 1 5-4 2 5-5 553 10-58, 10-59 570 1 8-1 3 8-1 4 8-1 5 8-1 6 8-1 590 10-56 611 2-21, 4-1,4-2, 4-6,4-32,4-38, 4-41, 4-42 2-24 2-90 2-92 615 1 8-3 2 8-3 3 8-3 4 8-3 5 8-3 635 5-57-5-59 660 10-56 669 10-52 677 2-91 686 9-270, 9-271 9-282, 9-283 693 10-64 700 2-314 718 4-106-4-110, 4-112, 4-113 722 2-315 725 2-252-2-254 2-256 726 10-56 727 10-55 735 6-9-1982 4-140-4-146 752 2-278-2-281 769 7-25 774 10-63 787 10-56 802 19 8-185 810 2-407-2-411 817 3 7-1 841 10-56 858 6-23 860 3-1-3-4 862 4-75, 4-76, 4-78-4-80 3-29-3-33 3-53-3-55 3-83-3-87 3-117-3-120 3-139-3-154 866 7-34 876 10-56 893 2-55 895 2-57 910 8-209-8-215 931 6-22 934 10-21 946 5-1, 5-2 966 10-66 967 3-5 973 10-56 974 10-60 1010 8-112 8-117, 8-118 1019 4-4, 4-5 1020 10-56 1022 8-214 1038 8-184, 8-185 1044 2-389 1050 7-30 1051 4-32 1058 8-2 1060 3-152 1062 7-33 1065 2-254 1068 4-32 1085 2-409 1095 10-60 1116 8-26 1121 8-184 1134 10-63 1141 4-34 1154 10-60 1159 10-60 1180 10-56 1184 4-140-4-146 1197 10-60 1212 9-1 9-14 1213 10-56 1218 2-22, 2-23 1223 8-212 1224 8-214 1239 10-19 1240 8-25 1263 10-19 1264 8-25 1267 4-31, 4-32 1268 4-4, 4-5 1271 5-1, 5-2 5-4 1279 15-881 1284 9-61-9-82 9-108-9-118 1288 3-31 1294 10-19-10-21 1295 8-25 1299 4-40, 4-38 1303 10-63 1304 6-53 6-55, 6-56 1309 7-100-7-120 1312 7-25 7-27 1314 15-265 15-298 15-335 15-389 15-799 1321 10-19 1322 8-25 1330 4-4, 4-5 1344 15-881 1346 12-185-12-191 1350 6-19, 6-20 1351 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1352 8-25, 8-26 1360 8-29 1361 8-28 1362 9-281, 9-282 1365 2-91 1374 10-53 1381 9-108 9-112 1382 7-139-7-147 7-177-7-185 15-265 15-389 1384 12-212-12-219 1386 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1387 8-25, 8-26 1391 15-851-15-857 1392 7-214 1399 11-19-11-24 11-53-11-59 11-61 11-63, 11-64 1409 12-247-12-265 1412 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1413 8-25, 8-26 1415 8-50 8-55 1416 10-53 1425 11-20 11-23 1437 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-59-10-66 1438 8-25, 8-26 8-55 1440 2-22, 2-23 1450 15-739-15-746 1455 15-298 15-799 1456 15-335 1460 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1461 8-25, 8-26 8-55 1464 2-312, 2-313 1465 7-67-7-78 1472 10-19 1474 9-14 1475 10-58 1476 2-252 2-256, 2-257 1481 10-19 1484 4-32 1487 15-169-15-173 15-798 1490 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1491 8-25-8-27 8-55 1496 8-214 1507 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-56 10-58-10-66 1512 10-19-10-22 10-48-10-55 10-58-10-66 1513 9-12-2011 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-55 1517 12-12-2011 1 15-798 15-799 1520 2-13-2012 1 15-852 1524 4-9-2012 1 7-25 7-28 2 7-27 5 7-33 7 7-29-7-33 7-34-7-38 7-40 8 7-39 1528 6-11-2012 1 12-19-12-40 12-69-12-73 12-105-12-107 1530 7-9-2012 1 15-235 3 15-265 5 15-297 7 15-799 9 15-853 1531 7-9-2012 1 10-19 1533 8-13-2012 1 8-214 1534 8-13-2012 1 7-269 2 7-271 3 7-272 4 7-273 5 7-274 6 7-275 7 7-270 1535 8-13-2012 1 15-297 1537 9-10-2012 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 10 10-49 12 10-50 14 10-51 16 10-52 18 10-53 20 10-54 22 10-55 24 10-56 28 10-58 30 10-59 32 10-60 34 10-61 36 10-62 38 10-63 40 10-64 42 10-65 44 10-66 46 10-48 1539 10-8-2012 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-28 9 8-29 11 8-55 1540 10-8-2012 1 15-235 3 15-297 1542 11-13-2012 1 15-799 1550 5-13-2013 1 9-32 1554 8-22-2013 1 15-147 3 15-150 1556 9-9-2013 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-49 11 10-50 13 10-51 15 10-52 17 10-53 19 10-54 21 10-55 23 10-56 25 10-57 27 10-58 29 10-59 31 10-60 33 10-61 35 10-62 37 10-63 39 10-64 41 10-65 43 10-66 45 10-48 1557 9-9-2013 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-28 9 8-29 11 8-30 12 8-55 1558 9-9-2013 1 3-4 3 9-280 1561 11-12-2013 1 15-297 1562 11-20-2013 1, 2       Added 2-224, 2-225 1565 2-10-2014 1 11-91 2 11-89 3 11-92 4 11-93 5 11-94 6 11-90 5-6 6-19-6-21 6-23 7-25 7-29-7-33 7-35-7-38 7-40 1570 4-14-2014 1 15-297 1581 11-10-2014 Adopt. Ord. 1582 12- 8-2014 1 15-147 3 15-150 5 15-235 7 15-294-15-298 9 15-438 11 15-490 13 15-491, 15-524 15 15-526 17 15-548 19 15-778 21 15-798 1583 11-10-2014 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-48 11 10-49 13 10-50 15 10-51 17 10-52 19 10-53 21 10-54 23 10-55 25 10-56 27 10-57 29 10-58 31 10-59 33 10-60 35 10-61 37 10-62 39 10-63 41 10-64 43 10-65 45 10-66 1584 11-10-2014 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-28 9 8-29 11 8-30 12 8-55 1605 12-14-2015 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-48 11 10-49 13 10-50 15 10-51 17 10-52 19 10-53 21 10-54 23 10-55 25 10-56 27 10-57 29 10-58 31 10-59 33 10-60 35 10-61 37 10-62 39 10-63 41 10-64 43 10-65 45 10-66 1606 12-14-2015 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-28 9 8-29 11 8-30 12 8-55 1607 12-14-2015 1 5-1 1608 12-14-2015 1 15-878 1609 12-14-2015 1 15-879 1610 12-14-2015 1 15-880 1611 12-14-2015 1 15-881 1612 12-14-2015 1 15-882 1613 12-14-2015 1 15-883 1614 12-14-2015 1 15-884 1615 12-14-2015 1 15-297 3 15-851 1616 12-14-2015 1 15-65 3 15-776 1629  9-12-2016 1 3-4 3 9-268 1630  9-12-2016 1       Rpld 2-224, 2-225 2       Added 2-93, 2-94 1634 10-10-2016 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-48 11 10-49 13 10-50 15 10-51 17 10-52 19 10-53 21 10-54 23 10-55 25 10-56 27 10-57 29 10-58 31 10-59 33 10-60 35 10-61 37 10-62 39 10-63 41 10-64 43 10-65 45 10-66 1635 10-10-2016 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7 8-28 9 8-29 11 8-30 13 8-55 1636 10-10-2016 1 15-852 1638 11-14-2016 1 9-76 3 11-56 5 11-90 7       Added 11-90.5. 8 11-93 1639 11-14-2016 2 4-140-4-146 1641 12-12-2016 1 15-297 1620  3-14-2016 1 15-297(b)(5)b. 1645  2-13-2017 1 2-113 3 2-114 5 2-115 7 2-116 9 2-117 11 2-118 13 2-119 15 2-120 17 2-121 19 2-122 20 2-123 1651  7-10-2017 1 10-19 1657 12-11-2017 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-48 11 10-49 13 10-50 15 10-51 17 10-52 19 10-53 21 10-54 23 10-55 25 10-56 27 10-57 29 10-58 31 10-59 33 10-60 35 10-61 37 10-62 39 10-63 41 10-64 43 10-65 45 10-66 1658 12-11-2017 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 7       Rpld 8-28 8 8-29 10 8-30 1659 11-13-2017 1 15-852 1661 12-11-2017 1 6-55 1675  9-10-2018 1 10-19 3 10-20 5 10-21 7 10-22 9 10-48 11 10-49 13 10-50 15 10-51 17 10-52 19 10-53 21 10-54 23 10-55 25 10-56 27 10-57 29 10-58 31 10-59 33 10-60 35 10-61 37 10-62 39 10-63 41 10-64 43 10-65 45 10-66 1676  9-10-2018 1 8-25 3 8-26 5 8-27 8 8-29 10 8-30 Char. Ord. No. 26 11-13-2018 App. A 1679 11-13-2018 1 2-21 1681 12-10-2018 2       Rpld 15-582-15-595 1       Added 15-582-15-591 1683  1-30-2019 1 2-21 1684  1-30-2019 1 2-93 1685  1-30-2019 1 2-228 3 2-229 5       Added 2-290, 2-291 6       Added 2-300, 2-301 1686  1-30-2019 2       Rpld 2-90 1       Added 2-90 4       Rpld 2-91 3       Added 2-91  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Kansas Statutes Annotated. 
K.S.A. 
Section Section 

this Code ch. 2, art. 13 6-55 8-126-8-149 6-22 8-1008 8-26 8-1401 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 8-1520 10-55 8-1560 10-48-10-50 8-1912 10-52 8-2001 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 8-2002(a)(1) 10-58 10-60 10-63 8-2002(a)(6) 10-54 10-56 8-2002(a)(9) 10-57 8-2008 10-56 8-2110(c) 2-313 8-2118 10-20 10-131 2-396 10-1009 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 18 App. B, § 9 11-204 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 12, art. 6a App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 22 ch. 12, arts. 41-47 2-312 12-1, 117 2-396 12-6a01 et seq. 9-32 12-685, 12-686 10-53 12-736 15-265 12-741 et seq. Ch. 15 (note) 15-739 12-744 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. II, 
Div. 2 12-747, 12-748 Ch. 15, Art. II, 
Div. 3 12-749 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. III 12-752 Ch. 15, Art. III, 
Div. 2 12-753 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. IV 12-758 Ch. 15, Art. IV, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. VII 12-759 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. IV, 
Div. 7 12-759 15-743 12-760 15-743 12-766 et seq. Ch. 15, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 12-766 15-739 12-770, 12-771 Ch. 15, Art. IV, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. VII 12-1301 et seq. Ch. 9, Art. VI 12-1304 9-273 12-1617 7-27 12-1617e Ch. 6, Art. II 6-55 12-1617f Ch. 6, Art. II 6-55 12-1617g Ch. 6, Art. II 12-1675 Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 2 2-361 12-1808 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 22 App. B, § 10 12-1809 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 22 App. B, § 10 12-2001 et seq. 7-67, 7-68 7-76 12-2001 7-27 12-2001(n) 7-67 12-2104 12-29 12-2901 et seq. 4-140 9-61 12-2908 12-192 12-3001 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 12-3007, 12-3008 2-114 12-3009 et seq. 5-1 12-3009- 
12-3012 5-32, 5-33 8-25 10-19 12-3014 et seq. 1-1 12-3014 Adopt. Ord. 12-3015 Adopt. Ord. 12-3101 et seq. 12-186 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 18 12-3101 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 18 12-3107 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 18 12-3201 Ch. 11, Art. III, 
Ch. 11, Art. IV 12-3301 et seq. 5-1 12-3301 10-19 12-3301- 
12-3302 8-25 10-19 12-3901 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII, 
Div. 3 12-4101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 2-312 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 2, 
App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 3 12-4103 Ch. 2, Art. VI 12-4105- 
12-4108 Ch. 2, Art. VI 12-4106 2-90 12-4108 2-316 12-4109, 12-4110 Ch. 2, Art. VI 12-4111 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 Ch. 2, Art. VI 12-4112 et seq. App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 19 12-4112 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 10 12-4112 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 12 12-4112 App. A, 
Char. Ord. Nos. 19, 20 App. B, § 6 12-4113 2-311 12-4203 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 13 App. B, § 4 12-4207 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 13, 
App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 15 App. B, §§ 4, 5 12-4212 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 12-4509 Ch. 2, Art. VI 12-1,115 6-53 15-172 13-301 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 14-103 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 7 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 24 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 App. B, § 1 14-111 Ch. 2, Art. II 14-201 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 4, 
App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 7 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 24 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 App. B, § 1 14-204 2-23 14-205 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 14 App. A, 
Char. Ord. Nos. 16, 17 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 24 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 14-301 2-23 14-570 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 25 14-571 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 25 14-801 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 2, 
App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 3 17-4760 7-181 19-2646 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 24 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 20-3127 7-27 21-2601 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II, 
Ch. 3, Art. III 21-3408 2-313 21-4106, 21-4107 3-148 21-5222, 21-5223 8-27 21-5225 8-27 21-5607 3-3 3-154 21-6204 3-148 21-6307 2-252 2-256, 2-257 21-6411 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. IV 22-4191 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 25-106 Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 25-2108a App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 21 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 24 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 25-2110a App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 26 App. B, § 2 25-2120 Ch. 2, Art. III 31-132 et seq. Ch. 5 (note) 31-134 Ch. 5, Art. III 31-157 8-28 31-710 3-2 Ch. 32, Art. 9 8-27 32-901 et seq. 8-27 40-252 7-27 40-1211 7-27 40-2810 7-27 40-3101 et seq. App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 20 App. B, § 6 40-4301- 
40-4318 7-27 ch. 41 Ch. 3 (note) 41-102 3-1 41-719 3-4 41-2601 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. IV 41-2614 3-31 3-152 41-2615 3-3 3-154 41-2622 3-30 3-53 3-84 41-2631 Ch. 3, Art. II, 
Ch. 3, Art. III 41-2643 Ch. 3, Art. IV 3-83 41-2644 Ch. 3, Art. IV 41-2645 Ch. 3, Art. V 41-2701 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. VI 3-144 3-148 3-152 41-2702 3-140 41-2703 3-144 3-146 41-2708 3-144 3-148, 3-149 41-2728 Ch. 3, Art. VI 41-2901 et seq. 3-148 45-215 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 45-218, 45-219 2-408, 2-409 47-1701 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 48-904 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 54-110 2-115 59-2946 8-27 59-29b46 8-27 60-206 1-2 65-101 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 65-164 et seq. Ch. 12 (note) 65-1625 et seq. 8-49 65-3401 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 65-4101 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III 8-55 74-7046 15-857 75-7c01 et seq. 8-27, 8-28 75-7c26 8-27 79-1952 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 6 App. B, § 8 79-2925- 
79-2937 2-118 12-189 79-3424 7-27 79-3601 et seq. 7-1 79-5001- 
79-5017 App. A, 
Char. Ord. No. 11 154-106 Ch. 2, Art. III  
