CODE OF THE - CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS 
____________ 
Published Under the Authority and by the Direction of 
The Governing Body of the City of Goodland, 
Kansas, this 9th day of August, 1991 
____________ Republished 1997 by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of The City of Goodland, Kansas 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF GOODLAND 
____________ 
Rick Billinger 
Mayor 
Barbara Aten 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
John Golden 
R. Chuck Lutters 
Jim Mull 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Ron Pickman 
City Manager 
____________ 
Perry Warren 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mary Volk 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This volume contains the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991. As expressed in the adopting ordinance, the code supercedes all ordinances passed prior to July 1, 1991, which are not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. The code was prepared by the staff of the League of Kansas Municipalities and Goodland city officials under the authority of Sections 12-3014:3015 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated. 
This code is arranged in chapters, articles, and sections in a manner similar to the Kansas Statutes Annotated arrangement. Headnotes and footnotes are included; however, these do not constitute a part of the code and no implication or presumption of intent or construction is to be drawn therefrom. 
Any section of this code may be amended or repealed by ordinary ordinance by reference to the code section number as follows: 
"Section 1-105 of the Code of the City of Goodland is hereby amended to read as follows: (the new provisions shall then be set out in full)" 
A new section not heretofore existing in the code may be added as follows: 
"The Code of the City of Goodland is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads as follows: (the new provision shall be set out in full)" 
All sections or articles or chapters to be repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: 
"Section 1-105 (or article or chapter) of the Code of the City of Goodland is hereby repealed." 
The user's attention is directed to the League of Kansas Municipalities publication, "HANDBOOK for the City Governing body," with the supplement for cities of the second class, both as a source of general information and as an index to the pertinent sections of the Kansas Statutes Annotated. 
An index is included in this volume, and the user's attention is also directed to indexes which may appear in standard codes incorporated by reference in this Code. 
	PREPARED AND PUBLISHED BY 
THE LEAGUE OF KANSAS MUNICIPALITIES 
	
	Donald L. Moler, Jr. 
Attorney 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 1257 
AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING AND PROVIDING FOR THE CODIFICATION OF THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND THE PUBLICATION OF SUCH CODIFICATION IN PERMANENTLY BOUND OR LOOSELEAF BOOK FORM. 
Be it Ordained by the Governing Body of the City of Goodland: 
Section 1. That a codification of the general ordinances of the City of Goodland, Kansas, including supplements thereto, as authorized by K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015, is hereby ordered, authorized and provided for, the preparation of which shall be done by the League of Kansas Municipalities as provided by contract. When completed, the codification shall be adopted by ordinance and published together with the adopting ordinance in loose-leaf book form. No fewer than 10 copies shall be published. Such codification shall be entitled, "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas," of the year in which the work is completed and ready for publication. The said code shall be duly certified by the City Clerk. One copy of the code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be designated as and shall constitute the official ordinance book. Three additional copies shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be designated for use by the public. 
Section 2. That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication once in the official city newspaper. 
Passed and Approved by the Governing Body this 2nd day of November, 1987. 
	/s/ Lester Frazier, Mayor 
ATTEST: /s/ Archie Wicke, City Clerk 	
(SEAL) 	
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 1290 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AUTHORIZED BY ORDINANCE NO. 1257 PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN OTHER ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPTING CERTAIN ORDINANCES FROM REPEAL AND SAVING CERTAIN ACCRUED RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES. 
Be it Ordained by the Governing Body of the City of Goodland, Kansas: 
Section 1. The codification of ordinances of the City of Goodland, Kansas, authorized by Ordinance No. 1257 and K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015, as set out in the following chapters, Chapters I to XIX, all inclusive, and entitled the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," is hereby adopted and ordained as the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," and said codification shall become effective upon publication of not less than 10 copies of said code in book form. 
Section 2. All ordinances and parts of ordinances of a general nature passed prior to the 1st day of July, 1991, in force and effect at the date of the publication of no fewer than 10 copies of the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," and this ordinance, are hereby repealed as of the date of publication of said code except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3. In construing this ordinance, the following ordinances shall not be considered or held to be ordinances of a general nature: 
(a)  Ordinances pertaining to the acquisition of property or interests in property by gift, purchase, devise, bequest, appropriation or condemnation; 
(b)  Ordinances opening, dedicating, widening, vacating or narrowing streets, avenues, alleys and boulevards; 
(c)  Ordinances establishing and changing grades of streets, avenues, alleys and boulevards; 
(d)  Ordinances naming or changing the names of streets, avenues and boulevards; 
(e)  Ordinances authorizing or directing public improvements to be made; 
(f)  Ordinances creating districts for public improvements of whatsoever kind or nature; 
(g)  Ordinances levying general taxes; 
(h)  Ordinances levying special assessments or taxes; 
(i)  Ordinances granting any rights, privileges, easements or franchises therein mentioned to any person, firm or corporation; 
(j)  Ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds and other instruments of indebtedness by the city; 
(k)  Ordinances authorizing contracts; 
(l)  Ordinances establishing the limits of the city or pertaining to annexation or exclusion of territory; 
(m)  Ordinances relating to compensation of officials, officers and employees of the city; 
(n)  Ordinances of a temporary nature; 
Provided, That the above enumeration of exceptions shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, it being the purpose and intention to exempt from repeal any and all ordinances not of a general nature and general ordinances specifically excepted by this section. 
Section 4. The arrangement and classification of the several chapters, articles, and sections of the code adopted by Section 1 of this ordinance and the headnotes and footnotes at the ends of the sections, are made for the purpose of convenience and orderly arrangement, and do not constitute a part of the ordinances, and therefore, no implication or presumption of legislative intent or construction is to be drawn therefrom. 
Section 5. The repeal of ordinances as provided in Section 2 hereof, shall not affect any rights acquired, fines, penalties, forfeitures or liabilities incurred thereunder, or actions involving any of the provisions of said ordinances or parts thereof. Said ordinances above repealed are hereby continued in force and effect after the passage, approval and publication of this ordinance for the purpose of such rights, fines, penalties, forfeitures, liabilities and actions therefor. 
Section 6. If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, portion or part of the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the publication of the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," as provided in K.S.A. 12-3015. 
Passed by the Governing Body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, this 5th day of August, 1991. 
	/s/ Wade Barnett, Mayor 
ATTEST: /s/ Archie Wicke, City Clerk 	
(SEAL) 	
 
CERTIFICATE OF THE CITY CLERK 
Office of the City Clerk 
City of Goodland, Kansas 
State of Kansas       ) 
) 
Sherman County       ) 
 
I, Archie Wicke, City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Sherman County, Kansas do hereby certify that said city is a city of the second class of the commission-manager form of government under the statutes of Kansas; that this codification of the general ordinances of said city and the publication thereof in book form were ordered and authorized by the governing body by Ordinance No. 1257 and in accordance therewith is entitled the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," that said codification was adopted as the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," by the governing body by Ordinance No. 1290 passed on the 5th day of August, 1991, as authorized by Section 12-3015 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated; that said Ordinance No. 1290 and said codification of general ordinances as contained in this volume will take effect upon publication of 10 or more copies; that the publication of 10 copies of this code and adoptive Ordinance No. 1290 constitute due passage and publication of the code and all general ordinances contained therein; that the codification and adoptive Ordinance No. 1290 as contained herein are true and correct copies; and that said publication imports absolute verity and is to be received in evidence in all courts and places without further proof as provided by 12-3015 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated. 
I further certify that the "Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1991," and the matter therein contained will take effect upon publication and be in force from and after August 9, 1991. 
Witness my hand and the seal of the City of Goodland, Kansas, at my office in Goodland, Kansas, this 5th day of August, 1991. 
	/s/ Archie Wicke 
City Clerk of the 
City of Goodland, Kansas 
	
(SEAL) 	
  
Chapter 1 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-101. - Code designated. 
The chapters, articles and sections herein shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas," and may be so cited. The Code may also be cited as the "Goodland City Code." 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-102. - Definitions. 
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(b)  Code shall mean "The Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas." 
(c)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
(d)  County means the County of Sherman in the State of Kansas. 
(e)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or authorizing the head of a department or officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
(f)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
(g)  Governing body shall be construed to mean the city commission of the city, or those persons appointed to fill a vacancy in the city commission as provided in this code. 
(h)  In the city shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
(i)  Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
(j)  Month shall mean a calendar month. 
(k)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(l)  Oath includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" is equivalent to the word "affirm." 
(m)  Officers, departments, etc. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this code shall mean officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees of the city, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(n)  Owner applied to a building or land, shall include not only the owner of the whole but any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
(o)  Person includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
(p)  Property includes real, personal and mixed property. 
(q)  Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal. 
(r)  Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. 
(s)  Sidewalk means any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(t)  Signature, subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write, when his or her name is written near such mark and is witnessed by a person who writes his or her own name as a witness. 
(u)  State shall be construed to mean the State of Kansas. 
(v)  Street means and includes public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city. 
(w)  Tenant or occupant applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
(x)  Tenses. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(y)  Writing or written may include printing, engraving, lithography and any other mode of representing words and letters, except those cases where the written signature or the mark of any person is required by law. 
(z)  Year means a calendar year, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-103. - Existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are in substance the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-104. - Effect of repeal. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive an ordinance previously repealed, nor shall such repeal affect any right which has accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred or any proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the ordinance repealed, except as shall be expressly stated therein. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-105. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the sections of this code printed in capital letters are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-106. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
The matter in parenthesis at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the code. Citations indicate only the source and the text may or may not be changed by this code. This code is a new enactment under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3014 and 12-3015. Reference matter not in parenthesis is for information only and is not a part of this code. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-107. - Amendments; repeal. 
Any portion of this code may be amended by specific reference to the section number as follows: "Section _____ of the code of the City of Goodland is hereby amended to read as follows: (the new provisions shall then be set out in full) …" A new section not heretofore existing in the code may be added as follows: "The code of the City of Goodland is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) which reads as follows: … (the new provisions shall be set out in full) …." All sections, or articles, or chapters to be repealed shall be repealed by specific reference as follows: "Section (or article or chapter) _____ of the code of the City of Goodland is hereby repealed." 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-108. - Ordinances. 
The governing body shall have the care, management and control of the city and its finances, and shall pass all ordinances needed for the welfare of the city. All ordinances shall be valid when a majority of all the members-elect of the city commission shall vote in favor. Where the number of favorable votes is one less than required, the mayor shall have power to cast the deciding vote in favor of the ordinance. 
(K.S.A. 12-3002; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-109. - Same—Subject and title; amendment. 
No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; and no section or sections of an ordinance shall be amended unless the amending ordinance contains the entire section or sections as amended and the section or sections amended shall be repealed. 
(K.S.A. 12-3004; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-110. - Same—Publication. 
No ordinance, except those appropriating money, shall be in force until published in the official city newspaper by the city clerk. One publication of any such ordinance shall be sufficient unless additional publications are required by statute or ordinance. The publisher of the newspaper shall prefix such published ordinance by a line in brackets stating the month, day and year of such publication. 
(K.S.A. 12-3007; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-111. - Same—Ordinance book. 
Following final passage and approval of each ordinance, the city clerk shall enter the same in the ordinance book of the city as provided by law. Each ordinance shall have appended thereto the manner in which the ordinance was passed, the date of passage, the page of the journal containing the record of the final vote on its passage, the name of the newspaper in which published and the date of publication. 
(K.S.A. 12-3008; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-112. - Resolutions, motions. 
Except where a state statute or city ordinance specifically requires otherwise, all resolutions and motions shall be passed if voted upon favorably by a majority of a quorum of the city commission. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-113. - City records. 
The city clerk or any other officer or employee having custody of city records and documents shall maintain such records and documents in accordance with K.S.A. 12-120 to 12-121 inclusive, which is incorporated by reference herein as if set out in full. 
(K.S.A. 12-120:121; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-114. - Altering code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Goodland to be misrepresented thereby. This restriction shall not apply to amendments or revisions of this code authorized by ordinance duly adopted by the governing body. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-115. - Scope of application. 
Any person convicted of doing any of the acts or things prohibited, made unlawful, or the failing to do any of the things commanded to be done, as specified and set forth in this code, shall be deemed in violation of this code and punished in accordance with section 1-116. Each day any violation of this code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-116. - General penalty. 
Whenever any offense is declared by any provision of this code, absent a specific or unique punishment prescribed, the offender shall be punished in accordance with this section. 
(a)  A fine of not more than $1,000.00; 
(b)  Imprisonment in jail for not more than 179 days; or 
(c)  Both such fine and imprisonment not to exceed (a) and (b) above. 
(Code 1989)  
Sec. 1-117. - Severability. 
If for any reason any chapter, article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid or unenforceable, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Code 1987)  
Secs. 1-118—1-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 
 
Sec. 1-201. - Powers generally. 
The governing body shall have power to enact, ordain, alter, modify or repeal any and all ordinances not repugnant to the constitution and laws of this state, and such as it shall deem expedient for the good government of the city, the preservation of the peace and good order, the suppression of vice and immorality, the benefit of trade and commerce, and the health of the inhabitants thereof, and such other ordinances, rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry such powers into effect. 
(K.S.A. 12-103)  
Sec. 1-202. - Mayor. 
The commission shall choose its own chairperson annually during the second regular meeting in the month of January and determine its own order of business. The chairperson shall have the title of mayor during the term of his or her office. The mayor shall vote as a commissioner and shall execute formal agreements requiring the signature of the mayor but shall have no administrative duties. 
(K.S.A. 12-1007; Code 1983; Ord. No. 1186; Ord. No. 1700 , 10-3-16)  
Sec. 1-203. - Vice-chairperson. 
The commission shall annually, at the second meeting in the month of January, shall choose a vice-chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall have the title of acting mayor, and in the absence of the mayor from any meeting of the commission, the acting mayor shall preside. In the absence of the mayor from the city or his or her inability to perform any of the duties imposed upon the office, the acting mayor shall exercise the duties of the office of mayor. 
(K.S.A. 13-1806; Code 1983; Ord. No. 1187; Ord. No. 1700 , 10-3-16)  
Sec. 1-204. - Meetings. 
The commission shall have regular meetings on the first and third Monday of each and every month, and adjourned and special meetings at any other time they deem proper. The hour of the meeting shall be 5:00 p.m. Meetings which would normally fall on a holiday shall be held on the next business day, the following Monday, or any other date agreed upon by the commission. 
(Code 1983; Ord. No. 1120; Ord. No. 1331, § 1, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 1524, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-2-07)  
Sec. 1-205. - Emergency government. 
In the event of a catastrophe in which all, or a majority, of the members of the governing body are fatally injured, the interim governing body shall be composed of the surviving members, the city attorney, city manager, and city clerk, and a sufficient number of the appointed officials selected in the order of the greatest seniority in office to make up a governing body of the prescribed number. 
(Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-206. - Officers—Selection, qualification. 
All officers elected shall be qualified electors of the city. The vacancy of any elected office shall be filled until the next annual election by appointment of the governing body. The clerk shall enter every appointment to office and the date thereon on the journal of proceedings. The commission may require all city officers elected or appointed to take and subscribe an oath and give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties, who shall qualify as required by law. 
(Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-207. - Compensation. 
The compensation or [for] the members of the governing body, other than the chairperson of the governing body, shall be $3,600.00 per year, and the compensation for the chairperson of the governing body shall be $4,200.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 1165, § 1)  
Sec. 1-208. - Terms of governing body. 
There shall be elected two commissioners for four-year terms and one commissioner for a two-year term. The candidates receiving the largest and second largest number of votes, respectively, shall be elected for four-year terms and the candidate receiving the third largest number of votes shall be elected for the two-year term. 
(Ord. No. 1183, § 1; Ord. No. 1699 , § 4, 9-6-16)  
Sec. 1-209. - Code of procedure. 
(1)  Incorporating code of procedure for Kansas cities. There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of establishing a code of procedure for the conduct of city commission meetings of the City of Goodland, Kansas, that certain model code known as the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities," First Edition (2004), prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas save and except for such articles, sections, parts or portions as are hereafter omitted, deleted, modified or changed. 
(2)  Official copies. At least three copies of the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities" shall be marked or stamped "official copy as incorporated by Ordinance No. 1523", with all sections or portions thereof intended to be omitted or changed clearly marked to show any such omission or change and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance. All official copies shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection by the public during all reasonable business hours. Official copies of the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities" shall be furnished to all persons or departments charged with the enforcement of the code or to whom the Code is applicable and to such others as may be deemed necessary. All such copies shall be furnished at the cost of the city. 
(3)  Sections 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 39 and 40 of the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities" relating to the council form of government are hereby declared to be and are omitted and deleted. 
(4)  Section 12 of the "Code of Procedure for Kansas Cities" is hereby changed to read as follows: Order of Business. At the hour appointed for the meeting, the mayor shall call the meeting to order. In council cities, the president of the council shall chair the meeting in the absence of the mayor. Upon having a quorum present, the governing body shall proceed to business, which shall be conducted in the following order: 
I.  Approval of the minutes of the last regular meeting and intervening special meetings; 
II.  Presentations of petitions, public comments, memorials; 
III.  Presentation of claims and appropriation ordinances; 
IV.  Unfinished business; 
V.  New business; 
VI.  Reports of staff and committees; 
VII.  Consent agenda; 
VIII.  Commissioner's reports; 
IX.  Mayor's reports; 
X.  Adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 1523, §§ 1—4, 8-2-04)  
Secs. 1-210—1-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 1-301. - Administrative departments; boards and commissions. 
Administrative departments shall be created by the commission as the public business may demand and as provided by state statutes. Whenever authorized to do so by state law or the ordinances of the city, the commission shall appoint members of various city boards and commissions. 
(Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-302. - Same—City manager. 
The commission shall appoint a manager as hereinafter provided and shall be responsible for his or her efficient administration of the city's business. 
(K.S.A. 12-1011; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-303. - Removal of officers. 
Officers appointed by the governing body may be removed from office for good cause, and after a hearing, by a majority of the members of the commission voting in favor thereof. 
(Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-304. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1529, adopted December 2, 2005 repealed § 1-304 in its entirety. Former § 1-304 pertained to personnel policies and derived from Res. No. 1131, adopted December 2, 1996.  
Sec. 1-305. - Employees retirement. 
A resolution passed by the governing body, to be effective January 1, 1964, which resolution extends the benefits of the Kansas Public Employees Retirement System to the employees of the City of Goodland, is incorporated by reference herein and made a part thereof as if the same had been set out in full therein.  
Sec. 1-305.1. - Employee deferred compensation plan. 
(a)  To enable the city to attract and to retain in its employment persons of competence and to provide a means for supplementing the retirement benefits of city employees, the city hereby elects to join and participate in the Kansas Public Employees Deferred Compensation Plan, as authorized by K.S.A. 75-5529a and 75-5529b. 
(b)  There is hereby established a city deferred compensation committee, which shall consist of three officers and employees of the city. The city manager shall be a member and chairman of the committee. The city clerk shall be a member and secretary of the committee. The remaining member shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve until replaced by a new appointee. 
(c)  The city clerk is hereby charged with the duties of serving as local administrator of the plan and shall provide forms to all city employees to specify the amount of any compensation voluntarily deferred, make appropriate reductions from the gross compensation of such employees, transfer to the Aetna Company the amount so deferred in accordance with the conditions established under the plan joinder agreement, and serve as secretary of the deferred compensation committee established by subsection (b). 
(d)  The city being authorized to become a joint contract owner with the state of the group annuity contract issued by Aetna Life Insurance and Annuity Company, in conjunction with the Kansas Public Employees Deferred Compensation Plan, hereby authorizes and approves execution of a plan joinder agreement and a contract joinder agreement to implement a deferred compensation plan. Such agreements shall be signed by the mayor. 
(e)  The city clerk shall periodically cause an accounting to be made to each employee participating in the city's deferred compensation plan of the amount contributed and such other information as may be required by the committee. The city shall not be responsible for any loss incurred by an employee under the city's deferred compensation plan adopted and approved by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1355, §§ 1—5, 5-20-96)  
Sec. 1-305.2. - Employee benefits contribution fund. 
(a)  The City of Goodland in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-16, 102 does hereby establish an employee benefits contribution fund for the purpose of paying the employer's share of employee benefits for the employees of the Goodland Public Library. 
(b)  The cost of employee benefits authorized for payment from the fund created by subsection (a) shall be as follows: employer contributions for social security, employee retirement and pension programs, and workers compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1361, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 1376, § 2, 5-19-97)  
Sec. 1-306. - City manager—Appointment and term. 
The administration of the city's business shall be in the hands of the manager, who shall be appointed by the commission and shall hold office at the pleasure of the commission. 
(K.S.A. 12-1011; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-307. - Same—Qualifications. 
The manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of administrative ability. Choice shall not be limited by any residence requirements. 
(K.S.A. 12-1012; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-308. - Same—Duties and functions; appointments. 
The manager shall be responsible for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He or she shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. He or she shall appoint and remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the city. All appointments shall be made upon merit and fitness alone. The manager shall be responsible for the discipline of all appointive officers, and may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or the conduct of any office or employee to be examined. He or she shall prepare and submit the annual budget to the commission and keep the commission fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city. He or she shall make recommendations to the commission on all matters concerning the welfare of the city, and shall have a seat, but no vote, in all of the public meetings of the commission. No member of the commission shall directly interfere with the conduct of any department, except at the express direction of the commission. 
(K.S.A. 12-1014; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-309. - Same—Purchasing agent. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to purchase material or equipment for the city. Expenditures of city funds shall be lawfully made on the basis of the amount provided therefor in the annual city budget. In the event the commission votes to request sealed bids on any purchase, such sealed bids must be open at a regular or special meeting of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1145; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-310. - Same—Organization. 
The affairs of the city shall be administered by the officers and employees of such administrative divisions as may be established by the manager. The commission shall annually review the administrative organization of the city and approve or disapprove such divisions and staff positions. 
(K.S.A. 12-1015; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-311. - Same—Officers and employees; appointment. 
All officers and employees shall be appointed by the manager, except as otherwise provided by state law or other city ordinances. Such officers shall include, but shall not be limited to the city clerk, city attorney, municipal judge, police chief, building inspector, city treasurer and city engineer. The manager is authorized to act as, and to perform the duties of any office for which qualified; and he or she may appoint one person to perform the duties of more than one officer or employee provided their duties are not incompatible and the same is not prohibited by law or by other ordinances. 
(K.S.A. 12-1014; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-312. - Duties, city clerk. 
The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows: 
(a)  Be the custodian of all city records and make and keep a record of all proceedings of the meetings of the city commission in a minute book provided therefor by the city commission; 
(b)  Make a record of all ordinances passed by the city commission in an ordinance book and shall publish any and all such ordinances in the form directed by the city commission and as required by law; 
(c)  Collect all money due the city, as directed by the commission and the laws of the State of Kansas, and shall keep a record of the various funds into which the money is paid; 
(d)  Keep a full and strict account of all purchases and expenditures made by the city and see that the funds for the same are duly taken from the proper funds from which they should be drawn; 
(e)  Issue receipts for all moneys received by him or her; 
(f)  Turn over to the city treasurer all moneys collected by him or her for the city, taking his or her receipt therefor, such receipts to specify the various funds into which such money is received and make a report thereof to the city commission at its next regular meeting; 
(g)  Make quarterly reports within 20 days after the quarters ending in March, June, September and December to the city commission of the receipts and expenditures of the city, stating the various funds into which moneys were received and from which moneys were expended and the balances remaining in each of the several separate funds; 
(h)  Publish or cause to be published all resolutions, motions, reports and minutes of the proceedings of the commission as shall be required of him or her; 
(i)  Have charge of the corporate seal of the city; 
(j)  Receive and file all claims or demands, or debts against the city and shall present the same for consideration at the next regular meeting of the commission; 
(k)  File and preserve all notices of the publication of the ordinances passed by the city commission and shall file all papers and records which shall at all reasonable times be open to public inspection; 
(l)  Keep in a book or books a record of all licenses, receipts of registration and certificates and of all warrants drawn upon the treasurer of the city together with a full account of all receipts and expenditures of the city, setting forth the dates, amounts, the funds into which paid or from which drawn, from whom received or in whose favor drawn; 
(m)  Keep a full and accurate account of the bonds issued by the city and shall record them therein by number, date and amount of each individual bond, date of maturity, rate of interest and when cancelled, the date of cancellation and such other information as is deemed convenient and necessary; 
(n)  Carry on all of the official correspondence of said city, giving the same prompt attention and shall present for the consideration of the commission all correspondence received and replies given; 
(o)  Perform such other and further duties as may be incumbent upon said office. 
(Ord. No. 369, § 4; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-313. - Duties, city treasurer. 
Duties of the city treasurer shall be as follows: 
(a)  To receive and safely keep all money of the city which may come into his or her hands and disburse the same only upon orders and warrants legally drawn and signed by the commission and attested by the city clerk under the seal of the city; 
(b)  To keep in suitable books a full and accurate account of all moneys received and disbursed by him or her in behalf of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom received, to whom disbursed and on what account; 
(c)  To keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto, specifying the date and amount of such payment and upon what account made. To deliver to every person making payment into the treasury duplicate receipts thereof specifying the date and amount of such payment and upon what account made, one of which receipts shall be delivered to the city clerk; 
(d)  To render to the city commission a quarterly report which he or she shall verify by affidavit, which shall show the total amount received into each fund and the total amount expended from each fund and the cash balances of each fund at the beginning and close of each quarter and the amount of outstanding registered warrants, temporary notes, bonds and all other obligations and liabilities. Such report shall be made and published within 20 days after the quarter ending in March, June, September, and December. 
(Ord. No. 369, § 5; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-313.1. - City treasurer—Inspection statements. 
The city treasurer shall keep his or her books and accounts in regular system and such books and accounts shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the commission, city clerk, city attorney or city manager and he or she shall submit a statement of his or her accounts with proper vouchers, to the commission each quarter and make such other reports as required by the statutes of Kansas. At the close of his or her term in office, he or she shall submit a statement of his or her accounts for final settlement for the year and all statements and vouchers shall be preserved in the clerk's office until final settlement be made. 
(Ord. No. 369, § 6; Code 1983)  
Sec. 1-313.2. - Same—Deposits. 
The city treasurer shall deposit in his or her name as such officer all public money that may come into his or her hands in some responsible bank or banks to be designated by the governing body and is hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, any money or orders in his or her keeping or custody, for his or her own use of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 369, § 7)  
Sec. 1-314. - Duties, city attorney. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, when requested by the governing body or the city manager, to attend any meetings of the city commission unless he or she is unavoidably prevented from attending; to prepare and file lawsuits, injunctions, and other legal matters, on behalf of the city and pursue litigation of same; to prosecute any case on behalf of the city in municipal court of the city; to draft ordinances, resolutions, leases, contracts, and any other legal documents as required by the business of the city; advise the governing body and officers of the city upon all legal questions affecting the duties of their offices or the interests of the city as may be submitted to him or her and to perform such other professional services as are incident to his or her office in the above named duties. 
(Ord. No. 844; Code 1983; Ord. No. 1395, § 1, 3-2-98)  
Sec. 1-315. - Duties, chief of police. 
Duties of the chief of police of the city shall be as follows: 
(a)  Have power to make or order an arrest with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the state or of the city, and bring the offender for trial before the municipal judge, to arrest without process, in all cases where any such offense shall be committed, or attempted to be committed, in his or her presence; 
(b)  Keep all persons arrested in the city prison, county jail or other place; 
(c)  Prevent their escape until trial can be had before the proper officer; 
(d)  Execute all processes issued by the municipal judge and delivered to him or her for that purpose; 
(e)  Act generally as a conservator of the peace within the city, and devote his or her whole time to the duties of his or her office; 
(f)  Supervise the police department of the city and prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of the department; 
(g)  Perform such other duties which may be prescribed by the city commission or city manager. 
(Ord. No. 369, § 3; Code 1983)  
Secs. 1-316—1-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OATHS AND BONDS 
 
Sec. 1-401. - Officers' oath. 
All officers of the city, whether elected or appointed, either under the laws of the State of Kansas or ordinances of the city, shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation as follows: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Kansas and faithfully discharge the duties of ___________ (here enter name of office). So help me God." 
(K.S.A. 14-205; 54-106)  
Sec. 1-402. - Oaths filed. 
All officers and employees required by Section 1-401 of this article to take and subscribe or sign an oath or affirmation shall be supplied the forms for the purpose at the expense of the city and upon taking and subscribing or signing any such oath or affirmation, the same shall be filed by the city clerk.  
Sec. 1-403. - Bonds required. 
The following city officers shall each, before entering upon the duties of their offices, give a good and sufficient surety company bond to the city, duly approved, conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of their respective duties and to properly account for all public moneys coming into their hands, in the following amounts: 
(a)  City clerk ..... $50,000.00 
(b)  City treasurer ..... 10,000.00 
(c)  City manager ..... 25,000.00 
All other officers shall give bonds in such sums as now are or may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the State of Kansas or the governing body of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1209)  
Sec. 1-404. - Premiums paid by city. 
All premiums on such surety bonds shall be paid by the city out of the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 370, § 2)  
Sec. 1-405. - Approval of bonds. 
All bonds given to the city shall be approved as to their form by the city attorney and as to their sufficiency by the governing body unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Kansas. All bonds shall be filed with and safely kept by the city clerk, except the city clerk's bond which shall be filed with and safely kept by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 370, § 3)  
Secs. 1-406—1-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INVESTMENT OF IDLE FUNDS 
 
Sec. 1-501. - Purpose and goals. 
It is the purpose of this statement to set forth the public policies of the city relating to the investment of public moneys, and establish procedural requirements as to investment management practice. The objective of the investment policy and program of the city shall be as follows: 
(a)  The safeguarding of all public moneys shall be of the highest priority. Public money shall not be invested or managed in any matter which would jeopardize the safety of the principal. 
(b)  Consistent with the requirement of safety, the objective of the investment program shall be to aggressively manage and invest all public moneys to maximize net earnings, consistent with the public responsibility to secure maximum, safe investment return possible from moneys assigned to its stewardship, to relieve demands on the property tax and to otherwise reduce the cost of public services. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-502. - Investment of idle funds. 
Temporarily idle moneys of the city not currently needed, may in accordance with the procedure hereafter described be invested in: 
(a)  Temporary notes or no-fund warrants of the city; 
(b)  Time deposits, open accounts or certificates of deposit in commercial banks or trust companies which have offices located in the city. If no commercial bank or trust company is located in the city, then in commercial banks or trust companies which have offices located in Sherman County, or in the counties of the State of Kansas adjacent to Sherman County, as provided for, and subject to the restrictions of, K.S.A. 12-1675; 
(c)  Time certificates of deposit with state or federally chartered savings and loan associations which have offices located in the city; 
(d)  Repurchase agreements with commercial banks, trust companies, or state or federally chartered savings and loan associations with offices located in the city, for direct obligations of, or obligations that are insured by, the United States government or any agency thereof. If no commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association has an office in the city, then in any commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association with offices located in Sherman County. If no such commercial bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association will enter into such an agreement at or above the interest rate set out by K.S.A. 12-1675(b)(4), then such repurchase agreements may be entered into with commercial banks, trust companies, or state or federally chartered savings and loan associations which have offices located in the State of Kansas; 
(e)  United States treasury bills or notes with maturities as the governing body shall determine, but not exceeding six months. Investments may be made in U.S. treasury bills or notes only if no eligible bank, trust company, or state or federally chartered savings and loan association can or will make the investments authorized in subsections (b) and (c) at interest rates equal to or greater than the average yield before taxes received on 91-day U.S. treasury bills or the maximum rates such banks, trust companies or savings and loan associations may pay on investments authorized under subsections (b) and (c), whichever is lower. 
(K.S.A. 12-1675; Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-503. - Procedures and restrictions. 
The city clerk shall periodically report to the governing body as to the amount of money available for investment and the period of time such amounts will be available for investment, and shall submit such recommendations as deemed necessary for the efficient and safe management of city finances. The recommendations of the city clerk shall provide for an investment program which shall so limit the amounts invested and shall schedule the maturities of investments so that the city will, at all times, have sufficient moneys available on demand deposit to assure prompt payment of all city obligations. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-504. - Custody and safekeeping. 
Securities purchased pursuant to this article shall be under the care of the mayor and city clerk and shall be held in the custody of a state or national bank or trust company, or shall be kept by such officers in a safety deposit box of the city in a bank or trust company. Securities in the original or receipt form held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall be held in the name of the city, and their redemption, transfer, or withdrawal shall be permitted only upon the written instruction of the city officers. Securities not held in the custody of a bank or trust company shall be personally deposited by such officer in a safety deposit box in the name of the city in a bank or trust company, access to which shall be permitted only in the personal presence and under the signature of the mayor and the city clerk. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-505. - Sale or transfer. 
If, in order to maintain sufficient moneys on demand deposit in any fund as provided in section 1-503, it becomes necessary to transfer or sell any securities of such funds, the officers specified in section 1-504 may transfer said securities to any other fund or funds in which there are temporarily idle moneys, or shall sell such securities, and for such purpose they shall have authority to make any necessary written direction, endorsement or assignment for and on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1987)  
Sec. 1-506. - Interest on time deposits. 
The city clerk shall deposit the interest earned on invested idle funds to the general fund, unless otherwise required or authorized by law. 
(Code 1987) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1677, and amendments thereto.  
Secs. 1-507—1-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CANCELLATION OF WARRANTS 
 
Sec. 1-601. - Policy on cancellation. 
In every case in which the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall have issued a warrant against the city treasurer, and the period of two years shall have elapsed since the date of signing of such warrant during which time no person entitled thereto shall have appeared to claim such warrant, or such warrant shall not have been presented to the city treasurer for payment, such warrant shall be cancelled and set aside upon the records of the city. Such records shall show the date of cancellation, and shall recite such warrant as unpaid, but cancelled by reason of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1110)  
Sec. 1-602. - No fund warrants. 
In case of a warrant presented to the city treasurer for payment within the two years above provided which shall not have been paid for want of sufficient funds, or which shall have been issued pursuant to law as a no-fund warrant which has been registered, recorded and endorsed pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 10-807, and any amendments thereto, the cancellation provided for in section 1-601 of this act shall apply to such warrant when a period of two years has elapsed subsequent to the publication of a call for such warrant made pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 10-808, and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1110)  
Sec. 1-603. - Revert to fund. 
All balances accruing from such unpaid cancelled warrants shall revert to the city fund upon which such warrants were drawn. 
(Ord. No. 1110)  
Secs. 1-604—1-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PETTY CASH FUND 
 
Sec. 1-701. - Established. 
There is hereby established a petty cash fund for the use of the city clerk for the purpose of making change, paying postage, freight, express, temporary labor and other miscellaneous and emergency expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 1)  
Sec. 1-702. - Amounts. 
The petty cash fund shall not exceed the amount of $2,000.00 which shall be provided as follows: 
 From the: 
   Electric utility fund 	$1,000.00 
   Water utility fund 	400.00 
   Sewer utility fund 	300.00 
   General operating fund 	   300.00 
     Total 	$2,000.00 
 
It is further provided that the individual advances listed above shall be and remain a part of the exclusive property of the respective fund. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 2)  
Sec. 1-703. - Depletion of fund. 
Whenever such petty cash fund becomes low or depleted, the city clerk should prepare vouchers covering such expenses as have been paid by such petty cash fund and shall submit the vouchers to the governing body for audit and allowance of the amount from the regular funds of the city. Warrant-checks therefore shall be payable to the petty cash funds and deposited therein to restore the petty cash fund to its original amount as provided in section 1-702. 
(Ord. No. 1236, § 3)  
Secs. 1-704—1-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND 
 
Sec. 1-801. - Fund established. 
In accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1,118, there is hereby established a capital improvements fund, which shall be used by the city to finance, in whole or in part, any public improvement need set forth in the city's capital improvement plan. 
(Ord. No. 1243, § 1)  
Sec. 1-802. - Policy objective. 
It is the policy objective of the governing body that such fund shall be used primarily to provide a financing mechanism for the repair, restoration and rehabilitation of existing public facilities. Further, it is the intent of the governing body to utilize current revenues to be credited to the fund, to the maximum extent possible to meet the city's present and future public infrastructure needs and to avoid the costs of unnecessary indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 1243, § 2)  
Sec. 1-803. - Use for studies. 
Moneys in such fund may be used to pay the cost of engineering and other advanced public improvement plans and studies, with the fund periodically reimbursed from bond proceeds, special assessments or state or federal aid that may be available for the completed project. (No expenditures for such purposes shall be made except on a finding of the governing body of its probable intent to proceed with the improvement following such engineering or advanced study.) 
(Ord. No. 1243, § 3)  
Sec. 1-804. - Plan of operation. 
(a)  The city manager shall submit to the governing body a plan of operation for the implementation of this article. Such plan shall provide that the annual, revised and adopted capital improvements plan of the city identify those improvements to be financed from the fund during the following year. 
(b)  Beginning in 1986, the city manager shall annually submit, at the same time and as a part of the annual operating budget, such proposed revenue allocations and budget transfers as may be necessary (a) to finance those improvements scheduled for completion in the next year, the cost of which is to be credited to the fund, as provided by the capital improvements plan, and (b) to set aside moneys to be annually reserved for future improvement, as provided in the capital improvements plan. 
(Ord. No. 1243, § 4)  
Sec. 1-805. - Investing. 
Moneys in the capital improvements fund shall be invested in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 10-131 and amendments thereto, with interest thereon credited to such fund. 
(Ord. No. 1243, § 5)  
Secs. 1-806—1-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. IX in its entirety and enacted a new Art. IX to read as set out herein. Former Art. IX, §§ 1-914—1-918, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1380, §§ 1—3, adopted June 16, 1997; Ord. No. 1468, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 3, 2001. 
 
DIVISION 1. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 1-901. - Planning commission established. 
The establishment of the planning commission shall be in accordance with the policies and procedures as set forth in K.S.A. 12-744. The planning commission shall consist of the number of members as specified herein. Additionally, one member may be appointed from the city governing body as an ex officio member to the planning commission. Such member shall have the right to attend all meetings and take part in all discussion but shall not vote on planning commission decisions. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-902. - Membership, terms. 
The city commission shall appoint a city planning commission which shall consist of five members; all of which shall be taxpayers and residents of the City of Goodland, Kansas. The members of the board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. The initial appointments may be shorter so that terms are staggered. Vacancies in the city planning commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only; the appointment shall be made by the city commission. Members of the city planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-903. - Election of officers. 
The members of the planning commission shall annually elect one of its own members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, each of whom shall serve for one year and until successors are appointed. The planning commission shall designate a secretary, whom does not need to be a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2, 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-904—1-910. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
 
Sec. 1-911. - Formation. 
A board of zoning appeals is hereby created in accordance with state statutes governing such creation. The word "board" when used in this division shall mean board of zoning appeals. 
The board shall adopt rules of procedure as may be necessary and proper to govern its own proceedings; such rules shall not be in conflict with other laws, regulations or resolutions. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. The BOARD shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the description of evidence presented, the findings of fact by the board, the decision of the board and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and will keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board immediately and shall be a public record 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-912. - Membership, terms. 
The members of the planning commission shall be designated to serve as the board of zoning appeals. The terms of the members of the board of zoning appeals shall run concurrently with their appointment on the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-913. - Powers and jurisdiction. 
The board shall have the following powers and jurisdictions: 
(1)  Appeals. To hear and decide where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of these regulations. 
a.  Appeals of the board may be taken by the person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or bureau of the government affected by any decision of the building official. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the building official and with the secretary of the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the secretary of the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. 
b.  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board, or by a court of record on application or notice to the zoning administrator of good cause shown. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize in specific cases a variance from the specific terms of these regulations which will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, provided the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
a.  The applicant must show that his property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of this specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the district zoning regulations, or where by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional circumstances, that the strict application of the terms of the zoning regulations actually prohibits the use of his property in the manner similar to that of other property in the zoning district where it is located. 
b.  Variances may be granted for any modifications of the specific terms of the zoning regulations, except that a variance may not be granted to allow the establishment of a use not permitted in the district regulations. 
c.  A request for a variance may be granted, upon a finding of the board that all of the following conditions have been met. The board shall make a determination of each condition and the finding shall be entered in the record. 
1.  The variance requested arises from such condition which is unique to the property in question and which is not ordinarily found in the same zone or district; and is not created by an action or actions of the property owner or applicant. 
2.  The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents. 
3.  The strict application of the provisions of the zoning regulations of which the variance is requested will constitute unnecessary hardship upon the property owner represented in the application. 
4.  The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, or general welfare. 
5.  The granting of the variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of the zoning regulations. 
(3)  Conditions of determination. In exercising the foregoing powers, the board, in conformity with the provisions of this Act, may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from where the appeal is taken, may attach appropriate conditions, and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and a concurring vote of five members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter which it is required to pass under any such regulation, or to affect any variation in such regulation. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-914. - Applications. 
(a)  The procedure for requesting a hearing before the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  All applications to the board shall be in writing on forms provided by the board. 
(2)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application and notice of the time, place, and subject of each hearing shall be published in the official newspaper (as designated by the city commission) at least 20 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing. A copy of the notice of public hearing shall be sent to each party of interest and to the planning commission. 
(3)  An application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $60.00. A separate filing fee of $60.00 shall be required for each request. 
(b)  In addition to the above requirements, certain applications require additional information as follows: 
(1)  Appeals. 
a.  An application for an appeal shall be filed within 60 days after a ruling has been made by the building official. 
b.  A copy of the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building official which the appellant believes to be in error. 
c.  A clear and accurate written description of the proposed use, work, or action in which the appeal is involved and a statement justifying the appellant's position. 
d.  Where necessary, a plot plan, drawn to scale shall be submitted in duplicate showing existing and proposed plans for the area in question. 
(2)  Variances. 
a.  The applicant shall submit a statement, in writing, justifying the variance requested, indicating specifically the enforcement provisions of the zoning regulations from which the variance is requested, and outlining in detail the manner in which it is believed that this application will meet each of the five conditions as set out in section 1-913(b)(3) of this division. 
b.  The applicant shall submit a sketch, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the lot or lots included in the application, the structures existing thereon, and the structures contemplated necessitating the variance requested. All appropriate dimensions should be included and any other information that would be helpful to the board in consideration of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-915. - Performance. 
In making any decisions varying or modifying any provisions of the zoning regulations, the board shall impose such restrictions, terms, time limitations, landscaping, and other appropriate safeguards to protect adjoining property. 
The board may require a performance bond to guarantee the installation of improvements such as parking lot surfacing, landscaping, etc. The amount of the bond shall be based on a general estimate of cost for the improvements as determined by the board and shall be enforceable by or payable to the city commission in the sum equal to the cost of constructing the required improvements. 
In lieu of the performance bond requirement, the board may specify a time limit for the completion of such required improvements and, in the event the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the board may declare the granting of the application null and void after reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-905), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-916. - Who may appeal from the board decision. 
Any person, department, or departments of the government jointly or separately aggrieved by any decision of the board may present to the circuit court having jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, stating that such decision is illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality, and asking for relief therefrom. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within 30 days after the date of filing the decision in the office of the board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(2-906), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-917—1-920. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CEMETERY ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-921. - Advisory board created. 
There is hereby created a cemetery advisory board for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(3-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-922. - Same—Appointment. 
The cemetery advisory board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by the governing body of the city for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(3-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-923. - Same—Organization. 
The board shall select its own officers annually during the month of December. Officers of the board shall consist of a chairperson and vice chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(3-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-924. - Same—Duties. 
The board shall make recommendations to the governing body as to all major proposals and propositions for the construction and improvement of the city cemetery including the acquisition of land and the acquisition of major equipment and facilities for cemetery purposes. The board shall make reports and recommendations to the governing body on all matters referred to it and any further recommendations as deemed advisable. The board shall administer the tree and fence fund. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(3-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-925. - Same—Meetings and reports. 
The board shall meet at least once each three months during winter months and shall meet at least once each month during summer months and report its recommendations to the governing body through its chairman, the director of recreation or the city manager. At least once each year the board shall report on the financial condition of the tree fund and the fence fund. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(3-905), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-926—1-930. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - HIGH PLAINS MUSEUM BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-931. - Museum created. 
There is hereby established the High Plains Museum for the purpose of collecting, preserving and displaying materials illustrative of the history of the city and Sherman County, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-932. - Administrator. 
The High Plains Museum shall be administered by the city manager, with the advice of the museum board and in accordance with sections 1-308 and 1-311. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-933. - Staffing. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to hire such employees as are necessary for the execution of this division subject to the provisions of section 1-311. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-934. - Board created. 
There is hereby created a High Plains Museum Board for the city. The museum board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the governing body as follows: five members of the board shall be appointed from residents of the city at large, one member shall be selected from Sherman County at large and one member shall be recommended for appointment by the board of the Sherman County Historical Society. Terms shall be for three years. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by the governing body of the city for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-935. - Same—Officers. 
The board shall select its own officers annually during the month of April. Officers of the board shall consist of a president, vice president and any other officers the board deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-905), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-936. - Same—Duties. 
The board shall make recommendations to the governing body concerning the development of policies, procedures and activities of the museum. The board shall have the responsibility of representing the interests of the public to the museum and of the museum to the governing body. The board shall make reports and recommendations to the governing body on all matters referred to it by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-906), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-937. - Same—Meetings. 
The board shall meet at least once each three months and report its recommendations to the governing body through its chairperson, the director of the High Plains Museum or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(4-907), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-938—1-940. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-941. - Board created. 
There is hereby established an organization known as the Goodland Airport Advisory Board. The purpose of the Goodland Airport Advisory Board, hereinafter called "board," shall be to provide the governing body with information and advice pertaining to policy for the operation, programs, property, gifts to the Goodland Airport, Renner Field, hereinafter called "airport," loans to the airports, exhibits, displays and employees of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-942. - Powers. 
The provisions relating to the powers of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  The board shall have the power to expend any moneys allocated to the airport by the governing body, and to hire and terminate employees of the airport. The board shall also advise the governing body as to the promotion and expansion of the airport; 
(2)  The board shall advise the governing body of its recommendations for acquisition and disposition of airport property, and shall make recommendations to the governing body for appointment of members to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-943. - Membership, terms of office. 
Provisions relating to membership and terms of office shall be as follows: 
(1)  Appointments to the board shall be made by the governing body, with recommendations from the board; 
(2)  Five members of the board shall be appointed from residents of Sherman County, Kansas. Additionally, one member may be appointed from the city governing body as an ex officio member to the airport board. Such member shall have the right to attend all meetings and take part in all discussion but shall not vote on airport board decisions. 
(3)  The members of the board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. The initial appointments may be shorter so that terms are staggered. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by appointment by the governing body, with recommendations from the board, for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-944. - Organization. 
The board shall select its own officers annually in the month of June, the officers to be a president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer, and any other officers by the board deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-945. - Meetings and reports. 
The board shall meet at least once each month and report its activities to the governing body through the governing body representative or the city manager after each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-905), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-946. - Budget. 
Budget requests by the board shall be submitted to the governing body no later than August 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-906), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-947. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  The airport advisory board shall serve as the hereby created board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the airport manager in the enforcement of chapter 13, article IX. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of chapter 13, article IX upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass. 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances relating to chapter 13, article IX. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and in harmony with the provisions of this division. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city clerk and on due cause shown. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of chapter 13, article IX. 
(d)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the airport manager or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under chapter 13, article IX. or to effect variation to chapter 13, article IX. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-907), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-948. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the airport manager, made in the administration of chapter 13, article IX may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the airport manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The airport manager shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the airport manager certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the airport manager cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment or notice to the airport manager and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of chapter 13, article IX, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-908), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-949. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the District Court of Sherman County, Kansas, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(5-909), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-950. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-951. - Recreation program created. 
The governing body of the city does hereby establish a system of public recreation. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-952. - Administration. 
The city recreation program shall be administered by the city manager in accordance with sections 1-308 and 1-311. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-953. - Staffing. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to hire such employees and officers as are necessary for the execution of this division subject to the provisions of section 1-311. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-954. - Advisory board created. 
There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board for the city, consisting of five members. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-955. - Same—Appointment. 
The parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of five members to be appointed by the governing body The members of the board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. The initial appointments may be shorter so that terms are staggered. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by the governing body of the city for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-905), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-956. - Same—Organization. 
The board shall select its own officers annually during the month of December. Officers of the board shall consist of a chairperson and vice-chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-906), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-957. - Same—Duties. 
The board shall make recommendations to the governing body as to all major proposals and propositions for the construction, reconstruction and improvement of public parks and recreational facilities, including the acquisition of land for park purposes, the acquisition of major recreational equipment and facilities, and the institution of new programs in the recreational system. The board shall make reports and recommendations to the governing body on all matters referred to it and any further recommendations as deemed advisable. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-907), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-958. - Same—Meetings and reports. 
The board shall meet at least once each three months during winter months and shall meet at least once each month during summer months and report its recommendations to the governing body through its chairperson, the director of recreation or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(6-908), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-959, 1-960. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CITY TREE BOARD 
 
Sec. 1-961. - Definitions. 
Definitions of terms as used in this division shall be as follows: 
Park trees are trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
Street trees are trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-962. - Creation, establishment of a tree board. 
There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city. The members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be designated to serve as the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-963. - Term of office. 
The terms of the members of the tree board shall run concurrently with their appointment on the parks and recreation advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-964. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-904), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-965. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, trimming, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in public ways, streets and alleys. Such plan will be presented annually to the city commission and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree plan for the city. The board, when requested by the city commission, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-905), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-966. - Operation. 
The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-906), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-967. - Species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species for Goodland, Kansas. No species other than those included in the list may be planted as street trees or park trees without written permission of the tree board. 
Small Trees 	Medium Trees 	Large Trees 
Flowering crabapple (sp) 	Honey locust 	Bur oak 
Paper mulberry 	Kentucky coffee tree 	Hackberry 
Redbud 	Red mulberry (male) 	Black walnut 
Hawthorn (sp) 	Golden rain tree 	Green ash 
Bradford pear 	Osage orange (male, thornless) 	Silver maple 
Fruit trees 	Bald cypress 	Cottonwood (cottonless) 
	Japanese pagoda tree 	Basswood 
	Black cherry 	Blue spruce 
	Eastern Red cedar 	Ponderosa pine 
	Rocky Mtn. juniper 	Scotch pine 
	Russian olive 	Austrian pine 
	Catalpa 	
 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-907), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-968. - Spacing. 
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 1-967 of this section, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: 
(1)  Small trees: 30 feet. 
(2)  Medium trees: 40 feet. 
(3)  Large trees: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-908), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-969. - Distance from curb and sidewalk. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in section 1-967 of this division, and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: 
(1)  Small trees: two feet. 
(2)  Medium trees: three feet. 
(3)  Large trees: four feet. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-909), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-970. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
No tree or shrub of a height of three and one-half feet or more shall be planted or shall be allowed to grow nearer than 20 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No tree or shrub shall be planted or allowed to grow nearer than ten feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-910), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-971. - Utilities. 
No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in section 1-967 of this division may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-911), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-972. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, spray, preserve and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety when servicing city utilities or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-912), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-973. - Trimming; corner clearance. 
Topping or severe pruning of trees will be forbidden by anyone other than the city or its approved representative. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-913), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-974. - Dead, diseased tree removal on private property. 
In conformity with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-3204 and any amendments thereto, the city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life or property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to the other trees within the city. The city code enforcement officer will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within the ten-day period as specified in such notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owners property tax notice. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-914), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-975. - Interference with tree board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the tree board or any of his agents or servants, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-915), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-976. - Arborists license, bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation of trimming, pruning, treating or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be $25.00 annually in advance; provided, that no license shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,0000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-916), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-977. - Review by city commission. 
The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the tree board to the city commission who may hear the matter and make final decisions. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-917), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-978. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this division other than section 1-976 of this division shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 and any person, firm or corporation violating section 1-976 of this division shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(7-918), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-977—1-980. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONSTRUCTION ADVISORY BOARD OF TRADES AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 1-981. - Establishment and membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established the construction advisory board of trades and appeals ("CABT" or "board") which will consist of seven members who shall be residents of the city and have the following qualifications: 
(1)  One City of Goodland licensed residential contractor; 
(2)  One City of Goodland licensed general commercial contractor; 
(3)  One City of Goodland licensed master electrician; 
(4)  One City of Goodland licensed master plumber; 
(5)  One City of Goodland licensed master mechanic (HVAC); 
(6)  One realtor; and 
(7)  One member at large. 
(b)  A building official of the city and a representative of the Goodland Fire Department shall also serve as ex officio members. Such members shall have the right to attend all meetings and take part in all discussion but shall not vote on CABT decisions. In the event the required license is not currently available in the city or if no suitable licensed individuals are able and willing to serve, the governing body may appoint a suitable alternative in its sole discretion. 
(c)  The members of the board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. The initial appointments may be shorter so that terms are staggered. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(8-901), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-982. - Officers; vacancies; conflict of interest; rules and regulations; compensation. 
(a)  The board shall annually elect one of its own officers, each of whom shall serve for one year and until successors are appointed. Officers of the board shall consist of a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary and such other officers as may be deemed necessary by the board. 
(b)  In case of death, incapacity, resignation or disqualification of any member, appointment to such vacancy on the board shall be made for the unexpired term by the governing body. 
(c)  Should any member have a conflict of interest in any matter coming before the board, the member shall not discuss or vote on the matter. 
(d)  The governing body may adopt rules and regulations providing for removal of members of the board. 
(e)  Members of the board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, as deemed desirable by the governing body. 
(f)  The board may create bylaws to govern the board's internal procedures, meeting calendar and proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(8-902), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-983. - Recording secretary; actions; records of proceedings. 
(a)  When the secretary is a member of the board, a recording secretary or recording secretary pro temp may also be elected. 
(b)  All actions of the board shall be taken by a majority vote of the membership thereof present at the meeting. 
(c)  Minutes of all proceedings of the board shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(8-903), 2-20-18)  
Sec. 1-984. - Powers and duties. 
The CABT will work directly with the relevant city staff and have the following duties: 
(1)  To study current code relevant to the board and make recommendations for changes and amendments; 
(2)  To review the current codes and potential for updating and adopting new codes to replace or extend the existing code; 
(3)  Make recommendations to resolve disputes with code interpretation and establish general policy for enforcement; 
(4)  Regularly review and monitor contract licensing and continuing education requirements including any initial licensing requirements, the qualifications for specific individual candidates for licensing and disciplinary action for current license holders. 
(5)  To act as the construction board of appeals. The board shall be the final determiner of the scope and meaning of all provisions of the construction codes which may be unclear, ambiguous, or requiring interpretation. Construction codes shall include the Uniform Plumbing Code, the National Electric Code, Uniform Building Code, and any other construction-related code as determined applicable by the governing body. 
(6)  Except when acting as the construction board of appeals, the board will function in an advisory capacity only. 
(7)  The board shall prioritize matters as requested by the governing body and investigate or not matters as requested by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1710 , § 2(8-904), 2-20-18)  
Secs. 1-985—1-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FUNDS  
DIVISION 1. - MUNICIPAL EQUIPMENT RESERVE FUND 
 
Sec. 1-1001. - Established. 
As authorized by K.S.A. 12-1,117 the City of Goodland hereby establishes a municipal equipment reserve fund to finance the acquisition of equipment. Monies for said fund may be budgeted and transferred to such fund from any source which may be lawfully utilized for such purposes, including equipment use, charges on the various departments and agencies of the city to finance new and replacement equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 1, 8-7-95)  
Sec. 1-1002. - Equipment defined. 
For the purpose of this division, equipment shall include machinery, vehicles and any other equipment or personal property including, but not limited to computer hardware and software, which the city is authorized to purchase for municipal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1338, § 2, 8-7-95)  
DIVISION 2. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 1-1003. - Sale of unclaimed, abandoned and confiscated personal property in possession of the city. 
(a)  The city is hereby authorized to sell all lost and stolen securities, money or personal property which shall remain unclaimed in the possession of any department of the city for six months, together with all unclaimed or confiscated property of any nature which shall have been in the custody of the police department for a period of six months, and the city is hereby authorized to sell at public auction such property. 
(b)  Notice of the public auction and a general description of the property to be sold shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of sale. 
(c)  The proceeds of said sale less the expenses of sale shall be deposited in the general fund of the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1433, §§ I—III, 4-3-2000)  
Secs. 1-1004—1-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 1-1101. - Procedures regarding both inspection and copying of open public records. 
The following procedures are hereby adopted and shall be applied by each official custodian and record custodian: 
(A)  Consistent with the policy, duties and procedures established by the State of Kansas in K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., all city record custodians shall provide full access and assistance in a timely and efficient manner to persons who request access to public records. 
(B)  Record custodians shall adopt and apply open public record access and copy procedures consistent with the policies of the city and with the provisions of the Open Records Act. Specifically, such procedures will inform members of the public of the procedures to be followed in making a request for inspection or copy of an open public record, including the hours during which record inspection or copy request may be made; who a request is to be made to; the forms to be completed in making a request; and the schedule of fees charged. 
(C)  Record custodians shall adopt and apply procedures which will ensure the protection and preservation of public records with respect to the manner in which such records are inspected and copied. 
(D)  Record custodians shall take necessary measures, consistent with their duties to ensure that the essential functions of the custodian's office, department or agency, is not disrupted by requests for record inspection and copying. 
(E)  All inspections and copying of open public records shall be performed by, or under the supervision of, the record custodian responsible for such records. 
(F)  Mechanical reproduction of a record shall not be undertaken when it is the judgment of the record custodian that any available means of mechanically reproducing the subject record is likely to cause damage to the record. 
(G)  All persons requesting the inspection of or a copy of open public records shall make such request in writing which reasonably describes the record sought prior to the request being honored. In instances where the requestor cannot provide sufficient information to identify a record, the custodian shall assist in making such identification. No form shall be required for requests made for records which have been reproduced for free public distribution. 
(H)  In cases where a request for a specific record gives the record custodian reason to believe that the record contains information of a personal nature which, if disclosed, would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, the record custodian shall inform the requester that a 72-hour waiting period must run before such record may be inspected. During that 72-hour period, the record custodian shall make every reasonable effort to determine the identity of those persons whose privacy interest may be so affected by disclosure. The record custodian shall attempt to contact such persons and ascertain whether they, or any of them, will seek a court order challenging disclosure. If so, the record custodian shall deny inspection pending the outcome of litigation or an intervening court order. 
(I)  The record custodian may demand reasonable identification of any person requesting a record. 
(J)  Any fees for record inspection or for copies are due at the time the records or copies thereof, are provided to the requester, unless the record custodian has demanded that prepayment of all or part of such fees be made. Fees are to be paid to the record custodian. 
(K)  The record custodian shall notify the record requester, prior to commencing search of the record or copies thereof, of his or her estimate of the fee which will be made for honoring the request whenever such estimate exceeds $10.00. 
(L)  The record custodian shall determine and assess a charge covering mailing and handling costs accrued in responding to requests through the mail service. 
(M)  The record custodian may exercise his or her discretion to reduce or waive any inspection or copying fees when such is in the public interest. 
(N)  No record inspection or copying charge shall be assessed against officers or employees of the city who make requests which are reasonably necessary to the performance of their official duties. 
(O)  No inspection fee shall be charged the requester if the actual cost of locating the records pursuant to one request is less than $10.00 or, in the case of multiple requests brought by the same person or on behalf of the same person, where the actual cost of locating the records pursuant to requests made over a 24-hour period is less than $10.00. 
(P)  No inspection fee will be assessed when a denial of a request is made. The record custodian shall, upon making a denial of an inspection request, forward a copy of the denial to the city attorney. 
(Q)  Hours for making requests for inspection or copying shall be all regular working hours for each day the office maintains regular office hours. If an office keeping or maintaining public records does not have regular office hours Monday through Friday, the official custodian for such office shall establish hours for each such day when no regular office hours are kept, at which time members of the public may make requests for record inspection or copies of records. 
(R)  Removal of open public records from the office where kept and maintained, for purposes of inspection and/ or the making of copies shall be permitted only with the written permission of the record custodian. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to return such records at the time and place where such return has been promised. Upon conviction for violation of this subsection a person may be fined up to $50.00 or sentenced to five days in the Sherman County Jail, or be both so fined and imprisoned. 
(S)  The above procedures, as well as, any other inspection and copying procedures shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the record custodian. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1102. - Inspection fee. 
(A)  Where request has been made for inspection of any open public record which is readily available to the record custodian there shall be no inspection fee charged to the requester. 
(B)  If a request takes longer than 15 minutes to complete, time to complete the request will also be charged at the wage rate of the employee(s) completing the request. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1103. - Copying fee. 
(A)  A fee of $0.25 for each 8½ inch × 11 inch copy and $0.50 for each 11 inch × 17 inch copy shall be charged for photocopying public records, such fee to cover the cost of labor, materials, and equipment. When it is necessary for the information to be mailed, there shall be an additional charge assessed to cover postage and handling. 
(B)  For copying any public records which cannot be reproduced by the city's photocopying equipment, the requester shall be charged the actual cost to the city, including staff time, in reproducing such records. 
(C)  Other costs are as follows: 
(1)  Records copied to computer disks: 
CD/DVD ..... $25.00 
(2)  Police department documents: 
Accident reports ..... $10.00 
Accident report photos ..... $25.00 
Offense reports ..... $10.00 
Call for service records ..... $10.00 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1104. - Prepayment of fees. 
(A)  A record custodian may demand prepayment of the fees established by this article whenever he or she believes this to be in the best interest of the city. The prepayment amount shall be an estimate of the inspection and/or copying charges accrued in fulfilling the record request. Any overage or underage in the prepayment shall be settled prior to inspection of the requested record or delivery of the requested copies. 
(B)  Prepayment of inspection and/or copying fees shall be required whenever, in the best estimate of the record custodian, such fees are estimated to exceed $10.00. 
(C)  Where prepayment has been demanded by the record custodian, no record shall be made available to the requester until such prepayment has been made. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1105. - Appointment of official custodians. 
The following city officers are hereby appointed as official custodians for purposes of the Kansas Open Records Act (KORA), K.S.A. 45-215 et seq., and are hereby charged with responsibility for compliance with that Act with respect to the hereinafter listed public records: 
City clerk: All public records kept and maintained in the city clerk's office and all other public records not provided for elsewhere in this section. 
Chief of police: All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the city police department. 
Clerk of the municipal court: All public records not on file in the office of the city clerk and kept and maintained in the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1106. - Designation of additional records custodians. 
(A)  Each of the official custodians appointed in section 1-1105 is hereby authorized to designate any subordinate officers or employees to serve as records custodian. Such records custodians shall have such duties and powers as are set out in KORA. 
(B)  Whenever an official custodian shall appoint another person as a records custodian he or she shall notify the city clerk of such designation and the city clerk shall maintain a register of all such designations. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1107. - Duties of custodians. 
All city officers and employees appointed or designated under this resolution shall: protect public records from damage and disorganization; prevent excessive disruption of the essential functions of the city; provide assistance and information upon request; insure efficient and timely action and response to all applications for inspection of public records; and shall carry out the procedures adopted by this city for inspecting and copying open public records. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1108. - Requests to be directed to custodians. 
(A)  All members of the public, in seeking access to, or copies of, a public record in accordance with the provisions of KORA, shall address their requests to the custodian charged with responsibility for the maintenance of the record sought to be inspected or copied. 
(B)  Whenever any city officer or employee appointed or designated as a custodian under this resolution is presented with a request for access to, or copy of, a public record which record the custodian does not have in his or her possession and for which he or she has not been given responsibility to keep and maintain, the custodian shall so advise the person requesting the record. Further, the person making the request shall be informed as to which custodian the request should be addressed to, if such is known by the custodian receiving the request. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Sec. 1-1109. - Appointment of local freedom of information officer; appointment and duties. 
(A)  The city clerk is hereby appointed as the local freedom of information officer and charged with all of the duties as set forth in section 1-1107. 
(B)  The local freedom of information officer shall: 
(1)  Prepare and provide educational materials and information concerning the Kansas Open Records Act; 
(2)  Be available to assist the city and members of the general public to resolve disputes relating the Kansas Open Records Act; 
(3)  Respond to inquiries relating to the Kansas Open Records Act; 
(4)  Establish the requirements for the content, size, shape and other physical characteristics of a brochure required to be displayed or distributed or otherwise made available to the public under the Kansas Open Records Act. In establishing such requirements for the content of the brochure, the local freedom of information officer shall include plainly written basic information about the rights of a requester, the responsibilities of the city, and the procedures for inspecting and obtaining a copy of public records under the Act. 
(Ord. No. 1720 , § 1, 1-7-19)  
Chapter 2 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1601, § 1, adopted May 4, 2009, amended chapter 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 2, §§ 2-101—2-311, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1979; Ord. No. 845; Ord. No. 846; Ord. No. 907; Ord. No. 1037; Ord. No. 1106; Ord. No. 1285; Ord. No. 1302, adopted December 7, 1992; Ord. No. 1313, adopted October 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1349, adopted March 18, 1996; Ord. No. 1389, adopted October 6, 1997; Ord. No. 1546, adopted May 1, 2006. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-100. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall mean: 
(a)  Abandon means the leaving of an animal by its owner or other person responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper care or custody. 
(b)  Animal means any live vertebrate or invertebrate creature, domestic or wild other than humans, and including all fowl. 
(c)  Animal control officer means the person or persons employed by the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Animal shelter means any facility, which is used or designed for use to house or contain any animal, which is owned, operated or maintained by the City of Goodland, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit corporate organizations devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. Any designated representative of the animal shelter must adhere to all cruelty and nuisance laws contained herein. 
(e)  At-large means to be outside of a fence or other enclosure which restrains the animals to a particular premises or not under the control, by leash or lead, of the owner or other authorized person capable of restraining the animal. Animals tethered to a stationary object within range of public thoroughfares are deemed to be "at-large." 
(f)  Bite means any penetration or bruising/marking of the skin by animal teeth. 
(g)  Cat means any member of the species felis catus, regardless of sex. 
(h)  Dangerous or vicious animal means any animal deemed to be dangerous or vicious as defined in section 2-219, below. 
(i)  Dog means any member of the species canis familiaris, regardless of sex. 
(j)  Fowl means all animals that are included in the zoological class avis, which shall include, but is not limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guineas, and pigeons. 
(k)  Harbor means to allow any animal to habitually remain or lodge or to be fed within his or her home, store, yard, enclosure, place of business or any other premises where he or she resides or controls. 
(l)  Humane live animal trap means any cage trap that upon activation encloses an animal without placing any physical restraint upon any part of the body of such animal. 
(m)  Humanely euthanize means the proper injection of a substance that quickly and painlessly terminates the life of an animal, or any other method approved by the American Veterinary Medical Association or the American Humane Society. 
(n)  Immediate control means the regulation and supervision by a competent person so that an animal is unable to run or get loose at will. 
(o)  Kennel means an establishment used for the keeping of more than four domesticated animals, commonly considered to be household pets, or for sale, if more than four months old. A kennel must comply with all code and zoning laws of the city. Individuals possessing an over limit permit shall not be deemed a kennel. 
(p)  Livestock includes but is not limited to, cattle, horses, goats, sheep, or other animals commonly regarded or used as farm or ranch animals. 
(q)  Neutered/spayed means any male or female dog or cat that has been permanently rendered sterile. 
(r)  Own means and includes own, keep, harbor, shelter, manage, possess, or have a part interest in any animal. If a minor owns any such animal subject to the provisions of this chapter, the head of the household of which such minor is a member shall be deemed to own such animal for the purposes of this chapter. 
(s)  Owner means the one who owns, or his or her employee, agent, or other competent person into whose charge an animal has been placed by the actual owner as described in subsection (r) above. 
(t)  Vaccination means an injection of a vaccine, approved by the state board of public health and administered by a licensed veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing an animal against rabies. 
(u)  Veterinarian means a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the State of Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-101. - Keeping animals in the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to keep or maintain horses, mules, asses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, fowl or other similar animals within the City of Goodland, Kansas. This article shall not apply to canaries, parrots or similar types of birds that are not prohibited by any other law, normally kept in cages. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-102. - Shelters, pens—Animals at-large—Nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having in custody any horses, mules, asses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, fowl or other similar animals: 
(a)  To maintain a stable, shed, pen or other places where horses, mules, asses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, fowl or other similar animals are kept anywhere within the city limits. 
(b)  To permit the same to run at-large in the City of Goodland, Kansas, or to restrain the same upon the streets, alleys or public grounds of the city. 
(c)  If any horses, mules, asses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, fowl or other similar animals are kept, maintained, or otherwise permitted within the City of Goodland, Kansas, said condition shall constitute a nuisance, and the governing body shall have the authority to abate such nuisance when it is found to exist anywhere within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-103. - Penalty. 
Wherever in this chapter any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the performance of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the municipal court judge. Each day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-104. - Exotic animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control within the City of Goodland, Kansas, any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous wild animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous animal, or any other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his/her possession or under his/her control within the limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, any of the following animals: 
1.  All poisonous animals including rear-fang snakes. 
2.  Apes, such as chimpanzees, gibbons, gorillas, orangutans or saimangs. 
3.  Baboons. 
4.  Badgers. 
5.  Bears. 
6.  Birds of prey or raptors. 
7.  Bison. 
8.  Bobcats. 
9.  Cheetahs. 
10.  Crocodiles or alligators. 
11.  Constrictor snakes exceeding six feet in length. 
12.  Coyotes. 
13.  Deer, elk, antelope or moose. 
14.  Elephants. 
15.  Game cocks or other fighting birds. 
16.  Hippopotami. 
17.  Hyenas. 
18.  Jaguars. 
19.  Leopards. 
20.  Lions. 
21.  Lynxes. 
22.  Monkey. 
23.  Ostriches. 
24.  Pumas, also known as cougars, mountain lions or panthers. 
25.  Raccoons. 
26.  Reptiles exceeding four feet in length. 
27.  Rhinoceroses. 
28.  Skunks. 
29.  Tigers. 
30.  Vietnamese or other potbelly pigs. 
31.  Wolves. 
(c)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to bonafied pet shops, zoos, circuses, carnivals, educational institutions or medical institutions, or to individuals possessing a current state or federal permit for possession of a listed animal, if: 
1.  Their location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinances of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
2.  All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary condition and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors. 
3.  Animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to prevent their escape. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to order an animal found to be in violation of this section to be confined, destroyed, or removed from the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(e)  Penalties: Refer to section 2-103. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Ownership. 
Any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal for seven consecutive days shall be conclusively presumed to be the owner of such animal for purposes of this title. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep or harbor, in or at a single-family residence or individual unit in a multifamily residence, regardless of ownership of the animals, more than four dogs or four cats or any combination thereof totaling four. 
A litter of pups or kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of time not to exceed four months from birth. 
Any person who lawfully owned more than four dogs or four cats or any combination thereof totaling four prior to the adoption of this article may retain their animals provided, however, they obtain a special "over limit" permit or possess a current Kansas Foster Home License, issued pursuant to K.A.R. 9-22-4, and amendments thereto, and must register and license all dogs and/or cats they own with the city within 90 days from date of passing and adoption of this article. 
A special "over limit" permit is nontransferable. If for any reason an animal in excess of four dogs or four cats or any combination thereof totaling four, after the adoption of this article, is lost, stolen given away, or dies, and there still remains more than four dogs or four cats or any combination thereof, there can be no replacements of the lost, sold, given, or deceased animal. 
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Each dog or cat kept in excess of the limits set forth in this section shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Upon order of the municipal court, all dogs and cats kept in excess of this section may be seized and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-202. - Animal control. 
All dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or keeper except when taken off the premises on a leash, in a cage, under direct care and control, in a car or other conveyance, or when within a designated dog park or off-leash area in accordance with section 13-510. For the purpose of this section "confined to the premises" shall mean confined either inside the resident structure of the owner or, if outside the resident structure of the owner, the dog(s) shall be physically restrained on a tether or within a suitable fence or other proper method of physical restraint from which it cannot escape. If the dog(s) is in the physical presence of its owner on its own property and under his or her direct and immediate control the dog(s) shall be considered confined to the premises. 
In this section "tether" shall be defined as a leash, rope, chain, lead or other similar apparatus at least ten feet long and weighing no more than one-eighth of the dog's body weight. Dogs shall be tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury, strangulation, or entanglement on fences, trees, or other man made or natural obstacles. 
Cats must be kept under reasonable restraint to prevent nuisance activities as prohibited by this article. 
Female animals in season shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes and shall be kept securely confined within a building at all times while in heat. A female animal in heat shall be allowed outside a building periodically, for elimination of bodily waste but shall be kept under physical restraint by a competent person at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1723 , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 2-203. - Seizure. 
When a law enforcement officer or animal control officer detects an animal in violation of section 2-202, the officer shall determine, when possible, the owner of such animal. If the owner can be determined, such animal may still be seized and impounded at the discretion of the officer. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-204. - Redemption of impounded animals; vaccination. 
Redemption of an animal impounded under the provisions of this section shall be permitted upon payment of any pound fees and any veterinarian fees then due and owing. In the event the animal has not been vaccinated for rabies when the owner seeks to redeem the animal, the owner shall be required to have the animal vaccinated and duly licensed with the city prior to the time of the animal being removed from the custody of the city. If a registered veterinarian determines it would be temporarily dangerous to the health of the animal to vaccinate it, then the owner will be given an extension up to 30 days after the animal is released from impoundment in which to obtain the vaccination. In either event, the license tag required by Code section 2-211 shall be withheld pending final vaccination. 
For any animal impounded the impound fee is $20.00 and the boarding fee is $25.00 for the time the animal is in the custody of the city. 
For any animal quarantined, the impound fee is $20.00 and the boarding fee is $10.00 per day for the time the animal is in the custody of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1667, §§ 1, 2, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 1688 , § 1, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 2-205. - Procedure on failure to redeem. 
The city shall have a lien against any animal seized pursuant to section 2-203 for its keep. If after five days from the date of seizure the animal has not been redeemed by payment made to the municipal clerk, the city shall have the right to dispose of the animal by giving the animal to the Northwest Kansas Animal Shelter. If the Northwest Kansas Animal Shelter will not accept said animal, then the animal may be humanely destroyed unless there is good reason, in the opinion of the impounding veterinarian, to suspect the presence of rabies in such animal, then the animal may be retained at the discretion of the impounding veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1667, §§ 1, 3, 12-15-14)  
Sec. 2-206. - Noisy animals and destruction of property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to permit any animal to make excessive noise, which may be reasonably expected to disturb a neighbor. The following definitions and conditions shall apply to this provision: 
(1)  The phrase "excessive noise" means any noise, which is so loud, continuous or untimely, as to disturb the sleep or peace of the neighbors. 
(2)  The term neighbor means any person residing in a residential structure, which is within 100 yards of the property on which the animal is kept. 
(b)  Shall not permit any animal to become a nuisance. For the purpose of this provision, nuisance is defined as any animal which: 
(1)  Molests or interferes with persons in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  Attacks or injures persons or other domestic animals. 
(3)  Damages public or private property by its activities or with its excrement. 
(4)  Scatters refuse that is bagged or otherwise contained. 
(5)  Causes any condition, which threatens the health or well being of persons or other animals. 
(6)  Any condition found in 2-309. 
(c)  If either an animal shelter or kennel is found to be a nuisance, as defined herein, twice within a 12-month period involving complaints from, at least, two separate households or individuals, the animal shelter or kennel license may be revoked by the governing body for not more than three years nor less than one year. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-207. - Animal bite procedure; generally. 
Except as provided in section 2-210, a dog, cat, or any other warm-blooded animal or any reptile, which bites, scratches, or otherwise injures a person shall immediately be quarantined at the owner's expense by city personnel at (1) the residence of the owner of the animal, (2) a veterinary hospital, or (3) a facility holding a current state pound and shelter license, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than 12 days. The total period of confinement of the animal is to be for a period not less than ten days nor more than 12 days from the date of the actual bite itself. Provided, however, that any animal which is not located, apprehended or picked up within the ten to 12-day period from the date of the bite, shall, immediately upon apprehension, be taken to a qualified veterinarian for the purpose of testing or checking the animal for rabies or any other communicable diseases. Such tests or checks shall be made at the animal owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1688 , § 2, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 2-208. - Notice of impoundment of biting animal to police chief. 
In all cases of impoundment under this section, a veterinarian shall give immediate written notice to the chief of police that such animal has been confined and will be confined not less than ten days nor more than 12 days. At the expiration of the aforesaid confinement period, the veterinarian shall give immediate written notice to the chief of police as to the health of such animal pertaining to the diagnosis of rabies. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1688 , § 3, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 2-209. - Notification of owner of impounded animal. 
If the address of the owner of the animal can be determined, the chief of police shall make reasonable effort to notify the owner that the animal is impounded under the provisions of sections 2-207 through 2-213 and the owner has the right to redeem the animal at the expiration of confinement upon the payment of pound fees, any veterinarian fees and any license and penalty fees then due and owing the city. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-210. - Alternatives for confined animal. 
In the event the investigating officer determines: 
(a)  That the animal, which injured the person or another domesticated animal, did so while confined on a chain or leash on property under the control of the animal's owner or within a fence or building enclosing property under the control of the animal's owner; 
(b)  That the person injured was upon the owner's property; 
(c)  That the animal had an effective rabies inoculation and was duly licensed under this title at the time of the injury, then, the animal need not be impounded in accordance with section 2-207, but the following alternative procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  If the injured person, his or her parent, or guardian desires that the animal be impounded and agrees in writing to pay for its board during the period of impoundment, it shall be so impounded for the period specified in section 2-207 notwithstanding any other provision of this title. 
(2)  If the injured party, his or her parent, or guardian is unwilling to agree in writing to pay for the animal's board during the period of impoundment, the animal shall be permitted to remain on the property of its owner or keeper; provided no animal shall be allowed to remain on the property of its owner or keeper under this section unless such person signs a written agreement to keep the animal confined to the property for the period specified in section 2-207 and further agrees to allow the animal to be examined periodically to determine its physical condition during the confinement period. If the owner or keeper is not willing to sign such an agreement, the animal shall be immediately impounded in accordance with section 2-207. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-211. - Licenses. 
For the issuance of each license, such owner or keeper shall pay the city clerk for each and every dog and/or cat owned or kept in the city the following amounts: 
(a)  Male dogs or cats: $5.00, per year. 
(b)  Female dogs or cats: $5.00, per year. 
(c)  Spayed female dog or cat: $2.50, per year. 
(d)  Neutered male dog or cat: $2.50, per year. 
All dogs and/or cats licenses shall be obtained from the office of the city clerk on or before the last day of January each year. Said licenses shall expire on January 31 of the following year. If dog or cat licenses are not obtained before the last day of January of each year as above stated, then the registration fee for that year shall be doubled. At the time of the issuance of the license, the city clerk shall deliver therewith a metallic tag showing the registration number. 
The owner or keeper of an animal licensed with the city shall make sure the license tag issued is attached to a suitable collar and kept on the animal for which it is issued at all times. Such tags are not transferable to other animals. 
In case any tag is lost, one duplicate tag may be issued by the city clerk on presentation of receipt showing the payment of the tag for the current year, and paying to the city clerk the sum of $0.50 for such duplicate tag. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-212. - Rabies vaccination. 
Before the city clerk shall issue any such license or tags the owner or keeper of such dogs or cats shall file with the city clerk a certificate from a licensed veterinarian showing that such dog or cat has been immunized against rabies for the year during which said tag is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-213. - Same—-Exception. 
The requirement of section 2-212 shall not apply to any animal under the age of four months or to any animal for which a licensed veterinarian shall certify that such inoculation will be hazardous to the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-214. - Interference with official duties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a duly authorized officer of the city, to open the dog pound of the city, or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out a dog therefrom. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder any policeman, or dogcatcher, or any other duly authorized officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this article. Penalties: refer to section 2-103. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-215. - Enter private property. 
Police officers of the city or any properly designated city employee are authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing this article. No person shall conceal any animal or otherwise interfere with the proper enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-216. - Tranquilizer gun. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to direct his or her police officers or animal control officer to judiciously use a tranquilizer gun in impounding a particular dog running at large, when the chief of police shall determine that the use is necessary for the welfare of the public, and further that the use will not pose a danger to the safety of children or residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-217. - Cruelty to animals. 
Refer to Uniform Public Offense Code. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-218. - Signing complaint. 
Nothing herein shall prohibit any citizen or police officer from signing a complaint against any person violating any of the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-219. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or harbor a vicious animal within the city. Impoundment of animals whose owners have been cited for violation of this section shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer. If the animal presents a clear and present danger to the public health or safety, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his or her agent to impound such animal. 
(b)  Defined. For purposes of this chapter a vicious animal shall include: 
(1)  Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)  Any animal that attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; 
(3)  Any animal owned or harbored primarily, or in part, for the purpose of fighting or any animal trained for fighting; or 
(4)  Any animal that is urged by its owner or harborer to attack, or whose owner or harborer threatens to provoke such animal to attack, any law enforcement officer while such officer is engaged in the performance of official duty. 
(c)  Complaint. Whenever a complaint is filed in the municipal court against the owner of an animal alleging that such animal is vicious and in violation of this section, the municipal judge shall hold a hearing to determine whether or not the animal is vicious within the meaning of this section and thereby in violation of this section. The owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing (at least one week prior to the hearing.) In making a determination, the municipal judge shall consider the following: 
(1)  The seriousness of the attack or bite; 
(2)  Past history of attacks or bites; 
(3)  Likelihood of attacks or bites in the future; 
(4)  The condition and circumstances under which the animal is kept or confined; 
(5)  Other factors that may reasonably relate to the determination of whether or not the animal is vicious. 
The municipal judge shall order the impoundment, the muzzling in accordance with subsection (d) and/or the confinement of the animal accused of being in violation of this section in a manner and location that will ensure that it is no threat to persons or other animals pending the outcome of the hearing. If such impoundment, muzzling or otherwise safe confinement is not possible or if prior court order to restrain such animal have gone unheeded, the municipal judge may order the animal immediately destroyed. 
(d)  Vicious dogs to be muzzled. It shall be the duty of every owner, keeper or harborer of any dog in the city, which dog is vicious or has been known to bite, chase or run after any person or animal in the streets, alleys, or any public place in the city, to keep the same muzzled with a good and sufficient wire or leather muzzle, securely fastened so as to wholly prevent such dog from biting any animal or persons until such determination has been made by the court as to whether or not the dog is vicious. Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog within the city limits contrary to this section shall be guilty of a violation of this code. 
(e)  Immediate destruction. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the animal control officer or any law enforcement officer from taking whatever action is reasonably necessary to protect himself or herself or members of the public from injury or danger, including immediate destruction of any vicious animal without further notice to the owner. 
(f)  Release of vicious animal. If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court against the owner of an impounded animal for a charge under this section, the animal shall not be released except on the order of the municipal judge, who may also direct the owner to pay all impoundment fees, and other related fees and any penalties for violation of this chapter. The municipal judge may, upon making a finding that an animal is vicious or that it represents a clear and present danger to the citizens or to other animals in the community, order the animal to be humanely euthanized. Surrender of the animal by the owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the owner immune from the decision of the court, nor to the fees and fines that may result from a violation of this section. 
(g)  Penalties. Refer to section 2-103. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 1654, § 1, 2-3-14)  
Secs. 20-220—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BREED-SPECIFIC REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1647, Art. I, § I, adopted July 15, 2013, amended the Code by the addition of §§ 2-220—2-228; however, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 2-231—2-239 at the editor's discretion for purposes of allowing future expansion of the Code. 
 
Sec. 2-231. - General. 
For the purpose of this division, the definitions set forth are incorporated by reference. The following words and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings respectively, ascribed to them: 
Enforcement authority means the city manager, chief of police, animal control supervisor and their respective designees. 
Pit bull dog means any and all of the following dogs: 
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier breed of dogs; the American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dogs; the American Pit Bull Terrier breed of dog; any other breed commonly known as Pit Bull, Pit Bull Dog, or Pit Bull Terrier; dogs which have the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of the breed of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier. The registration of a dog with a dog association or in any governmental jurisdiction as a pit bull or any of the dogs listed above shall constitute prima facie evidence the animal is prohibited by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-232. - Prohibition. 
No resident shall own, keep, harbor, or in any way possess a pit bull dog within the city limits of Goodland, Kansas. The city manager shall implement administrative regulations related to standards and requirements to protect the public safety governing non-resident possession of a pit bull dog within the city limits on a temporary basis. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-233. - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to the ownership prohibition in section 2-221 are: 
(1)  Pit bull dogs located within the city limits and lawfully registered with the City of Goodland on the effective date of this section, may be kept within the city limits upon strict compliance with the standards and requirements set forth in section 2-223. 
(2)  Ownership is limited to one pit bull dog per household. 
(3)  Residents who own a pit bull dog that dies and who are in good standing with the city and have had no or minimal dog-related violations will be permitted to own another pit bull dog within the City of Goodland. Residents who own a pit bull that dies and who have had repeated dog-related violations during their ownership of the dog will not be permitted to own another pit bull dog within the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-234. - Standards and requirements. 
The keeping of a pit bull dog eligible for the exception under section 2-233 shall be subject to the following mandatory requirements: 
(1)  Special permit required . A special annual permit shall be required for keeping of any pit bull dog eligible for the exception under section 2-233. No permit shall be granted except with such conditions attached as shall, in the opinion of the enforcement authority, reasonably protect the public health, safety and welfare. A temporary permit may be issued following application and pending final disposition of the application. A temporary permit is only valid for up to seven days. Permits shall only be issued to adults. 
(2)  Application for permit. An application for a pit bull dog permit pursuant to this division shall be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this division. The application shall be on forms provided by the city, with its form, content and submittal requirements to be determined by the city manager. 
(3)  Permit fee. An initial application fee for an annual permit shall be $50.00. Annual renewal fees shall be $25.00. 
(4)  Standards and requirements. The keeping of a specially permitted pit bull dog in the city limits shall be subject to the following mandatory requirements, in addition to compliance with all other state and local laws and regulations: 
a.  Leash requirement outside of pen. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to go outside the owner's residential structure or the dog's kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length and an adult is in physical control of the leash; provided, however, that a pit bull dog may be in the rear yard of the owner's premises without a leash when the rear yard is securely fenced. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be kept on a chain or rope outside its kennel or pen, and no pit bull dog may be leashed or tethered to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or buildings. 
b.  Confinement. All pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel. Such pen or kennel must meet administrative regulations for construction and location standards established by the city manager. All structures used to confine specially permitted pit bull dogs must be locked by a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. 
c.  Confinement indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. 
d.  Micro chipping. All pit bull dogs shall have an identification microchip implanted in the dog. Such micro chipping shall be accomplished by a licensed veterinarian or by the Northwest Kansas Animal Shelter as part of the special permitting process. The applicant for a special permit under this division shall file proof of micro chipping if it has already taken place or is to be accomplished outside the permitting process. 
e.  Signs. All owners of pit bull dogs shall within 30 days of the effective date of this division display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog". In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
f.  Special collar. All pit bull dogs shall be required to wear a special designated color collar at all times when not confined indoors. The collar shall be visibly on the dog when it is in a kennel or pen, or on a leash. The collar shall be either one issued by the City during the special permit process, or one provided by the owner and approved by the city. The enforcement authority shall designate the specific color required. 
g.  Identification photographs. All owners of pit bull dogs shall make available the dog during the special permit process in order to allow the city to obtain digital photographs of the registered animal for identification purposes. 
h.  [Spay/neuter.] All owners shall have their pit bulls spayed or neutered within 60 days of the adoption of this division. 
i.  Reporting requirements. All owners of specially permitted pit bull dogs shall, within ten days of the occurrence, report the following information in writing to the city: 
1.  The removal from the city limits or death of a specially permitted pit bull dog. 
2.  The birth of offspring of the specially permitted pit bull dog. 
3.  The new address of the premises where the pit bull dog is kept or harbored should the owner move within the city limits. 
j.  Animals born to specially-permitted dogs. All offspring born of pit bull dogs specially permitted with the city must be removed from the city limits within six weeks of their birth. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-235. - Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. 
No person shall sell, barter or in any other way transfer ownership of a pit bull dog to any person within the city limits unless the recipient person is an adult permanently residing in the same household and on the same premises as the owner issued the special permit. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-236. - Duty of owners; failure to comply. 
The purpose of the requirements in this division governing pit bull dogs is to prevent attacks, injuries or deaths by mandating use of control methods. It is the positive duty of any owner of a pit bull dog to take all necessary steps to comply with this division. It is unlawful for the owner of a pit bull dog within the city limits of Goodland to fail to comply with the provisions of this division. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of this division shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. Failure to comply shall also be considered good cause for the revocation of any license or special permit issued allowing for the keeping of the subject dog, resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-237. - Costs to be paid by responsible persons. 
Any reasonable costs incurred by the city in seizing, impounding, confining or disposing of any pit bull dog pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be charged against the owner of such animal and shall be subject to collection by any lawful means. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-238. - Administration and enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager, through the enforcement authority, to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. The city manager shall have authority to establish reasonable administrative regulations, policies and procedures as needed to effectively carry out the spirit and intent of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Sec. 2-239. - Penalties. 
Wherever in this division any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or the performance of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or by both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. Each day any violation of this division continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1647, § I, 7-15-13)  
Secs. 2-240—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL SHELTERS AND KENNELS 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Licensed required. 
It shall be unlawful for any persons, corporation or other entity to operate an animal shelter or kennel within the limits of the City of Goodland without being first licensed for that activity, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-302. - Application. 
Any person, corporation or other entity desiring to obtain or annually renew a license to operate an animal shelter or kennel shall file an application with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-303. - License fee. 
The fee for a license under this article shall be $25.00 per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-304. - License expiration; renewal. 
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each calendar year. The licensee shall apply to the city clerk for license renewal, at least 30 days prior to the license expiration date to assure continuous licensing. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-305. - Procedure. 
Upon the receipt of the license application and fee, the city clerk shall refer such application to the animal control officer who shall investigate the premises and file a written report and recommendation with the city clerk. If the animal control officer approves the application, the city clerk shall issue the applicant a license to operate the activity under such conditions as the animal control officer shall specify in the report. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-306. - Compliance. 
All animal shelters and kennels licensed under the provisions of this article shall abide by all laws rules and regulations of the state and this city. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-307. - Implied consent. 
The application for and the receipt of the license, as required herein, shall include an implied consent by the owner to permit an inspection of both real and personal property under his or her control for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, including inspection for cruelty to animals and inspection for sanitary conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-308. - Nuisances and excessive noise prohibited. 
Refer to 2-206. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 2-309. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any animal shelter or kennel to keep or maintain any animal in any yard, structure or area that is not clean, dry and sanitary; free from debris and offensive odors and devoid of rodents and vermin. 
(b)  Excrement shall be removed daily from any pen or yard area where animals are kept and, if stored on the premises of any animal shelter or kennel, shall be stored in adequate containers with fly-tight lids. 
(c)  All animal pens and yards shall be so located that adequate drainage is obtained, normal drying occurs, and standing water is not present. 
(d)  Females in season shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with males, except for breeding purposes and shall be kept securely confined within a building at all times while in heat. A female animal in heat shall be allowed outside a building periodically, for elimination of bodily waste but shall be kept under physical restraint by a competent person at all times. 
(e)  All premises on which animals are kept shall be subject to inspection by the city's animal control officer, or his or her representative. If the animal control officer determines from such inspection that the premises are not being maintained in a clean and sanitary manner, he shall notify the animal shelter or kennel in writing to correct the sanitation deficiencies within 24 hours after notice is served on the animal shelter or kennel. Failure to correct such sanitation deficiencies, within the allotted time period, shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of license by the city governing body. 
(f)  Penalty: Refer to section 2-103. 
(Ord. No. 1601, § 1, 5-4-09)  
Chapter 3 - BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 38 of Ord. No. 1371, adopted Feb. 18, 1997, repealed Ch. 3 in its entirety. Sections 1—37 adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Former Ch. 3 derived from the 1987 Code, Charter Ord. No. 15 and the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. . 	Ord. No. 	Ord. No. 
670 	1175 	1256 
976 	1224 	1325 
1158 	1228 	1326 
 
Cross reference— Minors and alcohol, § 12-301 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section. 
Alcohol means the product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol but does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol. 
Alcoholic liquor means alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a beverage. 
Caterer means an individual, partnership or corporation which sells alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, and provides services related to the serving thereof, on unlicensed premises which may be open to the public, but does not include a holder of a temporary permit selling alcoholic liquor in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
Cereal malt beverage means any fermented but undistilled liquor brewed or made from malt or from a mixture of malt or malt substitute or any flavored malt beverage, as defined in K.S.A. 41-2729 and amendments thereto, including beer as defined by K.S.A. 41-102, but not including any such liquor which is more than six percent alcohol by weight. 
Class A club means a premises which is owned or leased by a corporation, partnership, business trust or association and which is operated thereby as a bona fide nonprofit social, fraternal or war veterans' club, as determined by the State of Kansas, for the exclusive use of the corporate stockholders, partners, trust beneficiaries or associates (hereinafter referred to as members), and their families and guests accompanying them. 
Class B club means a premises operated for profit by a corporation, partnership or individual, to which members of such club may resort for the consumption of food or alcoholic beverages and for entertainment. 
Club means a class A or class B club. 
Drinking establishment means premises which may be open to the general public, where alcoholic liquor by the individual drink is sold. 
General retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail. 
Limited retailer means a person who has a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises. 
Place of business. Any place at which cereal malt beverages or alcoholic beverages or both are sold. 
Temporary permit means a permit, issued in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, which allows the permit holder to offer for sale, sell and serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on unlicensed premises, open to the public. 
Wholesaler or distributor means any individuals, firms, copartnership, corporations and associations which sell or offer for sale any beverage referred to in this chapter, to persons, copartnership and associations authorized by this chapter to sell cereal malt beverages at retail. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1722 , § 1, 3-18-19)  
Sec. 3-102. - Restriction on location. 
(a)  No alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage shall be sold or served by a person holding a license or permit from the city whose place of business or other premises are located within 200 feet of any church, school or library, said distance to be measured from the nearest property line of such church, school or library to the nearest portion of the building occupied by the premises. 
(b)  The distance location of subsection (a) above shall not apply to a club, drinking establishment, caterer or temporary permit holder when the license or permit applicant petitions for and receives a waiver of the distance limitation from the governing body. The governing body shall grant such a waiver only following public notice and hearing and a finding by the governing body that the proximity of the establishment is not adverse to the public welfare or safety. 
(c)  No license or permit shall be used for the sale of alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage if the building or use does not meet zoning ordinance requirements of the city or conflicts with other city laws, including building and health codes. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 2, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1727 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 3-103. - Minors on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to remain on any premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor is licensed for on-premises consumption, or where a caterer or temporary permit holder is serving alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator, person in charge or licensee of any premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic liquor or a caterer or temporary permit holder who is serving alcoholic liquor to permit any person under the age of 21 years to remain on the premises. 
(c)  This section shall not apply if the person under the age of 21 years is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed or permitted premises derives not more than 50 percent of its gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 3, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-104. - Consumption on public property. 
No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor on city-owned property. However, by obtaining a temporary permit issued by the Goodland City Commission, this prohibition shall not apply to the Goodland Arts Council Building located 12th and Center in the City of Goodland, and the High Plains Museum located at 1717 Cherry, the Goodland Municipal Airport Administration Building located at 596 Airport Road, which is property owned by the City of Goodland and the city parks located within the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 4, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1479, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 1626, §§ 1, 2, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 1665, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-14)  
Sec. 3-105. - Public sale; consumption. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, serve or dispense any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage in any public place not licensed to sell, serve or dispense such beverage at such public place within or under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any cereal malt beverage or alcoholic beverage in any public place not licensed to sell and serve such beverage for public consumption at such public place within or under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "public place" shall include upon any street, public thoroughfare, public parking lot or any privately owned parking area made available to the public generally, within any parked or driven motor vehicle situated in any of the aforesaid places or upon any property owned by the state or any governmental subdivision thereof unless such property is leased to others under K.S.A. 12-1740 et seq. if the property is being used for hotel or motel purposes or purposes incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 5, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-106. - Identification card. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in possession, any fictitious, fraudulently altered, or fraudulently obtained identification card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  Display or represent any identification card not issued to such person as being his or her card for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor. 
(3)  Permit any unlawful use of an identification card issued to a person for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor. 
(4)  Photograph, photostat, duplicate or in any way reproduce any identification card or facsimile thereof in such a manner that it could be mistaken for a valid identification card or display or have in possession any such photograph, photostat, duplicate, reproduction or facsimile for purposes relating to the sale, purchase or consumption of either cereal malt beverage or alcoholic liquor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Lend any identification card to or knowingly permit use of any identification card by any person under 21 years of age for use in the sale, purchase or consumption of any alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  Lend any identification card to or knowingly permit the use of any identification card by any person under the legal age for consumption of cereal malt beverage for use in the sale, purchase or consumption of any cereal malt beverage. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 6, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-107. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and by imprisonment for a period of not less than one day nor more than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 37, 2-18-97)  
Secs. 3-108—3-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 3-201. - License required of retailers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any cereal malt beverage at retail without a license for each place of business where cereal malt beverages are to be sold at retail. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, having a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail only in the original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises, to sell any cereal malt beverage in any other manner. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 7, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1518, § 1, adopted July 7, 2004, repealed § 3-202, which pertained to applications for liquor licenses and derived from Ord. No. 1371, § 8, adopted Feb. 18, 1997.  
Sec. 3-203. - License application procedures. 
(a)  All applications for a new or renewal of an existing cereal malt beverage license shall be submitted to the city clerk at least ten days in advance of the governing body meeting at which they will be considered. 
(b)  The city clerk shall notify the holder of an existing license 30 days in advance of it's expiration. 
(c)  The city clerk shall provide copies of all applications to the police department, to the fire department, and to the building official, when they are received. The police department shall run a records check on all applicants and the fire department and building official will inspect the premises in accordance with city fire codes and/or ordinances. The departments will then recommend approval, or disapproval, of applications within five working days of the department's receipt of the application. 
(d)  The governing body will not consider any application for a new or renewal license that has not been submitted ten days in advance and been reviewed by the above city departments. 
(e)  An applicant who does not hold a cereal malt beverage license in the city shall attend the governing body meeting when the application for a new license will be considered. 
(f)  All applicants are required to obtain a Federal Occupational Tax Stamp as required by law. A request for said stamp shall be conveyed to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 2600 Grant Avenue, Suite 280, Kansas City, Missouri 64108. 
(g)  All applications for a license to sell cereal malt beverages at retail in original and unopened containers and not for consumption on the premises shall be accompanied by a license fee of $50.00 and all applications for the sale of cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises shall be accompanied by a fee of $150.00. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 9, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1587, § 1, 12-17-07)  
Sec. 3-204. - License granted; denied. 
(a)  The journal of the governing body meeting shall show the action taken on the application. 
(b)  If the license is granted, the city clerk shall issue the license which shall show the name of the licensee and the year for which issued. 
(c)  No license shall be transferred to another licensee. 
(d)  If the license shall be denied, the license fee shall be immediately returned to the person who has made application. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 10, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-205. - License to be posted. 
Each license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business for which the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 11, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-206. - License, disqualification. 
No license shall be issued to: 
(1)  A person who has not been a resident in good faith of the State of Kansas for at least one year immediately preceding application and a resident of Sherman County for at least six months prior to filing of such application. 
(2)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(3)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he or she resides. 
(4)  A person who, within two years immediately preceding the date of application, has been convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude, or has been adjudged guilty of drunkenness or driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or the violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States. 
(5)  A partnership, unless all the members of the partnership shall otherwise be qualified to obtain a license. 
(6)  A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such corporation, would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than the citizenship and residency requirements. 
(7)  A corporation, if any manager, officer or director thereof, or any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock of such corporation, has been an officer, manager or director, or a stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the stock, of a corporation which: 
a.  Has had a retailer's license revoked under K.S.A. 41-2708 and amendments thereto; or 
b.  Has been convicted of a violation of the drinking establishment act or the cereal malt beverage laws of this state. 
(8)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses all the qualifications of a licensee. 
(9)  A person whose spouse would be ineligible to receive a retailer's license for any reason other than citizenship, retailer residency requirements or age, except that this subsection shall not apply in determining eligibility for a renewal license. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 12, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-207. - Restriction upon location. 
See section 3-102. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 13, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 1727 , § 2, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 3-208. - Temporary event cereal malt beverage permit. 
An individual or charitable/nonprofit organization may apply for the issuance of a special event retailer's permit which shall allow the permit holder to offer for sale, sell and serve cereal malt beverage for consumption on unpermitted premises, which may be open to the public, subject to the following: 
(1)  A special event retailer's permit shall specify the premises for which the permit is issued; 
(2)  A special event retailer's permit shall be issued for the duration of the special event, the dates and hours of which shall be specified in the permit; 
(3)  No more than four special event retailer's permits may be issued to any one applicant in a calendar year; and 
(4)  A special event retailer's permit shall not be transferable or assignable. 
(5)  Temporary event cereal malt beverage permit applicants shall submit an application to the city clerk not less than 30 days prior to the special event at which cereal malt beverage is planned to be sold, served, or consumed. The applicant shall provide the information required for a general retailer's license, as well as the following additional information: 
a.  Description of the planned special event, including type, date(s), times, location, and owner of the property where the special event is to take place; 
b.  Plans for security to be provided at the special event; and 
c.  Any other information deemed relevant or necessary by the city clerk, chief of police, or governing body. 
A special event retailer's permit holder shall not be subject to the provisions of the Beer and Cereal Malt Beverage Keg Registration Act, K.S.A. 41-2901 et seq., and amendments thereto. 
Each such permit shall extend for a period not to exceed seven consecutive days. There must be at least a five-day interval between the periods of the coverage for each such permit to any one organization. 
A temporary event permit fee of $50.00 shall accompany each permit application along with any other fees as required. 
(Ord. No. 1548, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 1621, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 1709 , § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 3-209. - License suspension/revocation by governing body. 
The governing body, upon five days written notice to a person holding a license to sell cereal malt beverages, may permanently revoke or cause to be suspended such license for a period of not more than 30 days for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If a licensee has fraudulently obtained the license by giving false information in the application therefor. 
(2)  If the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this article or has become ineligible to obtain a license under this chapter. 
(3)  Drunkenness of a person holding such license, drunkenness of a licensee's manager or employee while on duty and while on the premises for which the license is issued, or for a licensee, his or her manager or employee permitting any intoxicated person to remain in such place selling cereal malt beverages. 
(4)  The sale of cereal malt beverages to any person under the legal age for consumption. 
(5)  For permitting any gambling in or upon any premises licensed under this article. 
(6)  For permitting any person to mix drinks with materials purchased in any premises licensed under this article or brought into the premises for this purpose. 
(7)  For the employment of any person under the age established by the State of Kansas for employment involving dispensing cereal malt beverages. 
(8)  For the employment of persons adjudged guilty of a felony or of a violation of any law relating to intoxicating liquor. 
(9)  For the sale or possession of, or for permitting the use or consumption of alcoholic liquor within or upon any premises licensed under this article. 
(10)  The nonpayment of any license fees. 
(11)  If the licensee has become ineligible to obtain a license under any alcoholic liquor, private club, or drinking establishment ordinance of the city. 
(12)  The provisions of subsections (6) and (9) shall not apply if such place of business is also currently licensed as a private club. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 15, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-210. - Same—Appeal. 
The licensee shall have 20 days after the order of the governing body revoking any license to appeal to the district court of Sherman County, Kansas. Any appeal taken under this section shall not suspend the order of revocation of the license of any licensee. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 16, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-211. - Wholesalers and/or distributors. 
It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler and/or distributor, his, her or it's agents or employees, to sell and/or deliver cereal malt beverages within the city, to persons authorized under this chapter to sell the same within this city unless such wholesaler and/or distributor has first secured a license from the State of Kansas authorizing such sales. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 17, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-212. - Business regulations. 
It shall be the duty of every licensee to observe the following regulations: 
(1)  The place of business licensed and operating under this article shall at all times have a front and rear exit unlocked when open for business. 
(2)  The premises and all equipment used in connection with such business shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition and shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police and building official, health officers of the city, county and state. 
(3)  Except as provided by subsection (4), no cereal malt beverage may be sold or dispensed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or consumed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or on Sunday, except in a place of business which is licensed to sell cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises, which derives not less than 30 percent of it's gross receipts from the sale of food for consumption on the licensed premises. Closing hours for clubs shall conform to K.S.A. 41-2614 and any amendments thereto. 
(4)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold at any time alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on premises which are licensed pursuant to K.S.A. 41-2701 et seq., and licensed as a club by the State of Kansas. 
(5)  The place of business shall be open to the public and to the police at all times during business hours, except that premises licensed as a club under a license issued by the State of Kansas shall be open to the police and not to the public. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or agent or employee of the licensee to become intoxicated in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
(7)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any intoxicated person to remain in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
(8)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall sell or permit the sale of cereal malt beverage to any person under the legal age for consumption. 
(9)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any gambling in the place of business for which such license has been issued. 
(10)  No licensee or agent or employee of the licensee shall permit any person to mix alcoholic drinks with materials purchased in said place of business or brought in for such purpose. 
(11)  No licensee shall employ any person who has been judged guilty of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 18, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-213. - Sanitary conditions required. 
All parts of the licensed premises including furnishings and equipment shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition, free from flies, rodents and vermin at all times. The licensed premises shall have at least one restroom for each sex easily accessible at all times to it's patrons and employees. The restroom shall be equipped with at least one lavatory with hot and cold running water, be well lighted, and be furnished at all times with paper towels or other mechanical means of drying hands and face. Each restroom shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities which shall be of sanitary design and readily cleanable. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self closing and toilet paper at all times shall be provided. Easily cleanable receptacles shall be provided for waste material and such receptacles in toilet rooms for women shall be covered. The restroom shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and free of offensive odors and shall be at all times subject to inspection by the city building official or designee. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 19, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-214. - Minors on premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to remain on any premises where the sale of cereal malt beverages is licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(b)  This section shall not apply if the person under 21 years of age is an employee of the licensed establishment, or is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or if the licensed establishment derives not more than 50 percent of it's gross receipts in each calendar year from the sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 20, 2-18-97)  
Secs. 3-215—3-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 
 
Sec. 3-301. - Underage purchaser. 
It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic liquor. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 21, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-302. - State license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for sale, offer for sale, or expose for sale or sell any alcoholic liquor as defined by the K.S.A. annotated 41-101 et seq. without first having obtained a state license to do so. 
(b)  The holder of a license for the retail sale in the city of alcoholic liquors by the package issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control shall present such license to the city clerk when applying to pay the license tax levied in section 3-303 and the tax shall be received and a receipt shall be issued for the period covered by the state license. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 22, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-303. - License tax. 
There is hereby levied an annual license tax of $300.00 on any person holding a license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control for the retail sale within the city of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises. Such tax shall be paid by the retailer to the city clerk before business is begun under an original state license and shall be paid within five days after any renewal of a state license. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 23, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-304. - Posting of receipt. 
Every licensee under this article shall cause the city alcoholic liquor retailer's occupation tax receipt to be placed in plain view, next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 24, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-305. - Sale at retail; forbidden on certain days; hours of sale, exception. 
No person shall sell at retail any alcoholic liquor: 
(1)  On Sundays; 
(2)  On Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day; or 
(3)  Before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day when the sale is permitted, except that the governing body of any city by ordinance may require closing prior to 11:00 p.m., but such ordinance shall not require closing prior to 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 25, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-306. - Business regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for a retailer of alcoholic liquor to: 
(1)  Permit any person to mix drinks in or on the licensed premises; 
(2)  Employ any person under the age of 21 years in connection with the operation of the retail establishment; 
(3)  Employ any person in connection with the operation of the retail establishment who has been adjudged guilty of a felony; 
(4)  Furnish any entertainment in his or her premises or permit any pinball machine or games of skill or chance to be located in or on the premises; 
(5)  Have in his or her possession for sale at retail any bottles, cask, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in the original package; or 
(6)  Sell, give away, dispose of, exchange or deliver, or permit the sale, gift or procuring of any alcoholic liquor to or for any person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 26, 2-18-97)  
Secs. 3-307—3-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE CLUBS 
 
Sec. 3-401. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person granted a private club license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining a local license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 27, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-402. - License fee. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee on each private club located in the city which has a private club license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after renewal of a state license. The city license fee for a Class A club shall be $250.00 and the city license fee for a Class B club shall be $250.00. 
(b)  All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(d)  Every licensee shall cause the city club license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 28, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-403. - Business regulations. 
(a)  No club licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverages for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises. 
(c)  No club membership shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age, nor shall alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 29, 2-18-97)  
ARTICLE V. - DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 3-501. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person granted a drinking establishment license by the State of Kansas to sell or serve any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license within the city without first obtaining the city license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 30, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-502. - License fee. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of $250.00 on each drinking establishment located in the city which has a drinking establishment license issued by the state director of alcoholic beverage control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license. 
(b)  All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(d)  Every licensee shall cause the city drinking establishment license to be placed in plain view next to or below the state license in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 31, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-503. - Business regulations. 
(a)  No drinking establishment licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor on its premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  Cereal malt beverages may be sold on premises licensed for the retail sale of cereal malt beverage for on-premises consumption at any time when alcoholic liquor is allowed by law to be served on the premises. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 32, 2-18-97)  
Secs. 3-504—3-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CATERERS 
 
Sec. 3-601. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed by the State of Kansas as a caterer to sell alcoholic liquor by the drink, to sell or serve any liquor by the drink within the city without obtaining a local caterer's license from the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 33, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-602. - License fee. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license fee in the amount of $250.00 on each caterer doing business in the city who has a caterer's license issued by the state director of alcoholic control, which fee shall be paid before business is begun under an original state license and within five days after any renewal of a state license. 
(b)  All applications for new or renewal city licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. Upon presentation of a state license, payment of the city license fee and the license application, the city clerk shall issue a city license for the period covered by the state license, if there are no conflicts with any zoning or alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The license period shall extend for the period covered by the state license. No license fee shall be refunded for any reason. 
(d)  Every licensee shall cause the caterer license to be placed in plain view on any premises within the city where the caterer is serving or mixing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 34, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-603. - Business regulations. 
(a)  No caterer licensed hereunder shall allow the serving, mixing or consumption of alcoholic liquor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages or cereal malt beverages shall be given, sold or traded to any person under 21 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 35, 2-18-97)  
Sec. 3-604. - Notice to chief of police. 
Prior to any event at which a caterer will sell or serve alcoholic liquor by the individual drink, the caterer shall provide written notice to the chief of police at least 14 days prior to the event if the event will take place within the city. The notice shall contain the location, name of the group sponsoring the event, and the exact date and times the caterer will be serving. 
(Ord. No. 1371, § 36, 2-18-97)  
Secs. 3-605—3-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TEMPORARY EVENT LIQUOR LICENSE 
 
Sec. 3-701. - Temporary event liquor license permit. 
(a)  The city commission may issue to a charitable or non-profit organization which is not the holder of an annual retail liquor license, but which would otherwise qualify for such a license, a temporary event liquor license permit allowing for the sale and consumption of liquor for limited periods of time on specifically designated premises within the city. 
(b)  Such permit may be issued upon a verified application filed with the city clerk containing the following information: 
(1)  A copy of the temporary liquor license issued by the State of Kansas for the event or function for which the application is being submitted; 
(2)  The name of the fraternal or nonprofit organization; 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of the president and other officers of the organization; 
(4)  The nature of the event or function for which the permit is requested; 
(5)  The specific location(s) where the event will be conducted, which need not comply with section 3-207 of the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, as the use herein is temporary; 
(6)  The number of days or duration of the event; 
(7)  Such other information as may be required. 
(c)  Such application shall be submitted to the city clerk at least five days prior to the city commission meeting before the event; provided, however, such time period may be waived by the clerk when the nature and location of the event are of common knowledge to the city commission. 
(d)  The temporary event permit shall be issued to correspond with the temporary liquor license permit issued by the State of Kansas in all respects, including, but not limited to, the site, date and time. 
(e)  A temporary event permit fee of $25.00 dollars shall accompany each permit application along with any other fees as required. 
(Ord. No. 1683 , § 1, 11-2-15)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS, CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATIONS 
 
Secs. 4-227—4-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE I. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 4-100-4-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1419, adopted Aug. 2, 1999, repealed Ord. No. 1374 which had been codified as §§ 4-201—4-212. Sections 1, 2, and 7—22 contained similar provisions and have been set out as §§ 4-201—4-216. Sections 4—6 pertaining to severability, publication and effective date have not been set out herein. 
 
Sec. 4-201. - Codes adopted. 
That certain documents, three copies of which are on file and are open for inspection of the public in the office of the city clerk of the City of Goodland, being marked and designated as: 
(1)  Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition Volumes I, II, III adopted in full with exceptions, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, including the generic fire-resistive assemblies listed in the Fire Resistance Design Manual, Fifteenth Edition, dated April 1997, published by the Gypsum Association as referenced in Tables 7-A, 7-B, and 7-C of the specified Uniform Building Code, including Appendix Chapters 3, 4, 12, 15, Volume 2 Appendix Chapter 16, Appendix Chapters 23 and 29. 
(2)  Structural Welding Code—Reinforcing Steel, AWS D1.4-92 (U.B.C. Standard 19-1); American National Standard for Accessible and Useable Buildings and Facilities, A117.1-1992, published by the Council of American Building Officials; Load and Resistance Factor Design Specifications for Structural Steel Buildings, December 1, 1993 (Chapter 22, Division II); Specifications for Structural Steel Buildings Allowable Stress Design and Plastic Design, June 1, 1989 (Chapter 22, Division III); Load and Resistance Factor Design Specifications for Cold Formed Steel Structural Members, 1986 (with December, 1989 Addendum) (Chapter 22, Division VI); Specification for Design of Cold-Formed Steel Structural Members, 1986 (Chapter 22, Division VII); Standard Specification for Steel Joists, K-Series, LH-Series, DLH-Series and Joist Girders, 1994 (Chapter 22, Division IX); Structural Applications of Steel Cables for Buildings, ASCE 17-95 (Chapter 22, Division XI); and National Design Specification for Wood Construction, Revised 1991 Edition (Chapter 22, Division III, Part I), as modified or amended in the Uniform Building Code referenced herein: 
be and the same are hereby adopted as the code of the City of Goodland for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City of Goodland providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition, Volumes 1, 2, and 3, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and the secondary publications referenced above, all of which are on file in the office of the city clerk in the City of Goodland are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-202. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 2, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-203. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code, without first complying with all the requirements as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 7, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-204. - Enforcement. 
The code hereby incorporated shall be enforced by the building official, or official inspector designated by the city manager. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplement regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 8, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-205. - Right of entry. 
The building official in the discharge of his or her official duties and upon identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 9, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-206. - Definitions. 
Definitions of terms as used in this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  General contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who has met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who undertakes the construction, repair, alteration, remodeling, addition to, subtraction from, improvement and demolition of any building or structure including related improvements to real estate excluding electrical, mechanical and plumbing work relating thereto. This contractor is unlimited as to the height, area and complexity of a building, structure or related real property improvements, and is authorized to perform the work of all the builder and specialty builder categories and classes. 
(b)  Building contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and is limited to the construction of commercial buildings and single and multiple-residential dwellings, and accessory use structures in connection therewith, all of which shall not exceed three stories in height. The building contractor shall not do any electrical, mechanical and plumbing work. 
(c)  Residential contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and is limited to construction, remodeling, repair or improvement of one-, two-, or three-family residences not exceeding two stories in height. The residential contractor shall not do any electrical, mechanical, and plumbing work. 
(d)  Demolition contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who undertakes or offers to undertake for another the demolition and removal of structures such as dwellings, commercial buildings, and foundations. 
(e)  Paving commercial-asphalt contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who undertakes or offers to undertake for another the construction of roads, airport runways and aprons, parking lots, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, property line walls, and storm drainage facilities, and to perform the excavating, clearing and grading incidental thereto. 
(f)  Concrete forming and placing contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who are qualified to batch mix aggregates, cement and water to agreed specifications, to construct forms and framework for the casting and shaping of concrete, to place miscellaneous embedded steel and to pour, place, and finish concrete. 
(g)  Masonry/concrete contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who are qualified to do the work of a masonry contractor and to pour, place, and finish concrete flatwork (floor, sidewalks, etc.) including placement of mesh reinforcement, vapor barriers and edge forms incidental thereto. 
(h)  Roofing limited contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who are qualified to install, repair, and replace residential roof coverings. Work may include fabrication and installation of sheet metal incidental to residential roof coverings and installation of asphalt shingles, asphalt roll roofing materials, clay tile, concrete tile, slate, wood shake shingles and other prefabricated shingle products. 
(i)  Roofing unlimited contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-211 of this Code, and who are qualified to install, repair, and replace roof covering. Work may include, but shall not be limited to, roof deck insulation, roof coating, painting and coverings, including use of sheet metal products incidental to roofing work or other material in connection therewith, or any combination thereof, and including installation of nonstructural decking and siding. 
(j)  Factory built homes shall mean mobile home, manufactured home or modular home as defined in K.S.A. 58-4202 et. seq. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 10, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 1429, § 1, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 4-207. - Amendments. 
The following chapters, sections, paragraphs, parts of sections or tables from the Uniform Building Codes, 1997 Edition, adopted by section 4-201 are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Fees. Building permit fees for new construction shall be based on the annual building valuation data sheet provided in the building standards publication, which represents the average cost for most buildings. Building permit fees for remodels will be based on the estimated cost of construction. 
(a) 	Item 	Fees 
	Residential Fences ..... 	$15.00 
	Residential Roofing ..... 	 15.00 
		
(b) 	Total Valuation 	
	$1.00 to $500.00 	$15.00 
	$501.00 to $2,000.00 	$15.00 for the first $500.00 plus $1.50 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $2,000.00. 
	$2,001.00 to $25,000.00 	$37.50 for the first $2,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $25,000.00. 
	$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$175.50 for the first $25,000.00 plus $4.50 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $50,000.00. 
	$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$288.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to andincluding $100,000.00. 
	$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 	$438.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $2.25 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $500,000.00. 
	$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$1,338.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, up to and including $1,000,000.00. 
	$1,000,001.00 and up 	$2,088.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $1.50 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
 
Any governmental entity which has the authority to levy a tax is exempt from this section. 
(2)  Section 106.2, paragraph 2 is hereby deleted. 
(3)  Section 106.3.2 Submittal Documents, is hereby amended by adding the following: 
106.3.2.1 Building Permit Requirements: 
A.  For structures other than one- and two-family dwellings and residential accessory structures, the following shall be submitted at least ten working days prior to obtaining a permit. 
1.  Two site plans. 
a.  Site plan shall include the following (as applicable): 
1.  Lot dimensions. 
2.  Location of existing and proposed structure(s). 
3.  Size of structure(s). 
4.  Identification of setbacks. 
5.  Location and dimensions of off-street parking spaces. 
6.  Location of driveways. 
7.  Location and size of signs. 
8.  Location and dimensions of all accessory structures. 
9.  Location of other features (fences, walls, trees, etc.). 
10.  Location and dimensions of utility and drainage easements. 
11.  Location of utility service lines to existing and proposed structures. 
12.  Location and type of solid waste containers. 
13.  A legal description of the property. 
14.  Information sufficient to show drainage in conformance. 
15.  Location and dimensions of sidewalks, including curb ramps. 
16.  Location and dimensions of streets and alleys. 
2.  Two sets of building plans. 
a.  Building plans shall include the following: 
1.  A code foot print. 
2.  A stamped building plan; as required by K.S.A 74-7031 et seq. 
3.  Two sets of landscaping plans (when applicable). 
B.  For one- and two-family dwellings, residential accessory structures, mobile homes and residential manufactured design homes a site plan and one set of building plans shall be submitted. The plans shall be submitted at least five days prior to obtaining permit. Plans shall include the following: 
1.  Floor plans indicating room designation and dimensions for all stories. 
2.  Elevations. 
3.  Location of utility service lines to existing and proposed structures. 
4.  Egress windows where required; every sleeping room below the fourth story. 
5.  Load bearing footings. 
6.  Location of other structures on the lot of record. 
7.  Driveway location, if applicable. 
8.  Fence locations. 
C.  All construction or installation using structural metal shall have the design stamped by an engineer licensed by the State of Kansas. 
D.  Factory built homes are approved for placement on applicably zoned residential property. Any additions, alterations or repairs made to a factory-built home after delivery and set up shall be so completed to comply with all local codes for the City of Goodland. 
E.  All building sites must be platted and be on applicably zoned ground. 
(4)  Section 106.2(1) shall read as follows: 
One story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 150 square feet. 
(5)  [KSA 58-301 et seq., accessibility standards for public buildings.] There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating accessibility to structures within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland Kansas those certain statutes known as (accessibility standards for public buildings) KSA 58-301 et seq., prepared and published in the Kansas Statutes Annotated by the reviser of Statutes by the State of Kansas. 
(6)  Chapter 11 is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 1806.3 Bearing Walls is hereby amended by adding the following: 
All nonresidential structures shall have a continuous concrete or masonry foundation. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 11, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 1429, § 2, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 1482, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-02; Ord. No. 1486, § 1, 9-3-02)  
Sec. 4-208. - Residential foundation standards. 
The following standards assume a horizontal ground surface, minimal surcharge, minimal lateral pressure and minimal groundwater effects on foundations. The building official reserves the right to require architectural/engineering designs for foundations where determined necessary. 
(1)  The frost depth for this jurisdiction is 30 inches. 
(2)  Slabs for patios, driveways, and similar treatments shall have rebar placement of a minimum #4 embedded at least four inches into the adjoining wall and 12 inches into the slab with a maximum spacing of 18 inches. 
(3)  Placement of steel support in foundations shall be a maximum of four feet vertical, 24 inches horizontal. 
(4)  All new residential basements shall have at least one egress window installed. 
(5)  When foundation designs are used other than those specified in the Uniform Building Code, the plan shall be sealed by a licensed structural engineer licensed in the State of Kansas. All foundation plans must be accompanied by cross sections showing all reinforcement and other details at each change in foundation design. 
(6)  Residential detached or attached garages and accessory buildings shall utilize a spread footing design as specified in Table 18-I-D of the adopted Uniform Building Code or a minimum of a six-inch trench footing dug below frost depth. Both footings shall have metal reinforcement in place prior to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 12, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-209. - Factory built housing foundations. 
Factory built homes set on residential zoned property, other than the mobile home park district, shall be placed on a permanent foundation below the frost line as required by the building code and at a location required by the manufacturer. The crawl space shall be enclosed. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 13, 8-2-99; Ord. No. 1429, § 3, 2-22-2000)  
Sec. 4-210. - License, bonds and insurance. 
Any person intending to engage in the trade or business of building for any reason, in the City of Goodland, Kansas, either as a general contractor, building contractor, residential contractor, demolition contractor, paving commercial-asphalt contractor, concrete forming and placing contractor, masonry/concrete contractor, roofing unlimited contractor or roofing limited contractor shall first receive and possess a license as herein provided. Such license shall not be issued until the applicant thereof shall have applied to the building board for such license, taken and successfully passed the examination as specified in section 4-211 herein as to his or her competency to do such work, presents a Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. Chapter 12-1556 et seq., and provides the following insurance and bonding certificate: 
(a)  General contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a general contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(b)  Building contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a building contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(c)  Residential contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a residential contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(d)  Demolition contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a demolition contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(e)  Paving commercial-asphalt contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a paving commercial-asphalt contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(f)  Concrete forming and placing contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a concrete forming and placing contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(g)  Masonry/concrete contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a masonry/concrete contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(h)  Roofing limited contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a roofing limited contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-213 of this article. 
(i)  Roofing unlimited contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a roofing unlimited contractor as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set in section 4-213 of this article. 
Any homeowner intending to do work on his or her private home where he or she resides, will not be required to possess a contractors license but shall possess a building permit and comply with all regulations as stated herein. The property owner shall assume all responsibility for all personal or property damage that may occur at any future date. 
A landlord intending to do work on rental property owned by the landlord will be allowed to work on said property to allow maintenance repairs. Maintenance activities include, painting, floor coverings, wall papering, cabinetry, shingling and nonstructural work. Items such as the installation or relocation of load baring walls and new additions shall be completed by a licensed contractor to insure safety to future inhabitants. Work is prohibited and in violation of City Code if completed by any person, firm, or contractor other than that person, firm or contractor listed on the permit as contractor. The foregoing sentence shall not be applicable to a person actually employed and supervised by the contractor listed on the permit as contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 14, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-211. - Examinations. 
Standard examinations, for determination of competency as a general contractor, building contractor, residential contractor, demolition contractor, paving commercial-asphalt contractor, concrete placing and forming contractor, masonry/concrete contractor, roofing limited contractor, roofing unlimited contractor shall be one of the following: 
(a)  Contractor exam prepared, proctored and scored by the City of Goodland prior to January 1, 1997. 
(b)  Standard exams published and available from Experior Assessments LLC, 2100 NW 53rd Avenue, Gainesville, Florida 32653-2149. 
(c)  Any examination recognized by the State of Kansas as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq. 
These examinations are hereby designated as the standard examinations for determining the qualifications of persons seeking licensure as general contractor, building contractor, residential contractor, demolition contractor, paving commercial-asphalt contractor, concrete placing and forming contractor, masonry/concrete contractor, roofing limited contractor, roofing unlimited contractor. The minimum passing score shall be 75 percent for each of the examinations listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 15, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-212. - Re-examinations. 
Any person who fails to pass the examination as prescribed in section 4-211, may apply for re-examination after the expiration of 30 days. Should such person fail to pass the second time, the board may refuse a third application, until the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 16, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-213. - License fees. 
Upon successful completion of prescribed examination for the type of license desired the applicant may be issued a license at the following rate per year: 
General contractor ..... $35.00 
Building contractor ..... 35.00 
Residential contractor ..... 35.00 
Demolition contractor ..... 35.00 
Paving commercial-asphalt contractor ..... 35.00 
Concrete placing and forming contractor ..... 35.00 
Masonry/concrete contractor ..... 35.00 
Roofing limited contractor ..... 35.00 
Roofing unlimited contractor ..... 35.00 
An additional card or cards of the same title can be purchased for $5.00, by a contractor, for any license stated herein, for a qualified person as stated in section 4-210, employed full-time by such contractor. 
Contractors not meeting all requirements of this article shall be refunded the license fee and deemed nonlicensed. Any contractor who allows his/her license to lapse for more than one calendar year from the date of expiration is hereby required to possess a Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in section 4-211 herein or have taken and passed a local examination prior to 1997, prior to his/her relicensing. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 17, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-214. - License expiration. 
All licenses shall expire February 15 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 18, 8-2-99)  
Sec. 4-215. - Certificate of license. 
Each person required to be licensed under the provisions of this article shall be required to carry a card which designates the type of work that he or she is licensed to perform and such card will be issued each year upon approval of such person's license application. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 19, 8-2-99)  
Secs. 4-216—4-220. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1a, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed § 4-216 in its entirety. Former § 4-216 pertained to building board of appeals and derived from Ord. No. 1419, §§ 20—22, adopted Aug. 2, 1999.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 
 
Sec. 4-221. - Definitions. 
Definitions of terms as used in this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the City of Goodland; 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 4)  
Sec. 4-222. - Establishment of office of building official. 
Provisions relating to the establishment of the office of building official shall be as follows: 
(a)  The office of building official is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building official; 
(b)  The building official shall be appointed by the city manager. His or her appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He or she shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him or her to be heard on specific charges; 
(c)  During temporary absence or disability of the building official, the appointing authority shall designate an acting building official. 
(Ord. No. 879, § 1)  
Sec. 4-223. - Qualifications of building official. 
He or she shall be in good health, physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections. He or she shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition. 
(Ord. No. 879, § 2)  
Sec. 4-224. - Duties of building official. 
The duties of the building official shall be as follows: 
(a)  He or she shall receive applications required by the building code, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He or she shall examine the premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He or she shall enforce all provisions of the building code. He or she shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he or she shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary; 
(b)  Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be made by the building official or his or her duly appointed assistant. The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provisions of the building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. Furthermore, before any building permit may be issued, the owner or contractor requesting such building permit must have the four corners of the property established by steel bars, which steel bars shall have been set by a licensed engineer and a signed affidavit from the engineer as to the location of the bars shall be filed with the building official and retained in his or her permanent file; provided, that in the event a licensed engineer does not reside within Sherman County or if one resides in the county, he or she is unavailable to locate the bars, that such steel bars must be set by and an affidavit signed by a person approved by the building official, after the building official has investigated the qualifications of said person; 
(c)  The building official shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued; 
(d)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official without his or her written consent; 
(e)  The building official shall make written reports to his or her immediate superior once each month, or oftener if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated. 
(Ord. No. 880, § 3; Ord. No. 898)  
Sec. 4-225. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of the building code, acting for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself liable personally, and he or she is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provisions of this article shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 879, § 4)  
Sec. 4-226. - Utilities to construction site. 
It is hereby provided that the city shall not furnish any utilities to any construction site unless, prior thereto, there is posted upon the premises of said building or construction site, a building permit duly issued by the building inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 947)  
Secs. 4-227—4-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 38 of Ord. No. 1475, adopted April 15, 2002, repealed Art. III, in its entirety, which had derived from Ord. No. 1367, adopted Feb. 3, 1997 and Ord. No. 1430, adopted March 6, 2000. Sections 1—36 of Ord. No. 1475 enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 4-301. - Adoption of electrical code by reference. 
The standard code known as the National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition, a publication of the National Fire Protection Association, the same being a standard code for the installation of electrical wiring and apparatus and available in book and pamphlet form is hereby incorporated by reference herein and made a part of this article as authorized and in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 12-3009:3012. Three copies shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Goodland," and shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 1, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-302. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. 
Approved shall mean approved by the building official, the electrical inspector or his or her designee. 
Authorized person shall mean any individual, firm or corporation who or which is licensed under the provisions of this article to do the work as permitted under the specified provisions of this article. 
City shall mean the territory within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Conductor shall mean a wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying the electric current or potential. 
Electrical construction or installation shall mean and include all work and materials used in installing, maintaining or extending a system of electrical wiring and all appurtenances, apparatus or equipment used in connection therewith, inside or attached to any building, structure, lot or premises, except industrial plants where fulltime maintenance is provided and other agencies providing inspections of installations and facilities. Electrical construction shall not be held to mean or include any of the following: 
(1)  The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring; 
(2)  Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or 
(3)  Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under the scope of other inspection agencies. 
Equipment shall mean conductors, materials, fittings, devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors and the like, used as a part of or in connection with an electrical installation. 
Inspector shall mean the building official or any individual who has been appointed by the city as electrical inspector. 
Multifamily shall mean a residential structure housing more than four families. 
Person shall mean a natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors, assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid. 
Special permission shall mean the written consent of the chief building official or the electrical inspector. 
Special ruling shall mean a written ruling filed in the office of the chief building official or the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 2, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-303. - Additional provisions. 
The following sections of this article are in addition to the provisions of the standard electric code incorporated by reference in section 4-301. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 3, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-304. - Amendments. 
The following chapters, sections, paragraphs, part of sections or tables from the National Electrical Code adopted by section 4-301 are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Article 210-52(G), Basements and Garages, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
210-52(G) Basements and Garages. In all dwelling unit basements, whether finished or unfinished, a minimum of six receptacles shall be provided in the concrete walls. Each attached and detached garage and or accessory building provided with electric power shall have at least one outlet receptacle. 
(2)  Article 312.3(A), Meter Enclosure Location, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
312.3(A) Meter Enclosure Location. The city power and light division shall have the right to designate the placing and location of all metering equipment and the same shall be located not less than five feet nor more than six feet from the floor or exterior grade of the building. All meters shall be on the exterior of the structure and shall at all times be accessible to the meter reader and or utility personnel for routine maintenance and/or outages of the city. 
(3)  Article 240-50, General, shall be amended to read as follows: 
240-50 General. Fuses shall not be installed in circuits of less than 30 amperes in all new residential building with new wiring and/or extensions of new wiring in such buildings. A fuse stat may be installed down wire from a breaker to protect a specific item of equipment. 
(4)  Article 300.3, Conductors, shall be amended by adding the following: 
300.3 Conductors. All wiring in and on new and old buildings for commercial, industrial and multifamily uses shall be installed in approved EMT and ENT conduit or shall be of an approved metal-clad cable or armored cable. 
Exception No. 1. Modulars wired with Type NM cable may be used as commercial offices only when all of the following criteria are met. 
(a)  The modular is not wired with aluminum wiring; 
(b)  The modular is not attached to any other building, carport, breezeway, awning or other appurtenance; 
(c)  The modular has a separate electric service which would include an exterior disconnect; and 
(d)  The structure is not required to be fire-rated according to the building code for the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(5)  Article 300-6(B), In Concrete or in Direct Contact with the Earth, shall be amended to read as follows: 
300-6(B) In Concrete or in Direct Contact with the Earth. All conduit imbedded in earth, cinders, and on or below the first floor level of concrete, such as slabs, shall be threaded rigid metallic conduit or schedule 40 plastic conduit sealed in accordance with the manufactures specifications. Exception: EMT may be used in basement walls providing the same has been approved by the manufacture for such application. 
(6)  Table 310.5, Minimum Size of Conductors, shall be amended by adding the following exception: 
Table 310.5 Minimum Size of Conductors. Exception No. 11: A number 14 (AWG) conductor shall not be used as a main, branch circuit or switch leg. The minimum wire size except as otherwise specified for low voltage wiring shall be number 12 (AWG). 
(7)  Article 230.70(A)(1), Readily Accessible Location, shall be amended to read as follows: 
230.70(A)(1), Readily Accessible Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location on the outside of a building with a minimum of one and one-fourth inch EMT conduit on residential buildings and one and one-fourth inch rigid conduit on commercial buildings. Small outbuildings requiring separate service installations shall have a minimum of 60 ampere disconnect switch outside of the building with a minimum of one inch EMT conduit. 
(8)  Article 230.28, Service Masts or Supports, shall be amended to read as follows: 
230.28, Service Masts or Supports. All service entrances using a roof mast kit shall have a minimum of two-inch rigid conduit for support of the city electrical service drop. Other exposed conduit shall be no less than Schedule 80 rigid nonmetallic conduit or rigid metal conduit. 
(9)  Article 408.13, General, shall be amended by adding the following: 
408.13 General. Minimum space and additional breakers in panels shall be as follows: 
(a)  The panel box in residential dwellings, which have been wired for refrigerated air-conditioning, must have 10% additional breaker spaces remaining in panel box. 
(b)  The panel box in residential dwellings, which have not been wired for refrigerated air-conditioning, must have 25% additional breaker spaces remaining in panel boxes. 
(10)  Article 250.64(A), Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum Conductors, shall be amended to read as follows: 
250.64(A) Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum Conductors. All copper equipment ground wire shall be enclosed in conduit from the disconnect box down to a depth of two inches below grade for protection and for an attractive installation. Aluminum wire for equipment ground is prohibited. Installations requiring equipment ground through concrete shall have a minimum of a two-inch sleeve through the concrete and the ground rod clamp shall be driven into the sleeve so that an unauthorized person cannot easily remove it. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 4, 4-15-02; Ord. No. 1494, § 4, 1-6-03)  
Sec. 4-305. - Complying with requirements of this article. 
No person, firm or corporation shall design, contract, erect, alter, relocate, replace, add, construct, plan, layout, supervise, install of repair any wiring apparatus and or equipment for electric light, heat power or other purposes as outlined within this article without first complying with all the requirements as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 5, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-306. - Building official; authority. 
The code hereby incorporated by reference shall be enforced by the building official or electrical inspector designated by the city manager. The building official or his or her authorized designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this Code such interpretations; rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 6, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-307. - Electrical inspector; appointment. 
The building official may assume the responsibilities of or appoint some qualified officer or employee of the city to be and perform the duties of electrical inspector as may be required, subject to the consent and approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 7, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-308. - Same; duties. 
The building official and/or electrical inspector shall have the following duties: 
(a)  To enforce all regulations relating to electrical construction, alteration, repair or removal; 
(b)  May permit, with the approval of the electrical board, on the basis of duly authenticated reports from recognized sources, the use of new materials or modes of electrical construction, not provided for in this article, and may, for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this article adopt an accepted standard of material or workmanlike practices of federal or state bureaus, national, technical organizations or fire underwriters; 
(c)  To examine all buildings requiring electrical construction in the process of erection, construction, alteration or relocation in the city for the purpose of determining whether the work is in compliance with the permit given and in compliance with the regulations of the city pertaining to such work, including zoning regulations; and 
(d)  To keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits or certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. All such records shall be open to public inspection during stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building official or electrical inspector without his or her written consent. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 8, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-309. - Same; powers. 
The building official and/or electrical inspector shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To enter any building or structure or premises at any reasonable hour, whether complete or in the process of erection, to perform the duties contained in this chapter; 
(b)  To adopt and enforce all such prudent emergency measures, as he or she may deem necessary and expedient for the public safety under the laws of the city; 
(c)  May cause any work done in violation of this chapter to be discontinued until he or she shall have satisfactory evidence that the work will be done in accordance with the electrical regulations of the city, subject to the right of any installer or owner to appeal to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 9, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-310. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1b, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed § 4-310 in its entirety. Former § 4-310 pertained to electrical board and derived from Ord. No. 1475, § 10, adopted April 15, 2002.  
Sec. 4-311. - Clarification; modification. 
The electrical inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the electrical code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code. In approving modifications, the electrical inspector shall see that the spirit of the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of a modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the inspector thereon shall be entered upon the records of the electrical inspector and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 11, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-312. - Electrical permit required; application; approval. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any electrical construction, as defined in section 4-302, within the city without an electrical permit being first obtained therefore from the building official or his or her duly authorized assistant. The application for such permit shall be made and the permit obtained before any electrical construction work is commenced. 
(b)  No electrical permit shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring; 
(2)  Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or 
(3)  Any work in industrial establishments where the issuance of electrical permits come under the scope of other agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 12, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-313. - Same; application information required. 
(a)  An electrical permit shall be issued upon an application in writing to the office of building official on a form or forms provided for the purpose. This application shall, among other things, disclose the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the lot or tract of ground; 
(2)  The location of the building or structure; 
(3)  The electrical construction work proposed; 
(4)  The class of occupancy; 
(5)  The class of electrical construction; 
(6)  The kind of materials to be used; 
(7)  The estimated cost of the work; 
(8)  The date work will commence; 
(9)  Expected date of completion; 
(10)  Name and address of electrical contractor or contractors doing the work; 
(11)  Such other information as may be pertinent to the issuance of the required permit. 
(b)  An application for an electrical permit shall be signed by the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or an electrical contractor licensed by the city. If the application is made by the owner or his or her agent, it shall contain the name or names of the licensed electrical contractor or contractors doing the work described, or an electrical permit may be issued to the owner upon his or her application disclosing satisfactory evidence that the proposed work will be performed by the owner, himself or herself and not by a licensed electrical contractor, and likewise subject to the final approval of the electrical inspector for work performed. 
(c)  Upon approval of the completed application and a determination that a permit should be issued, the building official or his or her assistant shall issue a permit to the owner or electrical contractor authorizing the electrical construction work covered by the application. 
(d)  Any permit issued under this section shall be valid and subsisting for a period of not more than 180 days from the date of issuance unless the permittee shall have commenced, within the period so limited, the electrical construction work authorized by such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Electrical construction work commenced, for the purpose of this section, shall mean the beginning of electrical construction work other than the preparation of plans or the letting of an electrical contract. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 13, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-314. - Same; plans and specifications. 
Whenever an application for a electrical permit is made, the building official or the electrical inspector may, if he or she finds it necessary to determine whether electrical construction work described in the application will comply with the laws pertaining to such work, require that the applicant file a written description or drawing of the proposed electrical construction as may be prepared for the purpose. If such drawing or description is insufficient for the purposes of determining whether a permit should be issued, the building official may require the applicant to file complete electrical and engineering plans and specifications for such electrical construction, or any part thereof, as may be necessary for the inspector to determine compliance with this article. The filing of such plans and specifications and the approval thereof in connection with an application for a permit shall not in any way affect the authority of the city to deny or issue a permit, or to inspect any electrical construction work for conformity with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 14, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-315. - Same; fees. 
No permit or certificate of Inspection shall be issued as provided in this article until the person or corporation applying therefore shall have paid the City of Goodland, fees for such permit and inspection at the following rate: 
Rate 	Fee 	Rate 	Fee 
$1 to $200 	$5.00 	$201 to $400 	$7.50 
401 to 500 	10.00 	501 to 600 	11.00 
601 to 700 	12.00 	701 to 800 	13.00 
801 to 900 	14.00 	901 to 1,000 	15.00 
1,001 to 1,100 	15.30 	1,101 to 1,200 	15.60 
1,201 to 1,300 	15.90 	1,301 to 1,400 	16.20 
1,401 to 1,500 	16.50 	1,501 to 1,600 	16.80 
1,601 to 1,700 	17.10 	1,701 to 1,800 	17.40 
1,801 to 1,900 	17.70 	1,901 to 2,000 	18.00 
2,001 to 3,000 	21.00 	3,001 to 4,000 	24.00 
4,001 to 5,000 	27.00 	5,001 to 6,000 	29.50 
6,001 to 7,000 	32.00 	7,001 to 8,000 	34.50 
8,001 to 9,000 	37.00 	9,001 to 10,000 	39.50 
10,001 to 15,000 	52.00 	15,001 to 20,000 	64.50 
20,001 to 25,000 	74.50 	25,001 to 30,000 	84.50 
30,001 to 35,000 	94.50 	35,001 to 40,000 	104.50 
Over $40,000: $104.50 plus $2.00 per thousand or any part thereof in excess of $40,000. 
 
Any governmental entity, which has the authority to levy a tax, is exempt from this section. 
The above fees include a maximum of three inspections per project. Any project that requires additional inspections will be subject to an additional inspection fee at the rate of $15.00 per inspection. The fee herein shall be paid to the city clerk upon obtaining an electrical permit and the same shall be credited to the general operating fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 15, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-316. - Same; posting. 
A copy of the electrical permit shall be kept on the premises for public inspection during the performance of the work and until the completion of the same. The electrical inspector may require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 16, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-317. - Request for inspection. 
Upon the completion of any electrical work covered by this article, it shall be the duty of the person doing such work to notify the electrical inspector and request that it be inspected; after which such work shall be inspected promptly as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 17, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-318. - Inspection; concealment of prior work. 
(a)  When any electric equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building, the person, firm or corporation installing the equipment shall notify the building inspector and such equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the electrical inspector or until 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification. On large installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person, firm or corporation installing the electrical equipment shall give the electrical inspector due notice and inspections shall be made periodically during the progress of the work. 
(b)  The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require building contractors to open such work which, in any manner, conceals electrical wiring that has been closed without his or her knowledge or permission, and in no case shall the inspector issue a certificate of approval until satisfied that the work is in accordance with the provisions of this article. The inspector shall also have the right to refuse to issue a certificate of approval on any wiring, that is concealed in such manner that it cannot be fully determined that it has been done in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 18, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-319. - Certificate of approval. 
(a)  When the electrical inspector finds an electrical construction or installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this article, he or she shall issue to the person, firm, or corporation performing the electrical construction work or making the installation, a certificate of approval, with duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the supply of electricity. 
(b)  When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation, the certificate shall expire at a time to be stated therein and shall be revocable for cause by the electrical inspector. 
(c)  In no case shall certificates of approval be issued on electrical construction, installations or parts of installations where the work installed does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If, upon inspection, the installation is not found to be fully in conformity with the provisions of this article, the electrical inspector shall immediately notify the person, firm, or corporation performing the electrical construction work or making the installation of the existing defects. 
(e)  No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the electric conductor or equipment has been installed in strict conformity with the provisions of this article and unless the electrical construction or installation is made in compliance with nationally approved methods of construction for safety to life and property as herein set forth. 
(f)  The electrical inspector shall be deemed the judge of whether the installation of electric conductors and equipment has been made in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(g)  Issuance of a certificate of approval shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of this jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provision of this code or other ordinances of this jurisdiction shall not be valid. 
(h)  No certificate of approval shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  The replacement of lamps, fuses, bulbs or the connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles and replacement of receptacles and switches, lighting fixtures and apparatus where no changes or alterations are made to the wiring; 
(2)  Any work involved in the manufacturing, repair or testing of any electrical equipment or apparatus, but not including any permanent wiring; or 
(3)  Any work in industrial establishments where inspections come under the scope of other inspection agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 19, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-320. - Connection to installations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connection to a supply of electricity to any building or electrical equipment for which an inspection is required, or which has been disconnected by the order of the electrical inspector, until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing the connection and use of such electric supply. The electrical inspector may, at his or her discretion, authorize a temporary connection. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 20, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-321. - Reinspection. 
The electrical inspector shall periodically reinspect existing installations of electrical conductors and equipment. When the installation of any conductors or equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the person, firm, or corporation owning, using, or operating the installation shall be notified in writing and shall make the necessary repairs or changes required to place the conductors or equipment in safe condition and have the work completed within the period specified by the electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 21, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-322. - Condemnation; appeal. 
(a)  If in the judgment of the electrical inspector, after an inspection, any electrical conductors, appliances or equipment in any building are unsafe or dangerous to persons or property, the inspector shall have the power to cause the wires or appliances to be disconnected from the source of electrical energy supplying these conductors or equipment, and may, at his or her discretion, seal the control switches for the same in an open or disconnected position, whereupon he or she shall give notice to the owner, or his or her agent, or by posting such notice at the site and shall also notify the utilities serving the premises. Thereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit electric current to be supplied to the electrical conductors, appliances or equipment so sealed until they shall have been made safe and the inspector shall have issued a certificate of approval to that effect. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to cause all dead wires, unused poles or electric apparatus on the outside of the buildings or in streets or alleys to be removed at the expense of the owners thereof by giving the owners written notice. 
(c)  When the electrical inspector condemns all or part of any electrical installation, the owner may, within 10 days after receiving written notice thereof, file a petition in writing for review of the action of the electrical inspector by the electrical board, upon the receipt of which the electrical board shall at once proceed to determine the facts, and within ten days from receiving the petition make a decision in accordance with their findings. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 22, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-323. - Interference by unauthorized person. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to, in any manner, change or alter electrical conductors or equipment in or on any building. If in the course of the erection of a building or structure, electrical conductors or equipment are in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the structure, notice shall be immediately given the authorized person or firm installing the electrical conductors or equipment, and the needed change shall be made by such authorized person or firm. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 23, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-324. - Electrician or electrical contractors defined. 
(a)  An electrical contractor for purposes of this article shall be any person, firm, co-partnership, corporation, association, or any combination thereof, who have met all requirements as stated in section 4-325, whether a resident or not of the city: 
(1)  Who or which undertakes with or for another, for a fixed sum, price, fee or any other compensation to install, construct, alter, repair, add to, or move any electrical installation or performs any electrical construction work in the city, for which an electrical construction permit may now or hereafter be required by the laws of the city; or 
(2)  Who or which advertises or represents himself, herself, or itself to the public to have the capacity or ability to undertake, or submit a bid or offer to install, construct, alter, repair, add to, remove, restore or replace any electrical installation or perform any electrical construction work; or 
(3)  Who or which installs, constructs, alters, adds to or removes any electrical installation or performs any electrical construction work either on his or her own or other property for purposes of sale or speculation. 
a.  An electrical contractor as defined shall not mean or include: 
1.  Any owner or his or her authorized agents or employees making ordinary repairs to his, her or its own building or structure not involving electrical construction and for which a permit is not required or on which an electrician or electrical contractor, as defined, is not required, employed or engaged to perform; or 
2.  Any property owner personally performing any improvements, alterations or electrical construction within or upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her own personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the electrical inspector as to his or her ability to perform such work, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive approval. Personal electrical construction by an owner under this section shall be by himself, herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence, without compensation and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except an electrician or electrical contractor licensed by the city. 
(b)  "Master electrician" means any person having the necessary qualifications, as stated in section 4-325, and the knowledge and skill to install, repair, alter, add to or change any electrical wires, fixtures, appliances, apparatus, raceways, conduit, or any part thereof which generates, transmits, transfers or utilizes electrical energy in any form for light, heat power, or communications, employed by an electrical contractor. 
(c)  "Journeyman electrician" means any person having the necessary qualifications as stated in section 4-325, and is qualified to perform work in the electrical trade while employed or supervised by an electrical contractor. 
(d)  "Electrical apprentice" means a person who is registered as such under section 4-325, and is working at the trade in the employment of a licensed electrical contractor, and is under the direct supervision of a licensed electrical contractor and who is in compliance with the provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 24, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-325. - Electrician's or electrical contractor's license required; electrical permits; unlawful acts. 
Any person intending to engage in the trade or business of electrical wiring for any reason, in the City of Goodland, Kansas, either as an electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice shall first receive and possess a license as herein provided. Such license shall not be issued until the applicant thereof shall have applied to the electrical board for such license, taken and successfully passed the examination as specified in section 4-328 of this article as to his or her competency to do such work, or presents a Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq. 
(a)  Each electrical contractor, master electrician, journeyman electrician and electrical apprentice shall before entering upon any electrical construction work subject to regulation by city laws, apply to the city clerk for an electrical license as such and receive the same as hereinafter provided and have in his or her possession a valid license authorizing him, her or it to engage in the trade as such in the city. 
(b)  No permit for any electrical construction work shall be issued for any such work to be performed by an electrical contractor, as defined, which has not first obtained a license upon making a proper application and payment of the license fee as required. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, association or corporation to enter into a contract or agreement with another so as to bring himself, herself, or itself under the definition of an electrical contractor, master electrician, journeyman electrician or electrical apprentice herein, or to perform any work as such or any work under a contract for any work involving electrical construction, without first having obtained an electrical license issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 25, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-326. - Same; application; granting. 
Application for an electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice license shall be made upon a form to be supplied by the city which shall disclose the name of the applicant, his or her place of business in the city (and home office if a nonresident), the kind of contracting work engaged in, the length of time engaged in such work and places where work has been performed within the past two years. The electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice shall sign the applications. The applications shall be, by the building official, referred to the electrical board at its next meeting for action thereon. Such license shall be issued by the city clerk, upon payment of the fees hereinafter provided after approval of the electrical board. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 26, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-327. - Electrical contractor's bond required; conditions; approval; rights reserved. 
Classifications and costs of liability and bond certificates are as follows: 
(1)  Electrical contractor: 
a.  Shall possess a Kansas Certificate of Competency as a master electrician as specified in K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq. and pay the license fee as set out in this article. He/she shall secure and file with the city clerk a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the principal sum of $5,000.00 conditioned that the principal named therein shall faithfully and fully observe all laws of the city relating to the business or occupation for which a license is desired and further conditioned to hold and save the city harmless and free of claims for loss or damage to persons or property, or from damage, injury or destruction of property belonging to the city, resulting from, or arising out of, the negligence or failure of the principal or any of his, her or its employees, agents, servants to use due care or diligence respecting any opening or excavation made in, or adjacent to any street, alley or public ground in the city, or any materials stored, placed or used in any such places, or the operation or use of any vehicle, machinery or equipment in the streets, alleys or public grounds in connection with the business or occupation licensed. Each such bond shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas and further conditioned that in the event of cancellation or expiration that the company or agent will give ten days notice of such fact to the city clerk. Each bond shall be dated to run from the first day of any license issued by the city to the principal and may cover the period of not to exceed two years. An extension certificate shall renew no bond but the principal shall file a new bond for each successive period following the renewal thereof. The city reserves the right to furnish the form of all surety bonds as may be required by this article. 
b.  In addition to obtaining a corporate surety bond as required herein, an electrical contractor must procure and maintain a liability insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence. Some insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Kansas shall issue such policies of insurance. An electrical contractor may qualify as to the insurance requirements by filing a certificate with the city clerk executed by the resident agent of such company stating that the required policy of insurance has been issued by such company for the purpose required by this article and that such insurer will not cancel the policy except upon giving 30 days notice in writing to the city; and that the certificate shall be filed for an annual period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of such year. 
(2)  Electrical master. Electrical master shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq. and pay the license fee as set out in this article. Prior to examination, applicants shall show proof of three years experience as an electrical journeyman employed by an electrical contractor. 
(3)  Electrical journeyman. Electrical journeyman shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq. and pay the license fee as set out in this article. Prior to examination, applicants shall show proof of three years experience as an apprentice with an electrical contractor or 2,000 hours of education from a vocational or similar school in the electrical trade. 
(4)  Electrical apprentice. Electrical apprentice shall not be required to take an examination or pay a license fee. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 27, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-328. - Examinations. 
Standard examinations for the determination of competency of the electrical contractors, electrical master, electrical journeyman shall be prepared, published, and available from Experior, 2100 NW 53rd Avenue, Gainesville, FL 32653-2149, or any other examination recognized by the State of Kansas as specified in K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq., are hereby designated the standard examinations for determining the qualifications of persons seeking licensure as an electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman. The minimum passing score shall be 75 percent for each of the examinations listed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 28, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-329. - Re-examinations. 
Any person who fails to pass the examination as set out in section 4-328 may apply for re-examination after the expiration of 30 days from the date of said failure. Should such individual fail to pass the examination for a subsequent or a second time, the electrical board may refuse a third or subsequent application until after the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 29, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-330. - Same; license fees; conditions; renewal; unlawful acts. 
The applicant, upon completion of the prescribed examination for the type of license desired or any applicant who presents a Kansas Certificate of Competency as defined by K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq., and who meets all other requirements as set forth in this article will be issued a license at the following rates per year. 
Electrical contractor: $35.00, plus $5.00 for each master electrician employed full-time by such contractor. 
Electrical master: $35.00. 
Electrical journeyman: $15.00. 
Electrical apprentice: $0.00. 
Contractors not meeting all requirements of this article shall be refunded the license fee and deemed nonlicensed. Any contractor who allows his/her license to lapse for more than one calendar year from the date of expiration is hereby required to possess a Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in this article prior to his/her relicensing. 
(a)  Any license issued on or after September 1 of each year shall be issued upon payment of one-half the annual license fee. 
(b)  Each such license shall set forth the kind of electrical construction work in which the licensee may engage. The licensee shall display his or her license at any place where he or she may be engaged in contract work or produce the same on demand of any city officer. All licenses shall be renewable annually as in the case of an original license on or before the first day of March of the year for which issued. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to contract for any kind of work covered by this article without having a valid license issued by the city to perform such contracts. 
(d)  All licenses shall expire March 1 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 30, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-331. - License suspension; revocation; appeal; unlawful acts. 
(a)  The license of any electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice may be suspended temporarily, for a period of not to exceed 30 days at any one time, by the building official upon his or her own motion or upon a complaint of the city electrical inspector. Notice shall be given in writing to such electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice giving reasonable notice of a time of hearing of the complaint or the matter alleged against such electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice involving any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Misrepresentation of a material fact by applicant in obtaining a license; 
(2)  Use of license to obtain an electrical permit for another; 
(3)  Failure or neglect to observe conditions of permit authorizing encumbering of streets or sidewalks for safety of public; 
(4)  Performance of any electrical construction work without a permit where one is required by law; or 
(5)  Willful disregard of any violation of the electrical construction laws, or failure to comply with any lawful order of the city electrical inspector. 
(b)  Any licensee may within 15 days appeal in writing to the electrical board from any order of the building official suspending his or her license for its final decision thereon. The electrical board may upon such hearing terminate such suspension within not more than 30 days thereafter, or may revoke such license. If any license shall be revoked, the electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice shall not be eligible for a new license during a period of six months thereafter. No fee shall be refunded in event of the suspension or revocation of any electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to engage in the occupation or trade of an electrical contractor, electrical master, electrical journeyman or electrical apprentice during the time any license of such authorized person has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 31, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-332. - Work by property owners. 
Nothing herein contained shall prohibit any property owner from personally performing any electrical construction or installing electrical wiring or equipment within and upon his or her own residence and intended for his or her personal use and permanent occupancy; provided, the owner shall satisfy the electrical inspector as to his or her ability to perform such work or install such electrical wiring, secure a permit, pay required fees, do work in accordance with this article, and apply for an inspection and receive a certificate of approval. Personal electrical construction or installation performed by an owner under this section shall be by himself, herself, for himself or herself on his or her own residence, without compensation and no person shall be employed to assist him or her in any way on such work except an electrical contractor licensed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 32, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-333. - Approved materials. 
No electric materials for wiring of appliances or equipment shall be installed in the city unless they are in conformity with the provisions of this article and with the approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. Conformity of materials for wiring appliances and equipment to the standards of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. shall be prima facie evidence that the materials, devices, appliances and equipment comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 33, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-334. - Liability. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability, by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein, or the certificate of approval of any work or equipment authorized herein or by reason of any permit or license granted herein. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 34, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-335. - Severability. 
If any section of the National Electrical Code or of this article shall be held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, then such section shall be considered separate and apart from the remaining provisions of the National Electrical Code or of this article, the section is to be completely severable from the remaining provisions which shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 35, 4-15-02)  
Sec. 4-336. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon the conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1475, § 36, 4-15-02)  
Secs. 4-337—4-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1368, adopted Feb. 3, 1997, repealed Ord. No. 1294 in its entirety and adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Sections 3 and 19 pertaining to severability and publication have not been codified. 
 
Sec. 4-401. - Compliance required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall design, contract, erect, install, alter, repair, locate, relocate, replace, add, or maintain any plumbing or plumbing system in the City of Goodland without first complying with all the requirements as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-402. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby incorporated by reference by the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, for the purpose of regulating design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the City of Goodland and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore, that certain document known as the Uniform Plumbing Code, being particularly the 1994 Edition and all supplements thereto, as promulgated and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, omitted, modified, added or amended, of which not less than three copies have been and are now on file in the office of the City Clerk, being appropriately stamped or marked "OFFICIAL COPY" as adopted by Ordinance No. 1368 approved the third day of February, 1997 and which copies shall be open and available to the public at all reasonable business hours and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling upon all plumbing and plumbing systems and their supports hereafter placed or installed in or upon any land, building or other structures within the city and under the scope of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 2, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-403. - Enforcement. 
The code hereby incorporated shall be enforced by the building official, or official inspector designated by the city manager. The same shall be responsible for effectively conducting the cross-connection control program of the Goodland Public Water Supply. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 4, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-404. - Right of entry. 
The building official in the discharge of his or her official duties and upon identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 5, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-405. - Definitions. 
Definition of terms as used in this article shall be as follows: 
Administrative authority, as used in the plumbing code, shall mean the building official or his or her authorized representative. 
Appliance installer means one who is qualified and equipped to install appliances not requiring alteration of or additional plumbing, or gas piping. Any connection requiring additional waste or water piping below the trap shall be installed by a licensed plumber. All such installations shall be subject to inspections. 
Apprentice plumber means an employee who labors at the trade of plumbing under the direct supervision and in the presence of a master or journeyman plumber with the intentions of qualifying as a journeyman plumber. 
Certified gas fitter means one who is certified and qualified to layout and install gas or gas equipped appliances, as required by Peoples Natural Gas Company. 
Journeyman plumber means a person who has qualified to work at the trade of plumbing as an employee of a master plumber under the supervision of a master plumber. 
Maintenance plumber means a person who is qualified to maintain, repair or replace any plumbing system on the premises or building owned, occupied or otherwise controlled by the person, firm or corporation by whom the maintenance plumber is regularly employed. 
Master plumber means a person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to properly plan, layout, and supervise the installation, repair, maintenance or extension of any plumbing system, including waste drains, vents water supply and fixtures in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the board. 
Plumbing contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who undertakes or offers to undertake for another the planning, laying out, supervising, installing, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension of any plumbing system in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the board. 
Water conditioning installer means one who is qualified to install, maintain and repair machinery tanks or devices used to treat water, including water softening equipment and the piping required for the installation of such equipment. 
Yard sprinkler installer means one who is qualified and equipped to install yard sprinkler systems. A licensed plumber shall make all connections from the building service line up to and including the backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 6, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-406. - Permit and inspection fees. 
No permit or certificate of inspection shall be issued as provided in this article until the person or corporation applying therefore shall have paid the building official fees for such permit and inspection at the following rate: 
Rate 	Fee 	Rate 	Fee 
$1 to $200 	No Permit Fee 		
200 to 400 	$7.50 	500 	10.00 
600 	11.00 	700 	12.00 
800 	13.00 	900 	14.00 
1,000 	15.00 	1,100 	15.30 
1,200 	15.60 	1,300 	15.90 
1,400 	16.20 	1,500 	16.50 
1,600 	16.80 	1,700 	17.10 
1,800 	17.40 	1,900 	17.70 
2,000 	18.00 	3,000 	21.00 
4,000 	24.00 	5,000 	27.00 
6,000 	29.50 	7,000 	32.00 
8,000 	34.50 	9,000 	37.00 
10,000 	39.50 	15,000 	52.00 
20,000 	64.50 	25,000 	74.50 
30,000 	84.50 	35,000 	94.50 
Over $35,000 - $94.50 plus $2.00 per thousand or any part thereof in excess of $35,000. 
 
The above fees include a maximum of three inspections per project. Any project which requires additional inspections will be subject to an additional inspection fee at the rate of $15.00 per inspection. Any governmental entity which has the authority to levy a tax is exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 7, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-407. - Uniform Plumbing Code—Amendments. 
The following chapters, sections, paragraphs, parts of sections or tables from the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by section 4-402 of this article are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Chapter 3, Article 305 Sewer Required, is hereby amended by the addition of a new paragraph 4 to read as follows: 
305.4 All building sewers shall be a minimum of four inches. 
(2)  Chapter 3, Article 316.2 Special Joints, 316.2.1 Copper Tubing to Threaded Steel Sewer Pipe Joints, is hereby amended by adding to the existing wording the following: 
The administrative authority shall require the use of an approved dielectric insulator where necessary. 
(3)  Chapter 7, Article 719 Cleanouts, paragraph 719.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Cleanouts shall be installed outside the building between the building drain and the building sewer and extended to grade. 
Additional building sewer cleanouts shall be installed at intervals not to exceed 100 feet (30.4m) in straight runs and for each aggregate horizontal change in direction exceeding 135 degrees. 
(4)  Chapter 7, Table 7.7, is hereby amended by adding to the existing table the following: 
Public water supply wells ..... 100 feet 
(5)  Section 609.1 Installation, of the adopted Uniform Plumbing Code shall be amended by adding the following: 
All nonferrous water lines buried underground shall be required to be buried with a #12 tracer wire from the point of attachment at the meter to the outer edge of the building to which it is supplying. 
(6)  Chapter 12, Article 1210 Material for Gas Piping, is hereby amended by adding the following words: 
EXCEPTIONS: Stainless steel flexible piping with a polyethylene coating which meets or exceeds ANSI/AGA LC-1 requirements may be used for its listed use by a certified installer. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 8, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 1418, § 1, 7-19-99)  
Sec. 4-408. - License, bonds and insurance. 
Any person intending to engage in the trade or business of plumbing for any reason, in the City of Goodland, Kansas, either as a plumbing contractor, master plumber, journeyman plumber, apprentice plumber, maintenance plumber, yard sprinkler, appliance installer, water conditioning installer, or certified gas fitter shall first receive and possess a license as herein provided. Such license shall not be issued until the applicant thereof shall have applied to the plumbing board for such license, taken and successfully passed the examination as specified in section 4-409 herein as to his or her competency to do such work, or presents a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. Chapter 12-1508 et seq. Classifications and costs and insurance and bond requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Plumbing contractor shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a master plumber as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(2)  Master plumber shall present proof of at least three years experience as a journeyman plumber and shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(3)  Journeyman plumber shall present proof of at least two years experience as an apprentice plumber or proof of satisfactory completion of a one year instructional course in plumbing and shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(4)  Maintenance plumber shall pass the prescribed examination for competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(5)  Apprentice plumber shall not be required to take the examination as provided in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(6)  Yard sprinkler installer shall pass the prescribed examination for competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(7)  Appliance installer shall not be required to take an examination but shall pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(8)  Water conditioning installer shall pass the prescribed examination for competency as specified in K.S.A. 12-1508 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(9)  Certified gas fitters shall pass the prescribed examination for competency as given by People's Natural Gas, Goodland, Kansas, and shall pay the license fee as set out in section 4-410(a) of this article. 
(10)  Individual homeowner or owner of single-family dwellings and any accessory building thereto, used for their own private use and occupancy need not be licensed to do plumbing work to such dwelling unit or accessory building. 
In no case shall the owner be allowed to perform labor at the trade of plumbing on any other building or construction project without first obtaining an appropriate license from the city, giving him or her the right to do work in the trade of plumbing. The owner shall personally purchase all materials and perform all labor in connection therein, except make the tap on the main sewer or water line, which must be done in accordance with section 4-412 contained herein. The property owner shall assume all responsibility for all personal or property damage that may occur at any future date and shall procure required permits and call for all inspections required by the code. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 9, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-409. - Examination; re-examination. 
(a)  Examination. Standard examination, for the determination of competency of a plumbing contractor, master plumber, journeyman plumber, maintenance plumber, yard sprinkler installer and appliance dealer prepared, published, and available from Block and Associates, Florida Farm Bureau Building, 5700 S.W. 34th Street, #1303, Gainesville, Florida 32608, or any other examination recognized by the State of Kansas as specified in K.S.A. 12-1525 et seq., are hereby designated the standard examination for determining the qualifications of persons seeking licensure as plumbing contractor, master plumber, journeyman plumber, maintenance plumber, yard sprinkler installer and appliance dealer. The minimum passing score shall be 75 percent for each of the examination listed herein. 
(b)  Re-examinations. Any person who fails to pass the examination as prescribed in subsection (a) above may apply for re-examination after the expiration of 30 days. Should such person fail to pass the second time, the board may refuse a third application, until after the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 1368, §§ 10, 11, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-410. - Licenses. 
(a)  License fees. Upon successful completion of prescribed examination for the type of license desired the applicant may be issued a license at the following rate per year: 
Plumbing contractor 	$35.00 
  Plus for each master plumber employed full time by such contractor 	5.00 
Master plumber 	35.00 
Journeyman plumber 	15.00 
Maintenance plumber 	10.00 
Yard sprinkler installer 	25.00 
Appliance installer 	25.00 
Water conditioning installer 	25.00 
 
(b)  License expiration. All licenses shall expire February 1 of each calendar year. 
(c)  Certificate of license. Each person required to be licensed under the provisions of this article shall be required to carry a card which designates the type of work that he or she is licensed to perform and such card will be issued each year upon approval of such person's license application. 
(Ord. No. 1368, §§ 12—14, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-411. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1c, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed § 4-411 in its entirety. Former § 4-411 pertained to plumbing board of appeals and derived from Ord. No. 1368, §§ 15—17, adopted Feb. 3, 1997.  
Sec. 4-412. - Main sewer or water tap. 
The main connection of any building sewer into the public sewer shall be made under the direct supervision of the city public works department. 
(1)  A separate permit shall be required for each connection to the public sewer. 
(2)  The main connection of any building water service into the public water system shall be done in accordance with the city code. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 18, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-413. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 20, 2-3-97)  
Secs. 4-414—4-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SIGN CODE 
 
Sec. 4-501. - Code adopted. 
That certain documents, three copies of which are on file and are open for inspection of the public in the office of the city clerk of the City of Goodland, being marked and designated as the Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, be and the same are hereby adopted as the code of the City of Goodland for regulating the erection, re-erection, construction, alteration and maintenance of signs and sign structures in the City of Goodland providing for issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, which are on file in the office of the city clerk in the City of Goodland are hereby referred to, are adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-502. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation to erect, re-erect, construct, alter or maintain a sign or sign structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code, without first complying with all the requirements as herein stated. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 2, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-503. - Enforcement. 
The codes hereby incorporated shall be enforced by the building official, or official inspector designated by the city manager. The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplement regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 6, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-504. - Uniform Sign Code—Amendments. 
The following chapters, sections, paragraphs, parts of sections or tables from the Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition adopted by section 4-501 are hereby amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 304 is amended as follows: 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a sign permit which is required under the provisions of this article, shall at the time of receiving such permit pay to the City of Goodland a fee as follows: 
1.  For all signs having a valuation from $1.00 to $1,000.00, the fee shall be $15.00. 
2.  For all signs which exceed $1,000.00 in valuation, the fee shall be computed on the basis of $15.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $.20 per $100.00 of cost or fraction thereof, over $1,000.00. 
If a sign, for which a permit is granted, is not erected within 60 days from the date of the permit, the permit shall, unless renewed, become void. Advertising painted or placed on a structure shall be deemed subject to these regulations if permanent. 
(2)  Chapter 2 shall also be deemed to include the following definitions: 
1.  Sign Contractor, Electrical: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in Section 8 herein, and who are qualified to install, repair, and replace electrical wires, apparatus, raceways, conduit to any part thereof on electrical signs, and is qualified to erect signs. Such contractor may contract for, and take out building permits for the erection of signs. 
2.  Sign Contractor, nonelectrical: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or combination thereof who have met all requirements as stated in section 8 herein, and who are qualified to install, repair, alter, add to, or change non-electrical signs according to the building code. 
(3)  Paragraph No. 3 of Section 303 of Chapter 3 of said Uniform Sign Code, 1997 Edition is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 7, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-505. - License, bonds and insurance. 
Any person intending to engage in the trade or business of a sign contractor electrical, or sign contractor nonelectrical in the City of Goodland, shall first receive and possess a license as herein provided. Such license shall not be issued until the applicant thereof shall have applied to the building board as established by Ordinance No. 1374 of the City of Goodland for such license, taken and successfully passed the examination as specified in section 4-506 herein as to his or her competency to do such work, or presents a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. Chapter 12-1556 et seq.. Classifications, insurance and bond requirements are as follows: 
(1)  Sign contractor, electrical shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a sign contractor, electrical as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-507(a) of this article. 
(2)  Sign contractor, nonelectrical shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a sign contractor, nonelectrical as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., and shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00 and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-507(a) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 8, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-506. - Examinations; re-examinations. 
(a)  Examinations. Standard examinations, for determination of competency of a sign contractor, electrical and sign contractor, nonelectrical prepared, published, and available from Block & Associates, Florida Farm Bureau Building, 5700 S.W. 34th Street, #1303, Gainesville, Florida 32608, or any other examination recognized by the State of Kansas as specified in K.S.A. 12-1556 et seq., are hereby designated the standard examinations for determining the qualifications of persons seeking licensure as sign contractor, electrical and sign contractor, nonelectrical. The minimum passing score shall be 75 percent for each of the examinations listed herein. 
(b)  Re-examinations. Any person who fails to pass the examination as prescribed in subsection (a) above, may apply for re-examination after the expiration of 30 days. Should such person fail to pass the second time, the board may refuse a third application, until the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 1375, §§ 9, 10, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 4-507. - Licenses. 
(a)  License fees. Upon successful completion of prescribed examination for the type of license desired the applicant may be issued a license at the following rate per year: 
Sign contractor, electrical 	$35.00 
Sign contractor, nonelectrical 	35.00 
 
An additional card or cards of the same title can be purchased for $5.00, by a contractor, for any license stated herein, for a qualified person as stated in section 4-505, employed full-time by such contractor. 
(b)  License expiration. All licenses shall expire February 15 of each calendar year. 
(c)  Certificate of license. Each person required to be licensed under the provisions of this article shall be required to carry a card which designates the type of work that he or she is licensed to perform and such card will be issued each year upon approval of such person's license application. 
(Ord. No. 1375, §§ 11—13, 5-5-97)  
Secs. 4-508—4-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 16 of Ord. No 1408, adopted Jan. 18, 1999, repealed §§ 4-601 and 4-602, and §§ 1—15 of said ordinance enacted similar provisions set out herein as §§ 4-601—4-615. Former §§ 4-601 and 4-602 derived from Ord. No. 1281 and the 1988 Code, respectively. 
 
Sec. 4-601. - Purpose. 
The governing body has found that there exists within the corporate limits of the city structures which are unfit for human use or habitation because of dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire or accidents, structural defects or other conditions which render such structures unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise inimical to the general welfare of the city, or conditions which provide a general blight upon the neighborhood or surrounding properties. It is hereby deemed necessary by the governing body to require or cause the repair, closing or demolition or removal of such structures as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 1, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-602. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
Public officer means the building official, or authorized representative designated by the city manager or his or her authorized representative. 
Structure shall include any building, wall, superstructure or other structure which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 2, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-603. - Dangerous building. 
For the purpose of this code, any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered. 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever any portion thereof has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction. 
(8)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(9)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(10)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(11)  Whenever the building structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(12)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (iii) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
(13)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the building code or housing code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and Ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location. 
(15)  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(16)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(18)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 3, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-604. - Public officer; duties. 
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including the following: 
(a)  Inspect any structure which appears to be unsafe, dangerous or unfit for human habitation; 
(b)  Have authority to enter upon premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of making such inspections. Entry shall be made so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to any person in possession of the structure. If entry is denied, the public officer may seek an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(c)  Report all structures which he or she believes to be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation to the governing body; 
(d)  Receive petitions as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 4, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-605. - Procedure; petition. 
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by at least five residents charging that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public officer on his or her own motion that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, report such findings to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 5, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-606. - Same—Notice. 
The governing body upon receiving a report as provided in section 4-605 shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner's agent, any lienholder of record and any occupant of the structure may appear and show cause why the structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 6, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-607. - Same—Publication. 
(a)  The resolution shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of each week. At least 30 days shall elapse between the last publication and the date set for the hearing. 
(b)  A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by certified mail within three days after its first publication to each owner, agent, lienholder and occupant at the last known place of residence and shall be marked "deliver to addressee only." 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 7, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-608. - Same—Hearing, order. 
(a)  If, after notice and hearing, the governing body determines that the structure under consideration is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall state in a resolution its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall cause the resolution to be published once in the official city newspaper and a copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholder of record and occupants in the same manner provided for the notice of hearing. The resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the repair or removal of such structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of such structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is completed, the governing body will cause the structure to be razed and removed. 
(b)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure can be made at a cost which shall not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure, the owner of the property shall, within the time specified in the order, repair, alter or improve the structure to render it safe and fit for human use or habitation, or shall vacate and close the structure until such time as he has complied with the order. 
(c)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be made at a cost of 50 percent or less of its fair market value, the owner shall, within the time specified in the order, remove or demolish the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 8, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-609. - Duty of owner. 
Whenever any structure within the city shall be found to be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of the property to render the same secure and safe or to remove the same. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 9, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-610. - Same—Failure to comply. 
(a)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with the order to repair, alter, improve or vacate the structure, the public officer may cause the structure to be repaired, altered, improved, or to be vacated and closed. 
(b)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with the order to remove or demolish the structure, the public officer may cause the structure to be removed and demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 10, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-611. - Same—Make site safe. 
Upon the removal of any structure, the owner shall fill any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other action necessary to leave the premises in a safe condition. If the owner fails to take such action, the public officer may proceed to make the site safe. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 11, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-612. - Assessment of costs. 
(a)  The cost to the city of any notices, repairs, alterations, improvements, vacating, removal or demolition by the public officer, including making the site safe, shall be reported to the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall give notice to the owner of the structure by restricted mail of the cost of removing the structure and making the premises safe and secure. The notice shall also state that payment of the cost is due and payable within 30 days following receipt of the notice. 
(c)  If the costs remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice, the enforcing officer may sell any salvage from the structure and apply the proceeds or any necessary portion thereof to pay the cost of removing the structure and making the site safe. Any proceeds in excess of that required to recover the costs shall be paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was located. 
(d)  If the costs remain unpaid and the proceeds of the sale of salvage is insufficient to recover the cost, or if there is not salvage, the city clerk shall, at the time of certifying other city taxes, certify the unpaid portion of the costs to the county clerk who shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 12, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-613. - Immediate hazard. 
When in the opinion of the governing body any structure is in such condition as to constitute an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public, the governing body may direct the public officer to erect barricades or cause the property to be vacated, taken down, repaired, shored or otherwise made safe without delay. Such action may be taken without prior notice to or hearing of the owners, agents, lienholders and occupants. The cost of any action under this section shall be assessed against the property as provided in section 4-612. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 13, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-614. - Appeals from order. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the governing body under this article may, within 30 days following service of the order, petition the district court of the county in which the structure is located for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order pending final disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 14, 1-18-99)  
Sec. 4-615. - Scope of ordinance. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the constitution, any other law or ordinance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise or to exercise those powers granted specifically by K.S.A. 12-1750:1756. 
(Ord. No. 1408, § 15, 1-18-99)  
Secs. 4-616—4-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO RECEPTION 
 
Sec. 4-701. - Radio interference. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation knowingly or wantonly to operate or cause to be operated any wire, wires or mechanism or device that conducts or consumes electricity and which emits uncontrolled and/or undirected electrostatic energy audible on radio receiving sets or visible on television receiving sets, continuously or intermittently for ten seconds or for periods of less duration as reoccurring oftener than at ten minute intervals, within the corporate limits of the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and after having been notified by the city electrical inspector or other duly authorized officer of the city, that such wires, mechanisms or devices are or are liable to cause such interference as hereinbefore described: Provided, that x-ray machines and like electrical apparatus may be used for the making of pictures, examinations and treatments at any time if the machines or apparatus used therefor are properly shielded or equipped to avoid unnecessary or reasonably preventable interference with the reception and are not negligently operated. Provided further, that this article shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce or the use of which is authorized by or under the provisions of any act of the Congress of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 1)  
Sec. 4-702. - Duty of inspector. 
When any complaint shall be made or any disturbance or interference with radio reception, it shall be the duty of the electrical inspector, or some other city officer designated by the city manager to seek out the cause of the interference or disturbance and when the wires or mechanism suspected of causing such disturbance or interference may be found, the inspector shall make a reasonable effort to demonstrate the fact to the person in charge of the premises where found. It shall be his or her further duty to inspect the electrical wiring or mechanism on any such premises for compliance with the electrical code of the city and if found defective and not in accordance with this code, he or she shall consider the same to be corrected. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 2; Code 1983)  
Sec. 4-703. - Duty of persons. 
It shall be the duty of all persons owning or using electrical equipment or devices which may be operated or used in violation of section 4-701 of this article to correct the same in the manner recommended by the electrical inspector of the city and to install, maintain or use such filters, condensers, shields or other recommended devices to control the electrostatic energy where the same cannot be eliminated, correcting the wiring in accordance with the provisions of the electrical code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 3)  
Sec. 4-704. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall refuse, after notice, to correct the condition complained of in accordance with the recommendations made therefor or who shall be convicted of any violation of section 4-701 of this article shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. Provided, that every day any electrical wiring or electrical device shall be used contrary to the provisions of this article or is allowed to remain in use or be used shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 4)  
Secs. 4-705—4-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 4-801. - Location on premises. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct a fence within four feet of a city curb, or curbline. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1)  
Sec. 4-802. - Permit. 
No person shall construct a fence upon city property without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector. Said permit shall provide that in the event the city should need to utilize its property for any reason, including the widening of a street or the installation of utilities, that the owner of said fence must remove the same at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 2)  
Sec. 4-803. - Types of fences; zoned areas. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or keep or maintain any barbed wire fence or fence any part of which is composed of barbed wire or any electric fence within those areas of the City of Goodland zoned as Residential 1, Residential 2, Residential 3 or Mobile Home Subdivision or on any property on which a dwelling exists regardless of zoning; provided, that a barbed wire fence may be permitted around business or governmental property so long as the lowest strand of the same is at least seven feet above the ground, is constructed around business or governmental property and used for security purposes, and does not detrimentally affect the public welfare or unduly endanger the public taking into consideration the security purpose for which the fence is constructed. 
(Ord. No. 1002)  
Sec. 4-804. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 with each day after issuance of a citation hereunder constituting a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 4)  
Secs. 4-805—4-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MOVING HOUSES AND BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 4-901. - Denial of permit. 
No permit to move a building in, into, through, or from the city shall be issued by the building inspector, if any of the conditions listed herein shall be found to exist in regard to the dwelling or building proposed to be moved. 
(a)  Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous; 
(b)  Is infested with pests or unsanitary; 
(c)  If it is a dwelling or habitation, is unfit for human habitation; 
(d)  Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet from the proposed site; 
(e)  If the proposed use is prohibited by the zoning laws of the city; 
(f)  If the structure is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by any ordinance of the city; 
(g)  If the moving of the building or structure causes unreasonable damage to the trees, plants and shrubs on and along the public streets; 
(h)  If such dwelling or building whose walls or vertical members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line suspended from the top edge of such member shall fall outside of a distance from the edge equal to one-third of the thickness of such members; 
(i)  If such dwelling or building has support member or members which have deteriorated to such an extent as to be unable to safely support the applied loads or which have 40 percent damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting, enclosed, or outside walls or covering; 
(j)  If such dwelling or building has improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; 
(k)  If such dwelling or building has been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, moral, or the general health and welfare of any occupants; 
(l)  If such dwelling or building has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure persons or property; 
(m)  If such dwelling or building does not have an unobstructed means of egress leading to an open space at ground level; 
(n)  If such dwelling or building has wiring that is dangerous due to lack of insulation, improper fuses, breakers, inadequate grounding, lack of capacity of wires, or other dangerous conditions; 
(o)  If such dwelling or building fails to comply with the health, fire, building, electrical, or plumbing codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 4)  
Sec. 4-902. - Owner's completion bond or savings and loan certificate and share. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building the owner or lessee of the property upon which the building is to be located shall file with the building commissioner a corporate surety bond, conditioned as follows: That all of the work required to be done to complete the relocation, alteration and reconstruction of the building pursuant to the conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and completed within a reasonable time to be specified by the building inspector or other designated person in the permit. Such bond shall be in principal amount equal to the estimated cost of the work proposed to be done plus ten percent thereof, and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(b)  In lieu of furnishing such a corporate surety bond, the owner or lessee may post a cash deposit with the city in the amount of the bond. 
(c)  An extension of time for the completion may be granted in writing by the building inspector or other designated person when, in his or her discretion, circumstances shall so justify, but no such extension shall release any surety or other security. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 8)  
Sec. 4-903. - Site clearance; safety measures. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move a building, the owner or lessee of the property from which the building is to be moved shall file with the city clerk a bond or other form or security in favor of the city conditioned as follows: 
(1)  Before any work is started on a building or structure, the permittee or his or her authorized agent shall notify the appropriate utilities in order that all gas, water and oil pipelines that are to be disconnected from the building may be securely capped and sealed. 
(2)  Immediately after the moving of any building or structure, the permittee or his or her authorized agent shall securely barricade all basement excavations and other holes or openings. 
(3)  Within ten days after the moving of any building or structure, the permittee or his or her authorized agent shall complete the following work: 
a.  Securely close and seal any sanitary piping located on the property. 
b.  Fill with dirt or sand any septic tanks or cesspools located on the property. 
c.  Fill any openings, excavations or basements remaining on the land with dirt or sand to street level or the natural level of adjoining property, unless otherwise directed by the building inspector or other designated person. 
d.  Remove any buried underground tanks formerly used for storage of flammable liquids. 
e.  Remove all refuse, foundations, debris and waste materials from the property. 
(b)  The bond required by this section shall be in an amount equal to the cost of the work proposed to be done, as estimated by the building inspector or other designated person. 
(c)  The bond may in the form of a corporate surety bond, cash deposit, savings and loan certificate, or an instrument of credit as may be approved by the city. 
(d)  An extension of time for completion of the work required by this section may be granted by the building inspector or other designated person when in his or her discretion, circumstances justify such an extension; but no such extension shall release any bond or other security furnished pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 9)  
Sec. 4-904. - Notice to owners. 
(a)  Upon issuance of a moving permit the applicant shall give not less than 15 days written notice to any person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment along the proposed route of the intent to move the structure, giving the time and location that the applicants moving operation shall necessitate the cutting, moving, raising or interfering of any wires, cables or other aerial equipment. 
(b)  The notice provision of subsection (a) shall not apply where the person owning or operating any wires, cables or other aerial equipment has waived their right to advance notice. 
(c)  Should the moving operation be delayed, the applicant shall give the owner or his or her agent not less than 24 hours advance notice of the actual operation. 
(d)  Notice must be given by the person, firm, corporation, or agent who secured the permit to the department of public works and the police department of the city not less than 36 hours nor more than 48 hours before the actual work of moving a building or structure is to commence. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 14; Code 1988)  
Sec. 4-905. - Default in performance of conditions. 
(a)  Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the building inspector or other designated person, the notice to state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to complete such work. After receipt of such notice, the permittee must, within the time therein specified, either cause the work to be done or pay over to the city clerk of the city the estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus ten percent of the estimated cost. Upon receipt of notice from the city clerk that the permittee has deposited such money, the building inspector or other designated person shall cause the required work to be performed and completed to the satisfaction of the city. 
(b)  If the permittee defaults, the city shall have the option, in lieu of completing the work required, to demolish the building or structure and to clear, clean and restore the site or sites. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 15)  
Sec. 4-906. - Approval of route. 
The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved must be approved by the building inspector or other designated person. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 16)  
Sec. 4-907. - Obstructing streets. 
No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building into, on, over, through, or from any public streets, ways or parks in the city, shall permit the building to remain in any one location on any such street, way or park for a period longer than 24 hours, except by written permission obtained from the chief of police, or to obstruct traffic on any railroad. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 17)  
Sec. 4-908. - Lights and barricades. 
The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain proper lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street, way or park during the hours of darkness. The lighting or barricades shall be maintained so as to adequately warn any persons of obstructions when such persons are traveling or moving upon any public rights of way or other public places where the obstruction exists. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 18)  
Sec. 4-909. - Trees, plants and shrubs. 
(a)  In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or replant any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the city, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or his or her authorized representative, shall notify the director of public works at least 48 hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions. 
(b)  The person to whom the permit is granted shall not at the expiration of the time of notice or at any time trim, move, remove, replant or otherwise disturb such trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workmen of the city unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the director of public works. 
(c)  The person to whom the permit is granted shall pay to the city any and all costs or expense for the trimming, moving, removing or replanting of any trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 19)  
Sec. 4-910. - Repairs to public property. 
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted hereunder causes damage to the public streets or other public property, in addition to any other remedies the city may have, the director of public works may cause such damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit required herein, or he or she may require the person to whom such a permit has been granted, or his or her authorized representative, upon written notification from the director of public works to make all necessary repairs to such streets or property. Should the person to whom the permit has been granted, and to whom notice has been given, or his or her authorized representative, fail to make the necessary repairs within the period of time designated in the written notice, the director of public works may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost thereof deducted from the deposit required herein. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 20)  
Sec. 4-911. - Refunding of deposits. 
When the moving of any building for which a permit has been granted is completed, and all damage to public streets or other public property has been repaired to the satisfaction of the director of public works and all costs of repairing damage or performing other work as provided herein, have been paid, and the deposit as required by section 4-906, or such portion thereof then remaining unused under the provisions of this article shall be refunded upon surrender of the deposit receipt representing the money so deposited. Should the cost, however, of repairing damages and/or performing other work as in this article provided, exceed the total amount of money deposited, the person to whom the permit was granted shall be held liable for the amount of damage and/or other costs which are in excess of the amount deposited, and it shall be the duty of the city to collect such part of the claim which is in excess of the deposit from the person to whom the permit was granted. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 21)  
Secs. 4-912—4-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - NUMBERING HOUSES AND BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 4-1001. - Method. 
All houses and buildings fronting on public streets, avenues and highways in the city shall be numbered and designated as follows: 
(a)  On streets, avenues and highways running north and south in the city, numbering shall commence with number 101 at the northeast and southeast corners and with number 100 at the southwest and northwest corners of each such north and south street at its intersection with First Street and shall increase north and south at the rate of: 
(1)  One hundred numbers for each block or space between two streets; and 
(2)  One number for each twenty-foot space along the front or building line of the street within each block with even numbers being given to houses and buildings on the west side and odd numbers to houses and buildings on the east side. 
(b)  On streets, avenues and highways running east and west in the city numbering shall commence with 100 at the northeast and northwest corners and with number 101 at the southeast and southwest corners of each such east and west street at its intersection with Main Street and shall increase east and west at the rate of: 
(1)  One hundred numbers for each block or space between two streets; and 
(2)  One number for each twenty-foot space along the front or building line of the street within each block with even numbers being given to houses and buildings on the north side and odd numbers to houses and buildings on the south side. 
(c)  The building inspector of the city is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to establish such exceptions to the above numbering system as may be necessary by the irregular routing of any streets, avenues and highways; such exceptions shall be shown on a plat made under the direction of the director of public works and kept on file in the building inspector's office; said plat being designated Exhibit "A" hereto and by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 1)  
Sec. 4-1002. - Placement. 
The owner or occupant of each and every house or building be and he is hereby required to place on the house or building in a conspicuous place numbers of at least three inches in height of a type to be selected by such owner or occupant which numbers shall be in conformity with and according to the provisions of this article, including said Exhibit "A". 
(Ord. No. 884, § 2)  
Sec. 4-1003. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $25.00 for each and every offense. Each and every day's violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 884, § 3)  
Secs. 4-1004—4-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MECHANICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1369, adopted Feb. 3, 1997, repealed Ord. No. 1293 in its entirety and adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Sections 3 and 17, of Ord. No. 1369, pertaining to severability and publication have not been codified. 
 
Sec. 4-1101. - Compliance required. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall design, construct, erect, install, alter, repair, locate, relocate, replace, add, use or maintain any heating, ventilating, cooling or refrigeration systems, incinerators, or other systems and heat-producing appliances in the City of Goodland without first complying with all requirements as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 1, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1102. - Code adopted. 
There is hereby incorporated by reference by the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, for the purpose of regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous systems and heat producing appliances in the City of Goodland, Kansas, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore, that certain document known as the Uniform Mechanical Code, being particularly the 1994 Edition and all appendices and supplements thereto, as promulgated and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, omitted, modified, added or amended, of which not less than three copies have been and are now on file in the office of the City Clerk, being appropriately stamped or marked "OFFICIAL COPY" as adopted by Ordinance No. 1369 approved the third day of February, 1997 and which copies shall be open and available to the public at all reasonable business hours and the same hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling upon all heating, ventilating, cooling or refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous systems and heat-producing appliances and their supports hereafter placed or installed in or upon any land, building or other structures within the City of Goodland, Kansas, and under the scope of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 2, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1103. - Enforcement. 
The code hereby incorporated shall be enforced by the building official, or official inspector designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 4, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1104. - Right of entry. 
The building official in the discharge of his or her official duties and upon identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 5, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1105. - Definitions. 
(a)  Mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractor means any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, association or combination thereof, who undertakes or offers to undertake for another, for hire, the planning, laying out, supervising and installing or making of additions, alterations and repairs in the installation of mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems; 
(b)  Master heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic means any person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to properly plan, lay out and supervise the installation and repair of mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems; 
(c)  Journeyman heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic means any person having the necessary qualifications, training, experience and technical knowledge to install and repair mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 6, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1106. - Permits and inspection fees. 
The table 1-1 of the Uniform Mechanical Code is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following schedule: 
Rate 	Fee 	Rate 	Fee 
$1 to $200 	No Permit Fee 		
200 to 400 	$7.50 	500 	10.00 
600 	11.00 	700 	12.00 
800 	13.00 	900 	14.00 
1,000 	15.00 	1,100 	15.30 
1,200 	15.60 	1,300 	15.90 
1,400 	16.20 	1,500 	16.50 
1,600 	16.80 	1,700 	17.10 
1,800 	17.40 	1,900 	17.70 
2,000 	18.00 	3,000 	21.00 
4,000 	24.00 	5,000 	27.00 
6,000 	29.50 	7,000 	32.00 
8,000 	34.50 	9,000 	37.00 
10,000 	39.50 	15,000 	52.00 
20,000 	64.50 	25,000 	74.50 
30,000 	84.50 	35,000 	94.50 
Over $35,000 - $94.50 plus $2.00 per thousand or any part thereof in excess of $35,000. 
 
The above fees include a maximum of three inspections per project. Any project which requires additional inspections will be subject to an additional inspection fee at the rate of $15.00 per inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 7, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1107. - Uniform Mechanical Code—Amendments. 
The following chapters, sections, paragraphs, parts of sections or tables are hereby amended as follows: 
(a)  Chapter 9, Section 906, Paragraph 906.1 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
Required Outlets: In R-1 and R-3 occupancies where return air outlets are not provided in each room at least one return air opening or duct shall be provided on each floor level. The minimum for any return air opening shall be 28 square inches. Such outlets shall be located in a hall or similar area common to all rooms on that floor. The return outlet must be located near the floor unless otherwise approved by the building official. 
(b)  Chapter 9, Section 910, Paragraph 910.4 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
Enclosing Structures: Fences or screens constructed to conceal roof-top appliances shall maintain a clearance for maintenance purposes of 48 inches on all sides of the unit. When the screens are made of combustible construction, the manufacturer's installations shall be followed. 
(c)  Chapter 8, Section 815, Paragraph 815.3, Sub. Paragraph 815.3.2 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
Vent Connectors: Shall extend a minimum of 12 inches vertically from the draft diverter to the first elbow of the vent connector. EXCEPTIONS: Horizontal furnaces, side vent water heaters, draft induced furnaces, and in crawl spaces which have insulated walls and closeable foundation vents, vent connectors may be uninsulated. 
(d)  Chapter 8, Section 810, Paragraph 810.4 is hereby amended by adding the following: 
The venting system shall not be connected to cement asbestos, or transite flue pipe. 
(e)  Appendix B, Paragraph 1023.0 is hereby amended by deleting same paragraph in its entirety and replacing same with the following: 
Any installations for which a permit is required shall not be put into service until it has been inspected and approved by the state boiler inspector, a division of the Kansas Department of Human Resources. 
(f)  Appendix B, Paragraph 1025.0 is hereby amended by deleting same paragraph in its entirety and replacing same with the following: 
The state boiler inspector shall inspect all boilers and pressure vessels operated under permit, at such intervals as he or she deems necessary, but in no event less frequently than noted below. 
(g)  Appendix A, Part B Flexible Ducts, Section 6.507 Suitable Installation of the adopted Uniform Mechanical Code shall be amended to read as follows: 
(1)  General 
a.  The routing and length of flexible duct, the number of bends, the number of degrees of each bend and the amount of sag allowed between support joints will have serious effects on system performance due to the increased resistance each introduces. The maximum length of flexible duct to make connections shall be six feet. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 8, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 1417, § 1, 7-19-99)  
Sec. 4-1108. - License required. 
Any person intending to engage in the trade or business of mechanical heating, ventilation and/or air conditioning for any reason in the City of Goodland shall first receive and possess a license as herein provided. Such license shall not be issued until the applicant thereof shall have applied to the building official, taken and successfully passed an examination as specified in section 4-1110 herein, as to his or her competency to do such work, or presents a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. 12-1541 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 9, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1109. - License, bonds and insurance. 
The building official shall issue a license to every person who makes application for such pursuant to the following provisions: 
(a)  Mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractor license applicants shall possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as a master heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic as established by K.S.A. 12-1541 et seq., shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and be bonded to the City of Goodland to comply with applicable local ordinances and conduct business in conformity therewith in the amount of not less than $5,000.00, and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-1111(a) of this article. 
(b)  Master heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic license applicants shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. 12-1541 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-1111(a) of this article. 
(c)  Journeyman heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic license applicants shall pass the prescribed examination for determination of competency or possess a current Kansas Certificate of Competency as established by K.S.A. 12-1541 et seq., and pay the license fee as set out in section 4-1111(a) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 10, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1110. - Examinations; re-examinations. 
(a)  Examination. Standard examinations for the determination of competency of mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractor and master and journeyman heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanics, as prepared, published and available from Block and Associates, Farm Bureau Building, 5700 S.W. 34th Street, #1303, Gainesville, Florida 32608, are hereby designated as the standard examinations for determining the qualifications of persons seeking business licenses as mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractors and master and journeyman heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanics. The minimum passing score shall be 75 percent for each of the examinations listed herein. 
(b)  Re-examination. Any person who fails to pass the examination as set out in subsection (a) above, may apply for re-examination after the expiration of 30 days from the date of said failure. Should such person fail to pass the examination for a second or subsequent time, the building official may refuse a third or subsequent application until after the expiration of six months. 
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 11, 12, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1111. - Licenses. 
(a)  License fees. The applicant upon successful completion of the prescribed examination for the type of license desired or any applicant who presents a Certification of Competency as defined by K.S.A. 12-1541 et seq., and who meets all other requirements as set forth in this article, will be issued a license at the following rates per year: 
Mechanical heating, ventilation and air conditioning contractor 	$35.00* 
Master heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic 	 35.00 
Journeyman heating, ventilation and air conditioning mechanic 	 15.00 
 
*Plus $5.00 for each master heating, ventilating and air conditioning mechanic employed full-time by such contractor. 
(b)  License expiration. All licenses shall expire on the first day of February of each calendar year. 
(c)  Certification of license. Each person required to be licensed under the provisions of this article shall be required to carry a card which designates the type of work that he or she is licensed to perform and such card will be issued each year upon approval of such person's license application. 
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 13—15, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1112. - Property owners permitted to do own work. 
Any permit required by this article except for natural gas service lines, may be issued to the property owner of any single-family home where the owner is also the occupant of the home on a permanent basis. In no case will the homeowner be allowed to perform mechanical work on any other property without first obtaining an appropriate license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 16, 2-3-97)  
Sec. 4-1113. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 18, 2-3-97)  
Secs. 4-1114—4-1200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 4-1201. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter: 
(a)  Air-gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the overflow level rim of the receptacle and shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel but in no case less than one inch. 
(b)  Approved tester means a person qualified to make inspections, to test and repair backflow prevention/cross-connection control devices and which is approved by the city. 
(c)  Authorized representative means any person designated by the city manager to administer this cross-connection control division. 
(d)  Auxiliary water supply means any water source or system, other than the city, that may be available in the building or premises. This does not include other KDHE-permitted public water supply systems. 
(e)  Backflow means the flow other than the intended direction of flow, of any foreign liquids, gases, used water or substances into the distribution system of a public water supply system. 
(f)  Backflow prevention device means any device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into the public water supply system. 
(g)  Consumer means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or agency or their authorized agent receiving water from the city. 
(h)  Consumer's water system means all service pipe, all distribution piping and all appurtenances beyond the service meter of the public water system. 
(i)  Contamination means an introduction of any sewage, process fluids, chemicals, wastes or any other substances that would be objectionable. Contamination may be a threat to life or health or may cause an aesthetic deterioration, color, taste or odor. 
(j)  Cross-connection means any physical connection or arrangement between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water of the public water supply system and the second, water of unknown or questionable safety or steam, gases, chemicals or substances whereby there may be backflow from the second system to the public water supply system. No physical cross-connection shall be permitted between a public water supply system and an auxiliary water supply system. 
(k)  Degree of hazard means an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon anyone using the water. 
(l)  Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in the public water supply system which could create or may create a danger to the health and well-being of anyone using the water or allow contamination of the water. 
(m)  KDHE means the Kansas Department of Health and Environment. 
(n)  Public water supply system means the public water system and the consumers' water systems. 
(o)  Public water system means the water supply source, distribution system and appurtenances to the service meter operated as a public utility which supplies potable water to the consumers' water systems. 
(p)  Service connection means the terminal end of the service line from the public water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1202. - Policy. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to: 
(1)  Protect the public water supply system from contamination. 
(2)  Promote the elimination, containment, isolation or control of cross-connection between the public water supply system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial process systems or other systems which introduce or may introduce contaminants into the public water system or the consumer's water system. 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will prevent the contamination of the public water supply system. 
(b)  Application. This chapter shall apply to all consumers' water systems. The city may also require cross-connection control devices at the service connections of other KDHE permitted public water supply systems served by the city. 
(c)  Intent. This policy will be reasonable interpreted by the city. It is the intent of the city to recognize the varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(d)  [Cross-connection protection required, notification.] If, in the judgment of the city or its authorized representative, cross-connection protection is required through either piping modifications or installation of an approved backflow-prevention device, due notice shall be given to the consumer. The city's authorized representative shall evaluate the degree of hazard to the public water supply system and shall establish an appropriate timetable for compliance of this chapter. The consumer shall immediately comply by providing the required protection at his or her own expense. Failure or refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to provide such protection shall constitute grounds for the discontinuation of water service to the premises until such protection has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1203. - Cross-connections prohibited. 
(a)  No water service connection shall be installed or maintained to any premises where actual or potential cross-connections to the public water supply system may exist unless such actual or potential cross-connections are abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. 
(b)  No connection shall be installed or maintained whereby an auxiliary water supply may enter a public water supply system.  
Sec. 4-1204. - Survey and investigation. 
(a)  The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the city or its authorized representative for the conduction of surveys and investigations of water use practices within the consumer's premises to determine whether there are actual potential cross-connections in the consumer's water system. 
(b)  On request by the city or tits authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish requested information on water use practices within his or her premises and in the consumer's water system. 
(c)  On request by the city or its authorized representative, the consumer shall conduct periodic surveys of water use practices on the premises of the consumer's water system to determine whether there are actual or potential cross-connections. The consumer shall provide the survey results to the city or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1205. - Where protection is required. 
(a)  An approved backflow-prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system service premises where, in the judgment of the city or its authorized representative or the KDHE, actual or potential cross-connections exist. The type and degree of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard and/or type of contamination that may enter the public water supply system. 
(b)  An approved air-gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention device shall be installed at the service connection or within any premises where, in the judgment of the city or its authorized representative or the KDHE, the nature and extent of activities on the premises or the materials used in connection with the activities or materials stored on the premises would present a health hazard or contamination of the public water supply system form a cross-connection. This includes but is not limited to the following situations: 
(1)  Premises having an auxiliary water supply unless the quality of the auxiliary supply is acceptable to the city or its authorized representative and the KDHE; 
(2)  Premises having internal plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exists; 
(3)  Premises where entry is restricted so the inspection for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist; 
(4)  Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished; 
(5)  Premises which, due to the nature of the enterprise therein, are subject to recurring modification or expansion; 
(6)  Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry into the public water supply system or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters; 
(7)  Premises where toxic or hazardous materials are handled. 
(c)  The following types of facilities but not limited to such types shall be considered potential high-risk as they may be included in one or more of the categories or premises where an approved air-gap separation or reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention device may be required by the city or its authorized representative or the KDHE to protect the public water supply and must be installed at these facilities unless all hazardous or potentially hazardous conditions have been eliminated or corrected by other methods to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative and the KDHE: 
(1)  Agricultural chemical facilities; 
(2)  Auxiliary water systems, wells; 
(3)  Boilers; 
(4)  Bulk water-loading facilities; 
(5)  Carwashing facilities; 
(6)  Chemical manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment plants; 
(7)  Chill water systems; 
(8)  Cooling towers; 
(9)  Feedlots; 
(10)  Fire protection systems; 
(11)  Hazardous waste storage and disposal sites; 
(12)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics or others as discovered by sanitary surveys; 
(13)  Irrigation and sprinkler systems; 
(14)  Laundries and dry cleaning; 
(15)  Meat processing facilities; 
(16)  Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants; 
(17)  Oil and gas production, refining, storage or transmission properties; 
(18)  Plating plants; 
(19)  Power plants; 
(20)  Research and analytical laboratories; 
(21)  Sewage and storm drainage facilities—Pumping stations and treatment plants; 
(22)  Veterinary clinics.  
Sec. 4-1206. - Backflow-prevention devices—Required. 
Any backflow-prevention device required by this chapter shall be of a model or construction approved by the city or its authorized representative and the KDHE. 
(a)  Air-gap separation to be approved shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel but in no case less than one inch. 
(b)  Double-check valve assemblies or reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention devices shall appear on the current list of approved backflow-prevention devices established by the KDHE unless the device was installed at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter was passed and complies with required inspection and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1207. - Installation. 
(a)  Backflow-prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the city or its authorized agent. All devices shall be installed a the expense of the consumer unless the city or its authorized representative agrees otherwise. 
(b)  Backflow-prevention devices installed at the service connection shall be located on the consumer's side of the water meter as close to the meter as is reasonably practical and prior to any other connection. 
(c)  Backflow-prevention devices shall be conveniently accessible for maintenance and testing, protected from freezing and where no part of the device will be submerged or subject to flooding by any fluid. All devices shall be installed according to manufacturers' recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1208. - Inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  The consumer is required by this chapter to inspect, test and overhaul backflow-prevention devices in accordance with the following schedule or more often as determined by the city or its authorized representative: 
(1)  Air-gap separations shall be inspected at the time of installation and at least monthly. 
(2)  Double-check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the times of installation and at least every twelve (12) months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever needed and at least every thirty (30) months. 
(3)  Reduced pressure principle backflow-prevention devices shall be inspected and tested for tightness at the time of installation and at least every twelve (12) months thereafter. They shall be dismantled, inspected internally, cleaned and repaired whenever needed and at least every five years. 
(b)  Inspections, tests and overhauls of backflow-prevention devices shall be made at the expense of the consumer and shall be preformed by an approved tester. 
(c)  Whenever backflow-prevention devices required by this chapter are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced without delay at the expense of the consumer. 
(d)  The consumer must maintain a complete record of each backflow-prevention device from purchase to retirement. This shall include a comprehensive listing that includes a record of all tests, inspections and repairs. All records of inspections, tests, repairs and overhauls shall be provided within thirty (30) days to the city or its authorized representative. 
(e)  All backflow-prevention devices shall have a tag showing the date of the last inspection, test or overhaul or other maintenance. 
(f)  Backflow-prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the city or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Sec. 4-1209. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  The city or its authorized representative shall deny or discontinue the water service to any premises or any consumer wherein any backflow-prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained in a manner acceptable to the city or its authorized representative or if it is found that the backflow-prevention device has been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists. 
(b)  Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer is in compliance with this cross-connection division to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 12-02-02)  
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-101. - Conduct of elections. 
All elections in this city shall be conducted by the county election officer in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, and shall be conducted jointly with other elections held at the same time insofar as practicable. 
(K.S.A. 25-2114)  
Sec. 5-102. - Voting hours. 
Hereafter in all general elections, primary elections and all special or regular city elections conducted in or by the city, the hours of voting shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. of the election day or as otherwise provided by statute. 
(K.S.A. 25-2111)  
Sec. 5-103. - Places of voting. 
The place of holding city elections shall be designated by the county election officer. 
(K.S.A. 25-2111)  
ARTICLE II. - WARDS 
 
Sec. 5-201. - Wards designated. 
That all of that part of the said City of Goodland, Kansas, lying north of 11th Street in said city and west of the line beginning at 11th and Broadway; thence north to Toelkes Drive; thence east to Caldwell Avenue and; thence north on Caldwell Avenue to the city limits, be and the same is designated and known as the First Ward of said city; and all of that part of the city lying south and west of a line beginning at the intersection of the north city limits and Cattletrail; thence south to 11th Street; thence east to Broadway Avenue; thence south to 17th Street; thence east to Cherry Avenue; thence south to Highway 24 Business Loop; thence west to Caldwell Avenue; thence south to the city limits shall hereafter be and the same is designated and known as the Second Ward of said city; and all of that part of said city lying south and east of a line beginning at the intersection of the east city limits line and 8th Street; thence west to Eustis Avenue; thence south to 10th Street; thence west to Broadway Avenue; thence south to 17th Street; thence east to Cherry Avenue; thence south to Highway 24, Business Loop; thence west to Caldwell Avenue; thence south to the city limits shall be and the same is designated and known as the Third Ward of said city; and all that part of the said City of Goodland lying north and east of a line beginning at the intersection of the east city limits line and 8th Street, thence west to Eustis Avenue; thence south to 10th Street; thence west to Broadway Avenue; thence north to Toelkes Drive; thence east to Caldwell Avenue, thence north to the city limits shall be and the same is designated and known as the Fourth Ward of the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 746; Ord. No. 1463, 1, 2, 10-1-01)  
Chapter 5A - EMERGENCIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5A-101—5A-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE 
 
Sec. 5A-201. - Disaster assistance to other jurisdictions. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to provide assistance in any form of service including, but not limited to, police, fire, EMS, public works, administrative and clerical during times of disaster as defined in chapter 75 of the 1994 Session Laws of Kansas, with all the privileges and immunities described therein. 
(b)  Authorization. In the event of a disaster when there is a request for assistance, if the city can provide assistance without unduly jeopardizing the protection of its own community, this section hereby authorizes the city manager or his or her designee, to provide such assistance as may be required under authority granted in chapter 75 of the 1994 Session Laws of Kansas, with all the privileges and immunities provided therein. Nothing in this section is intended to conflict or circumvent any existing interlocal agreement, any automatic aid, intergovernmental or mutual aid agreement, or any authority to enter into those in the future. 
(Ord. No. 1334, §§ 1—3, 4-3-95)  
Secs. 5A-202—5A-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 5A-301. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have these prescribed meanings: 
Alarm business. The business by any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental unit or other entity for selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, monitoring or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in, on or around any building, structure or facility. 
Alarm coordinator(s). The individual(s) designated by the city police department chief of police to oversee the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
Alarm system. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical or both, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry, fire, medical emergency or other activity expected to urgently require or request a police, fire or other emergency response. 
Alarm user. Any person, firm or corporation who is lawfully in possession of any property or premises on which an operating alarm system is located. 
Answering service. A telephone answering business providing, among its other services, the service of receiving on a regular basis, through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems and thereafter relaying the message to a communications center. 
Automatic dial device. An electronically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which send over regular telephone lines a prerecorded voice alarm message upon receipt of a stimulus from the alarm sensory apparatus that has detected a force or condition characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion or any other emergency message indicating a need for an emergency or other response. 
Central station protective device. A system or group of systems operated by a person, firm or corporation in which the operations of electrical protection circuits and devices are transmitted to, recorded in and supervised from a central station having operators in attendance at all times. 
City. The City of Goodland. 
Communications center. Sherman County Emergency Communications. 
False alarm. An alarm signal eliciting an urgent response by police or fire or other emergency responders when a situation requiring an urgent response does not in fact exist. This does not include an alarm signal caused by violent weather conditions or other weather-related conditions or extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to the control of the alarm business or alarm user. 
Local alarm system. An alarm system which when activated causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated and is intended to be heard and/or seen by others outside of the protected premises and is not monitored or controlled by a monitoring service. 
Notice. A written notice, delivered by personal service or by United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his/her last known address, delivered to the addressee. Service of such notice shall be effective upon completion of personal service or upon placing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
Personal residence. The principal place of abode of any alarm user who has installed or personally installs and operates an alarm system for the security of that residence location. 
Police chief. The chief of police of the City of Goodland, Kansas police department or a person designated by the chief of police. 
Primary trunk line. A telephone line leading into the communications center that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis and which line is identified by a specific listing among the emergency numbers in the telephone directory issued by the telephone company provider or the directory of non-provider companies serving the city. 
Registration year. A calendar year beginning on the 1st day of January and ending on the 31st day of December at midnight. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-302. - Application. 
Every person or entity under section 5A-303 required to obtain an alarm registration shall obtain an alarm user's registration application form from the police department alarm coordinator within 30 days prior to the installation and use of the alarm system and after the effective date of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-303. - Registration required. 
No person, firm or corporation, either as principal officer, agent, attendant or employee, shall possess or operate an alarm system designated with the intent of eliciting a police, fire or other emergency response without first obtaining a registration for such alarm system from the city. Provided the requirement of this Section is not applicable to local alarm systems attached to motor vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-304. - City shall record permits. 
The police department alarm coordinator shall keep records in which shall be entered the names, addresses and telephone numbers of each and every person or firm issued an alarm registration permit, the name, address and telephone number of a primary and secondary contact person and/or the address and telephone number of the alarm service provider, the amount paid therefor, and the issuance and expiration date of the alarm registration. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-305. - Renewal. 
All alarm users shall renew their alarm registration(s) at the beginning of every registration year. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-306. - Transferability. 
Alarm registrations are non-transferable and valid for a period of one registration year. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-307. - Issuance of alarm permit. 
The issuance date of the alarm registration and sticker shall be the actual date of issuance of the registration unless such alarm system has recorded a false alarm prior to the registration being obtained; in such event, the issuance date shall be the date of the first false alarm received. A one-time fee of $25.00 for the alarm permit and alarm sticker is hereby established. There will be no fee for permit renewal as long as the permit holder continuously operates the alarm system at the same location. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-308. - Availability. 
Each registration shall bear the signature of the chief of police and shall be physically displayed in a prominent and readily visible place within the premises using the alarm system. An alarm sticker shall be furnished each registered alarm user. Display of the sticker for a business or a residence shall be on the front, lower left corner of the structure's front door or door glass. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-309. - Inspection. 
The alarm registration shall be available for inspection during normal business hours or when the structure is occupied. The city shall have the authority to determine the existence or validity of an alarm registration. A city employee or police officer may perform the on-site inspection of the alarm registration. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-310. - Alarm coordinator. 
There is hereby established the position of police department alarm coordinator. The alarm coordinator shall: 
(1)  Maintain necessary records to carry out the terms of this chapter and may share information with other city departments as needed. Alarm records shall be maintained confidential. 
(2)  Make the notifications to alarm users and issue citations for violations. 
(3)  Establish, distribute and enforce such rules and regulations as may be necessary for implementation of this chapter and make this information available upon request to alarm users. Such rules and regulations are incorporated into this chapter by reference. 
(4)  Determine which alarms constitute false alarms as defined in section 5A-301. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-311. - Exceptions. 
An alarm user which is a governmental entity or political unit shall be required to obtain an alarm system permit pursuant to the provisions of this article, however, such governmental entity or political unit is not required to pay the fee required for the issuance of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-312. - Regulations. 
(a)  Whenever a change occurs relating to the written information required by this chapter, the alarm user shall give written notice thereof to the police department alarm coordinator within ten days of such change. 
(b)  Alarm users shall notify the appropriate communication center and/or monitoring service prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration or installation of any alarm system that might activate a false alarm. Upon the completion of such installation, the alarm user shall notify the appropriate communication center of such work completion. The communication center shall forward received alarm information to the police department alarm coordinator. 
(c)  An alarm business user, employee of a central station protective system or employee of an answering service charged with the responsibility of relaying a live voice request for response to an alarm activation shall give the following information to the communications center at the time of such request for response: address of the alarmed location, type or nature of the alarm, type of alarm system that has been activated, name of the commercial business or resident's name, specific location of the alarm zone (when applicable), name of the alarm provider making the request, and a telephone number where the alarm provider can be contacted. Unless specifically requested, it is the sole responsibility of the alarm provider and employee making the request to notify authorized persons in control of such alarmed building, structure, facility or residence that an alarm has been activated. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-313. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any alarm system to emit a sound or sounds similar to that of an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning system. 
(b)  Local alarm systems, except those intended to elicit a fire department response only, shall be equipped to automatically discontinue emitting an audible sound within ten minutes after activation of the alarm. 
(c)  Unless approved by the chief of police or the police department alarm coordinator, it shall be unlawful for any automatic dial protection device within the city to be keyed to the primary trunk line. The owner or leasee of such device shall disconnect any such device in operation upon the effective date of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either in principal officer, agent, service, attendant or employee who possesses or operates an alarm system, to have more than three false activations in one registration year. Provided, false alarms as allowed during the grace period defined in section 5A-314(d) shall not be counted in determining whether there has been a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to not pay the assessed fees or fines for exceeding the three false alarm activation grace period. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-314. - False alarm activation—Grace period. 
(a)  The police department alarm coordinator shall be responsible for determining which alarms received by the police department constitute false alarms as defined in section 5A-301. The police department alarm coordinator shall maintain a record of all false alarms. 
(b)  Whenever the police department alarm coordinator makes a determination that an alarm was false and records such determination, he or she shall give notice to the alarm user of such violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Any alarm user that has exceeded the number of permissible false alarms during the registration year shall pay a fee and be responsible for the fee payment as set forth in the fee schedule of this chapter. 
(d)  A grace period of three false alarms or 30 days from alarm system installation activation shall be granted to residential and commercial alarm users. Provided, the resident or commercial alarm user can furnish to the police department alarm coordinator, upon request, that the grace period alarm(s) were activated during correction, adjustment or modification of the alarm system. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-315. - Fee payment—Appeal—Court proceedings. 
(a)  The payment of any fee provided in section 5A-316 of this chapter shall be submitted to the municipal court clerk within ten days of receiving notice that such fee is due. The chief of police may waive all or part of such fees if the responsible party participates in an approved education program designed to reduce the occurrence of false alarms. 
(b)  Any alarm user who has been assessed a fee as provided in section 5A-316 of this chapter may appeal such assessment to the alarm coordinator by filing a written declaration of appeal within ten days of the receipt of the notice that such fee is due. The filing of such declaration shall stay the effect of such assessment until the alarm coordinator makes a final determination. 
(c)  Any alarm user who has been assessed a fee and has appealed such fee to the police department alarm coordinator and the appeal has been overturned may request such appeal disallowance be heard in the municipal court and shall have the right to request an appearance before the municipal court and shall be issued a notice to appear in municipal court. 
(d)  Failure of an alarm user to satisfy the fee assessment as required in section 5A-316 or to appeal a fee assessment as provided in section 5A-316 shall create a prima facie case that the alarm(s) at issue are false alarms and that such alarm user is in violation of this chapter. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit prosecution in the municipal court for violations of any section(s) of this chapter and the assessment of any and all other penalties as provided herein or by law. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Sec. 5A-316. - Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more that $500.00 or imprisonment of a term not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. Any fine or term of imprisonment imposed by the court shall be in addition to any and all fees that have been assessed against the alarm user. 
(b)  Determination of a responsible party shall be made by using the recorded name on the alarm registration maintained by the police department alarm coordinator. 
(c)  Fees. The following fees shall be assessed to alarm users who have recorded false alarms within a calendar year at a given location: 
(1)  There shall be no fees assessed for the first, second, and third false alarms. 
(2)  There shall be a fee of $50.00 assessed for the fourth false alarm. 
(3)  There shall be a fee of $100.00 assessed for the fifth false alarm. 
(4)  There shall be a fee of $150.00 assessed for the sixth false alarm. 
(5)  There shall be a fee of $200.00 assessed for the seventh false alarm. 
(6)  There shall be a fee of $250.00 assessed for the eighth and each subsequent false alarm. 
( Ord. No. 1712 , § 1, 4-16-18)  
Chapter 6 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Fire department established. 
There is hereby established a fire department in the city to consist of a chief, assistant chief and not less than 12 firefighters, with the fire chief to be a full-time city employee and with the assistant chief and firefighters to be volunteers. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 1; Ord. No. 1594, § 1, 7-21-08; Ord. No. 1625, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 1689 , §§ 1, 2, 2-16-16)  
Sec. 6-102. - Meetings. 
The members of the fire department shall meet at least twice each month for practice and drill. The chief shall keep a record of attendance at such meetings and any member who shall fail to attend six consecutive meetings shall automatically become expelled from membership. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 2)  
Sec. 6-103. - City manager supervises. 
The chief of the fire department shall be under the supervision of the city manager and the chief shall have superintendency and control over and be responsible for the care and condition of the fire apparatus and equipment, and it shall be his or her duty to see that all such apparatus and equipment shall be at all times ready for immediate use, and shall submit a written report as to its condition to the city manager who shall transmit the same to the governing body at its first regular meeting in October. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 3; Code 1983)  
Sec. 6-104. - Chief to discipline. 
The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for the discipline of members and is hereby given the authority to suspend or expel any member for the refusal to obey orders, or for misconduct or failure to do his or her duty at a fire. The chief shall also appoint the assistant chief and the volunteer firefighters. The appointments or suspensions made by the chief shall be approved by the city manager. The chief shall have power to adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations governing the fire department. The chief shall also have the right to summon any and all persons present to aid in extinguishing a fire or to aid in removing personal property from any building on fire or in danger thereof and in guarding the same. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 4; Code 1983)  
Sec. 6-105. - Power to chief. 
The chief of the fire department shall have full power, control and command over all persons whomsoever present at fires, and he or she shall direct the use of all fire apparatus and equipment, and command all firefighters in the discharge of their duties. The chief shall take such measures as he or she may deem necessary in the preservation and protection of property and the extinguishing of fires. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 5)  
Sec. 6-106. - Records. 
The chief of the fire department shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires. Such information shall include the time and location, construction of building, owner, occupancy, how extinguished, value of building and contents, loss on building and contents, insurance on building and contents, members responding to the alarm, and any other information deemed advisable. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 6)  
Sec. 6-107. - Fire prevention measures. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to adopt all prudent measures for the prevention of fires and for this purpose the assistant under the chief's direction may, upon request or whenever he or she has reason to believe that the safety of life and property demands it, and as often as he or she may deem necessary, enter any building, yard or premises in the city during reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, and where dangerous, unsafe or hazardous conditions are found to exist the chief shall give such directions for the alteration, change or removal or better care or management of the same as he or she may deem proper, and such directions shall be obeyed and complied with by the person directed in that regard and at their expense. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 7)  
Sec. 6-108. - Assistant chief. 
In the absence of the chief, an assistant chief shall perform all the duties and have all the authority and responsibility of the chief as conferred by this article. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 8)  
Sec. 6-109. - Illegal use of apparatus. 
No person or persons shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority remove, take away, keep or conceal any tool, appliance or other article used in any way by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 9)  
Sec. 6-110. - Penalty. 
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article or refusing or neglecting to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in a sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 11)  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1291, adopted Dec. 16, 1991, was not specifically amendatory of the Code. The editor has treated these new provisions as superseding Art. II, §§ 6-201—6-217 which contained similar provisions and derived from Ord. No. 863, §§ 2—17; and Ord. No. 1263. 
 
Sec. 6-201. - Adoption of uniform codes. 
There is hereby adopted by the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code and standards known as the Uniform Fire Code, including all the Appendix Chapters, and the Uniform Fire Code Standards, and the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1991 and amendments hereafter, published by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 1991 Editions thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or amended by section 6-205, of this article two copies which code and standards have been and are now filed in the office of the clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 1, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-202. - Establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the fire department of the City of Goodland which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 2, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-203. - Definitions. 
Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it is The City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 3, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-204. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited. 
The limits referred to the Uniform Fire Code in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows: all areas zoned as commercial, residential, and industrial, except the city-county planning county planning commission is hereby authorized to grant variance in the industrial zones from the restrictions imposed by the above enumerated sections if they find that a variance will not unduly endanger lives or property. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 4, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-205. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the code hereby incorporated by reference upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the code shall be obstructed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 5, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-206. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city commission within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 6, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-207. - Flammable liquids, handling near fire. 
Flammable liquids shall not be drawn or handled in the presence of open flames or fire, but may be drawn or handled by daylight or when lighting is incandescent electric lamps in vapor proof globes. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 7, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-208. - Striking match or having flame near flammable liquids. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to strike a match or have open light within 25 feet of any place where gasoline or other liquids giving off explosive vapors are being dispensed in open containers. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 8, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-209. - Burning combustible materials; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall set fire, within the city, any rubbish, trash, paper, lumber or any other combustible material at any time; provided, these restrictions shall not apply to burning in a residential fireplace or in charcoal burners or broilers used in the preparation of food; and provide further, that the fire chief, or his or her authorized representative, may authorize the burning of leaves and grass through the issuance of a written burning permit, if such burning is conducted under the circumstances and conditions as set out in the permit by the fire chief, or his or her authorized representative. 
(b)  Any person violating provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fine in an amount not less than $25.00, nor more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 9, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-210. - Trash not to be allowed to accumulate. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow to accumulate in any part of the building, or outside of and adjacent to any building or in any alley, sidewalk, street, or premises within 30 feet of any building, any rubbish, trash, wastepaper, excelsior, empty boxes or barrels. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 10, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-211. - Stacks of hay. 
No person shall deposit or stack any hay or straw within 500 feet of any building located in the fire limits. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 11, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-212. - Packing material, keeping of. 
Packing material shall be kept in metal or wood metal-lined bins having self-closing or automatic covers. Refuse from rooms where packing or unpacking is done shall be moved daily. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 12, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-213. - Ashes, storage. 
It shall be unlawful to store ashes inside any non-fireproof building unless they be stored in an incombustible container or receptacle, and a clearance of at least five feet shall be maintained between such container or receptacle and combustible material. Ashes shall not be stored outside any building in wooden receptacles or dumped in contact with or in close proximity to any combustible materials. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 13, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-214. - Fire hazards; inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or cause to be inspected by the fire department officers or members, as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four in closely built portions of the city, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining any danger or causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of this city affecting the fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 14, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-215. - Order for removal; manner. 
Whenever any officer or members of the fire department shall find in any buildings or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter, or any unnecessary accumulation of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any other highly flammable materials liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions in or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department, or progress of occupants, in case of a fire, he shall order the same to be removed or embodied, and such orders shall forthwith be complied with the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the mayor, who shall within ten days review such order and file his decision thereon, and unless the order be revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant within two days after such decision. Any such owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within ten days after the service of the order, or in case of an appeal, two days after the decision thereon, shall be liable to a penalty as herein stated. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 15, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-216. - Service of order. 
The service of any such order as specified in the preceding section shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door of the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a true copy of the order, or if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction if the officer making the order, by mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 16, 12-16-91)  
Sec. 6-217. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby incorporated by reference or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. 
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1291, § 17, 12-16-91)  
ARTICLE III. - FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION 
 
Sec. 6-301. - Relief fund. 
The treasurer of the firemen's relief fund shall receive from the commissioner of insurance, all moneys belonging to the firemen's relief fund and deposit the same to the credit of the Goodland Firemen's Relief Fund. The fund shall be held in trust and used as a fund for the relief of members of the fire department of the city as herein provided. No part of the fund shall be paid out except upon orders of the Goodland Firemen's Relief Association, which association shall be composed of the members of the fire department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 1)  
Sec. 6-302. - Funds; how disbursed. 
The treasurer of the firemen's relief association as set out in section 6-303 shall have supervision of the disbursement of the firemen's relief fund for the purposes hereinafter provided. He shall also have supervision of the investment of such fund as hereinafter provided. The treasurer of the firemen's relief fund shall pay out the same only on warrants issued by the association, which warrants shall be signed by the president, countersigned by the secretary and shall bear the seal of the association. The treasurer shall keep an accurate and detailed account of all warrants drawn on the fund, and the purposes for which same are drawn, and shall make a quarterly report to the relief association and to the governing body as to the condition of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 2)  
Sec. 6-303. - Treasurer. 
The treasurer of the firemen's relief association shall give bond for the safekeeping of the firemen's relief fund and for the faithful performance of his or her duty in such sum with such sureties as may be approved by the governing body. The treasurer shall, on behalf of the relief association, on or before the first day of March of each year, submit to the commissioner of insurance a verified account showing in full the receipts and disbursements of its funds for the year ending on the preceding December 31. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 3)  
Sec. 6-304. - Funds; purposes. 
The Goodland Firemen's Relief Association is hereby authorized to disburse the firemen's relief fund for the following purposes and no other: 
(a)  For the relief of any member of the fire department when injured or physically disabled in or by reason of the discharge of his or her duties as such; 
(b)  For the relief of or the payment of gratuities to the widow, widower or those dependent upon any member of such fire department who may be killed in the discharge of his or her duties as fireman, or who may die from the effect of injuries so received or disease contracted by reason of his or her duties as such; 
(c)  For the payment of the necessary funeral expenses of any member of the fire department when killed in the discharge of his or her duties as fireman, or in case of death resulting from the injuries so received, or disease contracted by reason of his or her duties as such; 
(d)  For the purchase of accident and health insurance upon the members of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 4; Code 1983)  
Sec. 6-305. - Funds may be invested. 
The Goodland Firemen's Relief Association through its officers, may invest any amount, not to exceed 90 percent of all such relief fund, in purchasing bonds of the city; provided, that when such bonds are not obtainable, United States government bonds may be purchased. Such bonds must bear interest of at least four percent per annum, must not be purchased for a greater sum than par, and such purchase must be approved by the city commission. It shall be the duty of the city attorney of the city to examine all such bonds as to their validity and report thereon in writing to the commission and the firemen's relief association, and no bonds shall be purchased by the firemen's relief association until they have been approved and found valid by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 5; Code 1983)  
Sec. 6-306. - Funds; loaned to city. 
The Goodland Firemen's Relief Association is hereby authorized to loan a part or all of such funds to the city to be used by such city in the improvement of its fire department and equipment thereof, and the city is hereby authorized to borrow the same and issue to the treasurer of the firemen's relief association its warrant therefor bearing interest payable semi-annually, at a rate not to exceed six percent per annum. 
(Ord. No. 359, § 6)  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 6-401. - Sale of fireworks. 
(a)  Fireworks. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell fireworks as defined by the regulations of the Fire Marshal of the State of Kansas, within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(b)  Permit purpose. The purpose of issuing a permit for the sale of fireworks pursuant to this section is to permit a location for the sale of fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, while controlling the inconvenience, interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and danger to the public that could be caused by the unregulated placement of said location. 
(c)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display for sale, offer to sell or give away any type of fireworks within the City of Goodland, Kansas, without first paying the appropriate permit fee per establishment or premises to the City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, and applying for and securing a permit therefore at least ten days in advance of the date sales are to commence. 
(d)  Permit fee. The permit fee for a tent, shed or other structure with a total square footage of up to 2,500 square feet shall be $50.00. The permit fee shall only be refundable upon failure of the permittee to qualify for the permit. 
(e)  Permit location. No permit shall be issued for any location where retail sales are not permitted under the zoning laws. Fireworks stands are prohibited from all but the following zoning districts within the city; general business district (C-1), downtown business district (C-2), light industrial district (L-1), heavy industrial (L-2). Any fireworks stands located in permanent structures must comply with City of Goodland Zoning Regulations. Fireworks stands shall be constructed according to administrative regulations and must not be located on, or interfere with streets, sidewalks, or utility facilities. Temporary structures must be removed by July 6 of each year. 
(f)  Location inspection. Prior to the issuance of a permit, an inspection will be made of the applicant's facility for compliance with this section and other pertinent laws, and no permit shall be issued for any premises not in compliance with such laws. Each location where fireworks are to be sold or displayed for sale shall be inspected by and subject to the standards imposed by the City of Goodland Fire Chief. The City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, may only issue a permit pursuant to the section upon proof that the premises have passed the required inspection by the Goodland Fire Chief. 
(g)  Location safety. Approval of all safety precautions and equipment at the sales location shall be by the city manager or his/her designee, in conjunction with the Goodland Fire Chief. 
Safety precautions and equipment shall include fire extinguishers and such other equipment as required by applicable state and city laws and regulations. 
Fireworks shall not be stored or sold within 50 feet of any source of flame, sparks, or flammable or volatile liquids in excess of one gallon. 
If housed in a tent, the tent shall be constructed of a flame-retardant material, with a certificate of such flame retardant attached. Any electrical cords shall be appropriately protected from damage by weather, the public and automobiles. 
No sales of fireworks shall occur at any location, building, structure, tent or other similarly describable enclosure in conjunction with the retail sales of non-fireworks related items except as allowed by the City Manager of the City of Goodland, Kansas, at the written request of the permittee. Any items sold under this exception must be approved by the city manager prior to any sale taking place. 
(h)  Location parking. Each location where fireworks are to be sold or displayed for sale shall provide at least five off-street vehicular parking spaces. 
(i)  Permit display. Upon qualifying for the permit, the permittee shall conspicuously post, and prominently display, the same along with the City of Goodland Fire Chief inspection receipt at the establishment or premises where fireworks are to be sold or displayed for sale. 
(j)  Permit application. Applications for permits to sell fireworks shall not be accepted before the first business day of January of the year for which the permit is to be issued. A preference will be extended to an application with proceeds supporting a not for profit organization within the City of Goodland, Kansas, or an activity sponsored by the City of Goodland, Kansas. To exercise this preference, the applicant must apply for a permit before the first business day of March of the year for which the permit is to be issued. Thereafter, applications will be accepted on a first-come first-serve basis for a permit that remains unissued. 
(k)  Application process. All applications shall be on a form determined by, and include the information requested by, the City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas. The appropriate permit fee, in certified funds, must accompany each application. 
The City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall present all applications received to the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, at the first meeting in March or the first meeting after receipt of the application, whichever is later. 
Subject to a determination by the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, that said applicant has met all the requirements set forth herein, including a determination as to the appropriateness of the proposed site and the availability of a permit, a permit shall be issued. 
The City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall notify each applicant by first-class United States Mail whether said applicant was successful in obtaining a permit within ten business days of the determination by the governing body of the City of Goodland, Kansas. The permit fee submitted by all unsuccessful applicants shall be returned with the notice that said applicant was not successful in obtaining a permit. 
(l)  Permittee insurance. Each permittee shall obtain a policy of general comprehensive liability insurance for a minimum coverage of $500,000.00 per occurrence, with the City of Goodland, Kansas, named as an additional insured, and shall provide the city with a copy of the certificate of such insurance. Such policy or policies shall not be cancelable by the permittee upon less than 30 days' notice. 
Each permittee shall also obtain a policy of product liability insurance for a minimum coverage of $500,000.00 per occurrence for products sold and/or stored within the city by the vendor, and shall provide the city with a copy of the certificate of such insurance. Such policy or policies shall not be cancelable by the permittee upon less than 30 days' notice. 
(m)  Permittee indemnification. Each permittee shall at all times indemnify the City of Goodland, Kansas, its officials, representatives, designees and employees, and shall defend, save and hold them harmless, from and against any and all claims, actions, damages, liability and expense, including, but not limited to, attorneys and other professional fees, in connection with loss of life, personal injury and/or damage to property arising from or out of the storage, sale, discharge and/or transportation of fireworks by such permittee and permittee's customers, representatives, employees, contractors and designees. 
(n)  Permit revocation. Any permit holder violating any provisions of this section shall, upon the first violation of this section, be issued a warning by the Goodland Police Department. On any second or subsequent violation of this section, the Goodland Police Department shall revoke the permit for sale and terminate the sale of fireworks by the violator. 
Any permit holder whose permit is revoked hereunder may appeal to the City Manager of the City of Goodland, Kansas, by notice served upon the City Clerk of the City of Goodland, Kansas, and a hearing shall be called and held not less than 24 hours from the date of the filing of such notice of appeal. The determination of the City Manager of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be final. 
(o)  Permittee disqualification. No permit shall be issued or renewed to a holder who has been revoked hereunder in a prior year or who has failed to demonstrate financial responsibility. In this regard and by way of illustration, evidence that the holder of a permit has failed to pay the cost of merchandise when due, failed to pay costs associated with leased land or facilities when due, or failed to pay wages of employees when due in connection with sales of fireworks in prior years, may constitute sufficient grounds for the rejection of an application for a permit. 
(p)  Sale times. Fireworks permitted under this section shall be sold only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. from June 27 through July 5. 
(q)  Penalty. Any person, whether acting on his or her own behalf or that of any group or organization, who violates any section of this section shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Note— For the current year 2012, due to the date upon which this section takes effect, applicant may apply for a permit on or after June 25, 2012. The city will expedite the application process to determine whether or not it is appropriate to issue a permit pursuant to this section. This time for applying for a permit is only applicable for the calendar year 2012. 
(Ord. No. 1632, §§ 1—17, 6-18-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1632, §§ 1—17, adopted June 18, 2012, amended § 6-401 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 6-401 pertained to unlawful to sell, give away, distribute fireworks and derived from Ord. No. 719, § 1.  
Sec. 6-402. - Detonation of fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning: 
Fireworks means and includes any combustible or deflagrating composition, article or device suitable for use of the public for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. 
Class C fireworks (common fireworks) means fireworks designed primarily to produce visible effects by combustion. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to: storage, sale or use of signals necessary for safe operation of railroads or other class of public or private transportation, or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial or theatrical or athletic events, nor as prohibiting the firing of sky rockets or missiles when produced by a science class of any school and when under supervision of a school instructor, and shall not apply to those items excepted by the regulations of the state fire marshal as set forth in the Kansas Administrative Regulations. 
(b)  Possession; approved. The use and possession of the following fireworks are hereby approved within the city: 
Approved: All pyrotechnic items classified as class C fireworks (common fireworks) and listed as follows: 
a.  Roman candles, not exceeding ten balls with total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 20 grams in weight and inside tube diameter not exceeding three-eighths inch. 
b.  Helicopter-type rockets, with total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 20 grams in weight and inside tube diameter not exceeding one-half inch. 
c.  Cylindrical fountains with total pyrotechnic composition not exceed 75 grams in weight and inside tube diameter not exceeding one-half inch. 
d.  Cone fountains, with total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 50 grams in weight. 
e.  Firecrackers with casings with external dimensions not exceeding one and one-half inches in length and one-quarter inch in diameter, and total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding two grains each in weight. 
f.  Wheels with total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 60 grams for each driver unit or 240 grams for each wheel, and with inside tube diameter of driver units not exceeding one-half inch. 
g.  Illuminating torches and colored fire in any form, with total pyrotechnic composition not exceeding 100 grams. 
h.  Dipped sticks, the pyrotechnic composition of which contains any chlorate or perchlorate not exceeding five grams, and all sparklers. 
i.  Novelties consisting of two or more devices enumerated in items a—i. of this subsection. 
(c)  Public exhibitions. Fireworks prohibited herein may be sold for use by a competent operator approved by the fire chief for use in public exhibition or displays who holds a valid and current permit issued by the city. A display for family and friends is not a public display. Operators desiring to purchase such fireworks shall exhibit to and file with the seller a copy of the permit for public fireworks display issued by the city. 
(d)  Discharging of fireworks. 
(1)  Except when otherwise expressly authorized under a permit issued, discharging of fireworks shall be allowed only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on July 3 and July 4. Discharging fireworks at any other time or day is unlawful. Fireworks shall not be ignited or discharged within 200 feet of any hospital, sanitarium or infirmary. No person shall ignite or discharge any fireworks into, under or on a car or vehicle, whether moving or standing still. Fireworks shall not be discharged within 200 feet of any retail stand or facility where fireworks are stored. Discharging or igniting fireworks in violation of the provisions of this section shall be unlawful. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge fireworks by throwing, placing or discharging any fireworks in any gathering of persons or to direct fireworks toward any person. 
(3)  Except when otherwise expressly authorized under a permit, it shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or ignite or discharge any fireworks on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or within the city parks of the City of Goodland. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set off or discharge any fireworks in any building. 
(e)  Bottle rockets. As used in this section, bottle rocket means any pyrotechnic device which is classified as a "division 1.4" (formerly "class C") explosive, by the United States Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. 173.2 and 173.50 (2003), and which is: 
(1)  A bottle rocket with or without reports; or 
(2)  A device with the same configuration as a bottle rocket with or without reports, which may be classified as a pipe or through rocket. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other city laws to the contrary, the sale, use, manufacture and possession of bottle rockets is unlawful and is hereby prohibited. 
(f)  Permit for public display required. All persons discharging fireworks for public display within the city limits shall obtain a city permit. Permits will be issued only to those persons with the requisite competence and skill in the opinion of the fire chief and only when in the opinion of the fire chief the proposed display will be conducted in a manner not hazardous to persons or property. A display for family and friends does not qualify as a public display. An applicant shall file a resume showing at least three previous public displays of fireworks of the type prohibited herein, in which applicant supervised or handled such fireworks and showing the names and phone numbers of a contact person with the organization putting on the display. 
(g)  Application for permit. 
(1)  An applicant for permit for a public exhibition or display of fireworks shall file with the city a written application duly subscribed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(2)  Such application shall set forth the following: 
a.  The name of the association, organization or corporation, together with the names of the persons to be in charge of the sales or of the firing and discharging of the display; 
b.  The date and time of the day at which the sales or display is to be held; 
c.  The exact location planned for the display; 
d.  In case of a display, a description setting forth the age, experience, residence and physical characteristics of the persons who are to do the actual firing and discharging of the fireworks; 
e.  The number and kinds of fireworks to be discharged at the display; 
f.  The manner and place of the storage of fireworks for the display between the date of purchase and the date of display; 
g.  A diagram or sketch of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged; the location of all buildings, streets and other lines of communication; the lines behind which the public will be restrained; and the location of all nearby trees, telegraph, telephone lines, or other overhead obstructions; and 
h.  A sales tax number or else the applicant shall supply one to the city clerk two weeks before July 1. 
(3)  An application fee for display may be charged in an amount to be set by the city. 
(h)  Insurance policy required. Before a permit will be issued for the sale of fireworks or for a display exhibition or display of fireworks, the applicant shall file with the city clerk a certificate of liability insurance stating that the applicant has a liability insurance policy in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional named insured or loss payee. 
(i)  Conduct of public display. 
(1)  No fireworks shall be discharged, ignited, or exploded at any point in the city within 200 feet of any hospital, nursing home, health care facility, infirmary or similar facility. 
(2)  The audience at a public display of fireworks shall be restrained a safe distance from which the fireworks are discharged, and only persons in active charge of the display shall be allowed inside these lines. 
(3)  All fireworks that fire a projectile shall be set up so that the projectile will go into the air as nearly as possible at an angle of not more than 15 degrees from vertical and directed away from spectators. 
(4)  Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a safe manner for the particular type of fireworks and as directed by the fire chief. 
(5)  No fireworks display shall be held during any windstorm in which the wind reaches a velocity of more than 30 miles per hour. In such cases the fire chief may authorize the display at a future date suitable to the group holding the display. There shall be at all times at least two operators of the display constantly on duty during the discharge, at least one of which shall be an adult. 
(j)  Fire extinguishers at public display. At a public display of fireworks, at least two fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire chief shall be kept at as widely separated points as possible within the actual area in which the discharging is being done. 
(k)  Enforcement of provisions. 
(1)  The fire chief and all law enforcement officers are charged with the duty of enforcing all of the provisions, terms, and regulations of this section. 
(2)  The fire chief and law enforcement officers may confiscate or cause to be confiscated and removed and stored, retained and disposed of at the owner's expense, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, sold at retail, stored, possessed or held in violation of this section or in violation of the laws of the State of Kansas and the rules and regulations of the Kansas State Fire Marshal. The storage, retention and disposition of such confiscated fireworks shall be subject to and governed by Kansas State Fire Marshal Regulations, including, but not limited to, Kansas Administrative Regulations 22-6-13 and 22-6-13 and amendments thereto. 
(l)  Exemptions from section. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber from selling at wholesale such fireworks as are not herein prohibited, or the selling of any kind of fireworks if the fireworks are to be shipped out of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the manufacture, storage, sale, or use of signals, fuses, or fireworks necessary for the sole operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of transportation or of blank cartridges and blank pistols for a show or theater or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletic events or for use by governmental agencies or for use by military organizations or for use by a science class under the supervision of a school instructor when the place and time of firing have been approved by the fire chief. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent, prohibit or regulate the manufacture, storage, sale or use of model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models not considered to be fireworks. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent, prohibit, or regulate the use of explosives of any nature or any substance or device used in connection with such explosives in any building or construction work or activities within the city as provided in the fire prevention code of the city. 
(m)  Violation; penalty. 
(1)  Violation of any provision of this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $1,500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  In addition, any violations of the provisions of this section which result in a conviction in the municipal court of the city, or any state court within Kansas, shall bar the person so convicted from obtaining city permits and licenses relating to fireworks for a period of two years. 
(n)  Emergency proclamations. If in the opinion of the fire chief, city manager and city commission a fireworks-related disaster has occurred, or the threat thereof is imminent within the city, a proclamation may be issued pursuant to the limitations, conditions, restrictions and requirements set out in the laws of the State of Kansas, including, but not limited to, K.S.A. 48-932, which proclamation may prohibit the use and discharge of fireworks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1608, §§ 1—14, 5-17-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1608, §§ 1—14, adopted May 17, 2010, repealed § 6-402 in its entirety and enacted a new § 6-402 as set out herein. The former § 6-402 pertained to unlawful to detonate fireworks and derived from Ord. No. 719, § 2; and Ord. No. 1594, § 2, adopted July 21, 2008.  
Sec. 6-403. - Exhibition license. 
Any nonprofit organization desiring to stage an exhibition or display of fireworks within the limits of the city may do so upon being granted an exhibition license for such purpose by the fire chief of the city. Application for such a license shall be made at the office of the city clerk, who shall refer the application to the fire chief. The fire chief shall investigate the plans for the proposed exhibition and shall approve and issue the license if, in his discretion, the proposed exhibition shall not present a fire or safety hazard. Such license shall be granted without payment of a fee. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3)  
Sec. 6-404. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00 for each such violation, and each day that sales of fireworks declared illegal under this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 4)  
ARTICLE V. - STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES 
 
Sec. 6-501. - Storage; types of reservoirs allowed, permission required. 
All persons, firms and corporations are hereby prohibited from keeping or storing any coal oil, kerosene, gasoline, or any other highly flammable products of every kind or character from crude petroleum or other substances, upon any lots, blocks, pieces, parcels or tracts of land, or within any building, north of the Rock Island railroad main line, within the corporate limits of the city, unless it shall be stored or kept in a metal tank or reservoir, which tank or reservoir is to be or shall be built in the earth, so that the tank or reservoir shall have at least three feet of earth over it. No such storage plant, tank, reservoir or receptacle shall be built or placed upon any such territory, or in any building in such territory, unless there shall first be secured from the mayor and council, on submission of plans and specifications for such storage plant, a permit to so construct such plant, tank, reservoir or receptacle to store such aforementioned highly flammable products of petroleum or other substances. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 1)  
Sec. 6-502. - Exclusions. 
This article shall in no case apply to the storage of any crude oil, distillate or fuel oil in containers of capacity of 500 gallons or less, but only one such five-hundred-gallon container shall be permitted on each premises, nor shall it apply to the storage of gasoline, kerosene or naphtha in quantities of less than ten gallons, all of which commodities in the quantities mentioned and permitted by this section shall be kept and stored in the same manner as now provided by existing ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 396, § 2)  
Sec. 6-503. - Penalty. 
Any person failing to do any of the things that are herein commanded to be done or violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation and upon conviction shall, where no other penalty is imposed, be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense, and each and every day that any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this article are not complied with shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 395, § 3)  
ARTICLE VI. - INSURANCE PROCEEDS FUND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 1379, adopted June 16, 1997, repealed §§ 6-601—6-611 in their entirety, which sections had derived from the 1989 Code. Ord. No. 1379 further provided for the adoption of similar provisions as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 6-601. - Scope and application. 
The city is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures established by K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a named insured for loss or damage to any building or other structure located within the city arising out of any fire, explosion, or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering such building or other insured structure, unless there is compliance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 1, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-602. - Lien created. 
The governing body of the city hereby creates a lien in favor of the city on the proceeds of any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a building or other structure located within the city, caused by or arising out of any fire, explosion, or windstorm, where the amount recoverable for all the loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75 percent of the face value of the policy(s) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises upon any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of the city which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or not evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other charge that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a proof of loss. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 2, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-603. - Same—Encumbrances. 
Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by section 6-602, the insurer or insurers shall contact the county treasurer, Sherman County, Kansas, to determine whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are found to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal to that owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the county treasurer, Sherman County, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 3, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-604. - Same—Pro rata basis. 
Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurance companies insuring the building or other structure. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 4, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-605. - Procedure. 
(a)  When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived at between the named insured or insureds and the company or companies, and the final settlement exceeds 75 percent of the face value of the policy covering any building or other insured structure, and when all amounts due the holder of a first real estate mortgage against the building or other structure, pursuant to the terms of the policy and endorsements thereto, shall have been paid, the insurance company or companies shall execute a draft payable to the city treasurer in an amount equal to the sum of 15 percent of the covered claim payment unless the chief building inspector of the city has issued a certificate to the insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the damaged building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired, rebuilt, or otherwise made the premises safe and secure. 
(b)  Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the city shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms. 
(c)  Upon the transfer of the funds as required by subsection (a) of this section, the insurance company shall provide the city with the name and address of the named insured or insureds, the total insurance coverage applicable to said building or other structure, and the amount of the final settlement agreed to or arrived at between the insurance company or companies and the insured or insureds, whereupon the chief building inspector shall contact the named insured or insureds by registered mail, notifying them that said insurance proceeds have been received by the city and apprise them of the procedures to be followed under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 5, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-606. - Fund created; deposit of moneys. 
The city treasurer is hereby authorized and shall create a fund to be known as the "Insurance Proceeds Fund." All moneys received by the city treasurer as provided for by this article shall be placed in said fund and deposited in an interest-bearing account. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 6, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-607. - Building inspector; investigation, removal of structure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of moneys as provided for by this article, the city treasurer shall immediately notify the chief building inspector of said receipt, and transmit all documentation received from the insurance company or companies to the chief building inspector. 
(b)  Within 20 days of the receipt of said moneys, the chief building inspector shall determine, after prior investigation, whether the city shall instigate proceedings under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  Prior to the expiration of the 20 days established by subsection (b) of this section, the chief building inspector shall notify the city treasurer whether he or she intends to initiate proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended. 
(d)  If the chief building inspector has determined that proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended shall be initiated, he or she will do so immediately but no later than 30 days after receipt of the moneys by the city treasurer. 
(e)  Upon notification to the city treasurer by the chief building inspector that no proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, the city treasurer shall return all such moneys received, plus accrued interest, to the insured or insureds as identified in the communication from the insurance company or companies. Such return shall be accomplished within 30 days of the receipt of the moneys from the insurance company or companies. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 7, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-608. - Removal of structure; excess moneys. 
If the chief building inspector has proceeded under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, all moneys in excess of that which is ultimately necessary to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or structure, less salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 8, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-609. - Same—Disposition of funds. 
If the chief building inspector, with regard to a building or other structure damaged by fire, explosion, or windstorm, determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756, any proceeds received by the city treasurer under the authority of section 6-605(a) relating to that building or other structure shall be used to reimburse the city for any expenses incurred by the city in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon reimbursement from the insurance proceeds, the chief building inspector shall immediately effect the release of the lien resulting therefrom. Should the expenses incurred by the city exceed the insurance proceeds paid over the city treasurer under section 6-605(a), the chief building inspector shall publish a new lien as authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 9, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-610. - Effect upon insurance policies. 
This article shall not make the city a party to any insurance contract, nor is the insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 10, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 6-611. - Insurers; liability. 
Insurers complying with this article or attempting in good faith to comply with this ordinance shall be immune from civil and criminal liability and such action shall not be deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments thereto, including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to this article or releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1379, § 11, 6-16-97)  
Chapter 7 - HEALTH, SANITATION, AND WELFARE  
ARTICLE I. - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 12 of Ordinance No. 1502, adopted June 16, 2003, repealed Ch. 7, Art. I, §§ 7-101—7-144; and sections 1—11 enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former §§ 7-101—7-144 derived from Ord. No. 1424, adopted Oct. 18, 1999; Ord. No. 1441, adopted Aug. 21, 2000; and Ord. No. 1472, adopted March 4, 2002. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-101. - Definitions. 
Definitions shall read as follows: 
Class A commercial customer shall include, but not be limited to, all businesses, government operations, commercial enterprises, dwellings containing 20 or more dwelling units, offices, shops, hotels, churches, schools and institutions. 
Class B commercial customer shall be limited to structures whose primary function and use is storage of the owner's personal property and not for rent or lease by others. Such customer shall be a small volume generator of solid waste and final determination for classification as a Class B customer shall rest with the Sherman County solid waste committee. 
City means the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Cart means a container provided by the city and/or its contractor for the disposal and collection of garbage and trash and/or yard waste, with a capacity of 90 to 100 gallons. The contents shall not weigh more than 250 pounds. 
Construction and demolition debris means solid waste resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of structures, roads, sidewalks, and utilities. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, bricks, concrete and other mansonry materials, roofing materials, soil, rock, wood, wood products, wall or floor coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures, electrical wiring, electrical components containing no hazardous materials, no-asbestos insulation, and construction related packaging. 
Contractor means any private garbage and/or refuse and/or trash collection company (hauler) under contract with the city to provide refuse, garbage and trash collection; yard waste collection; and heavy bulky item collection. 
Customer shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Any address, person, firm, partnership, or corporation or other entity within the corporate limits of the city that has an active utility account of any kind with the city. 
(2)  Any residential or commercial customer within the corporate limits of the city served by the city's solid waste collection system. 
(3)  Any commercial or residential person, firm, partnership, or corporation as defined "rural" herein that requests solid waste collection service from the city. 
Director means the director of the city's public works department and/or the city's utilities department and/or the city's authorized representative. 
Dumpster means any container provided by the city and/or for the disposal and collection of garbage and trash and/or yard waste, and with a capacity of three cubic yards. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and townhouses, but not hotels or motels. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building that contains living facilities for not more than one family and that includes provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Garbage shall include, but not be limited to, decayed, unsound, waste or discarded food, fruit, meat, bakery goods, and vegetables; animal and vegetable refuse from food handling places or residences; any putrid or offensive animal or vegetable matter; and any bottles, cans or other containers utilized in normal household use. 
Hazardous material shall include, but not be limited to: explosive material; rags or other waste soaked in volatile or flammable liquids; motor oil; highly combustible material; chemicals; poisons; paints; thinners; household cleaners; pesticides; radioactive materials; medical wastes; soiled dressings, clothing, bedding and/or other wastes contaminated by body fluids, infection or contagious disease; any other material which may present a special hazard to personnel, equipment, or the public in the act of collection or disposal of such material; or the containers in which any of these materials were packaged or stored in if not properly cleansed. 
Heavy and bulky debris shall include, but not be limited to: nonmetal furniture, and tree limbs bundled (bundle shall not weigh more than 50 pounds and shall not exceed six feet in length). 
Metal debris shall include, but not be limited to, appliances, automobile bodies, chassis parts, drive trains or engine parts, compressed gas or air bottles, general construction metal, electrical fixtures, wire, farm implements or parts thereof, lawn equipment, metal furniture or equipment, pipe, rebar, outdoor grills, sheet metal, wheels or rims, and other similar materials. 
Municipal solid waste means all solid waste that normally originates in a residential environment. 
Refuse means waste material of any kind or nature whatsoever, excluding heavy and bulky items, metal debris, hazardous materials, yard waste, and construction and demolition debris. 
Residential customer shall include, but not be limited to, all residential dwellings containing less than 20 individual dwelling units. 
Returned check fee shall mean the fee set for the return of a check to the city in the amount of $20.00 plus the amount of the check. 
Services means the solid waste, garbage, refuse, trash, yard waste, and heavy and bulky item collection and disposal system of the city. 
Trash shall include, but not be limited to, accumulations of paper, magazines, packaging, containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage or yard waste, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of business places. 
Unusual, heavy or hazardous material means any material, which in the judgment of the director cannot be collected by regular collection service because of its dimension, density, or potentially harmful nature. Ashes and cinders are hazardous material unless the combustion thereof has been completely extinguished and they are contained. 
Yard waste means waste materials generated from the maintenance of lawns and gardens, which shall include grass clippings, leaves, weeds, flowers, vegetables, plants and other similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 1516, § 1, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 7-102. - General requirements. 
The city shall have the right to enter into a contract with any responsible person or entity for collection and disposal of any waste materials as defined herein. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to accumulate or allow the accumulation of garbage, refuse, trash, yard waste, municipal solid waste, or any other waste as defined herein, in order that the city may be kept clean and sanitary. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to, place or permit to be placed, any garbage, refuse, trash, yard waste, or municipal solid waste, on the outside of any building, or in any location within the city, except in a wind-proof container so that the same will not be liable to scatter by wind or otherwise. 
(3)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any customer to whom any dumpster or cart has been issued is the party responsible for any violation of this article. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of any person or organization sponsoring a special event within the city to arrange for the placement of appropriate carts and/or dumpsters and to schedule the collection and disposal of waste products with the city and/or its contractor. 
(5)  The city and/or its contractor are hereby authorized to enter in and upon private property for the purpose of collecting any cart or dumpster therefrom as required by this article. 
(6)  The city and/or its contractor reserves the right to refuse to collect or dispose of any waste from any cart or dumpster that contains any waste materials in violation of this article, until the responsible party has removed from such cart or dumpster the objectionable waste material. 
(7)  The city and/or its contractor reserves the right to refuse the collection of any waste materials as defined herein that do not meet the requirements of this article, federal, state, and other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 2, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-103. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation: 
(1)  To deposit, throw, place or leave any garbage, trash or other refuse upon public or private property, including his or her own, except in a cart or dumpster complying with the provisions herein; 
(2)  To remove the contents of a cart or dumpster, or any portion thereof, except for the proper collection and disposal as permitted herein; 
(3)  To upset, remove or carry away any cart or dumpster, or mutilate or injure such cart or dumpster in any manner; 
(4)  To place or deposit, or cause to be placed or deposited, any refuse or yard waste in a cart or dumpster other than his or her own cart or dumpster or one provided for his or her use; 
(5)  To place or deposit, or cause to be placed or deposited, any refuse or yard waste in a cart or dumpster with the intent of avoiding payment of the required fees; 
(6)  To interfere in any manner with the city or its contractor in the collection of refuse or yard waste; 
(7)  To burn or bury any refuse at any place within the city; 
(8)  To cause, permit or allow any material, other than material as expressly permitted by this article, to be deposited in any cart or dumpster provided therefore by the city and/or contractor of the city; 
(9)  To destroy or deface any cart or dumpster provided by the city and/or contractor of the city for the use of any customer; 
(10)  To subscribe with any private contractor for refuse, garbage and/or trash disposal service other than with the city or contractor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 3, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-104. - Residential collection service; general regulations. 
The city and/or contractor shall provide residential refuse collection service upon the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  All residential and commercial garbage, refuse, and trash collection within the corporate limits of the city shall be provided exclusively by the city. The city may provide these services with city personnel and equipment or by contract with municipal or private garbage and trash collection services. 
(b)  The city and/or contractor of the city shall provide each residential customer with a suitable cart or dumpster. The city shall determine placement of containers and the number of containers per block to be shared by customers within that block. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to add or remove carts and/or dumpsters based on the volume of solid waste generated by any customer or group of customers. 
(d)  Each customer shall be responsible for making the cart or dumpster available for collection on the designated collection day. Unless exceptional circumstances exist and the city has notice thereof, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  For property with street access only, all carts and other approved containers shall be placed for collection at a point within two feet of the traveled portion of the street, affording easy and unobstructed access for collection. 
2.  For property with alley access, all carts and/or dumpsters shall be placed for collection at a point within or immediately adjacent to the abutting alley, and outside fences and other obstructions. 
3.  Carts and/or dumpsters should be placed and made available for collection at the collection point specified herein no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day preceding the collection day and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the collection day, and shall be removed (when applicable) from such location no later than 8:00 p.m. of the collection day. 
(e)  Except when a specific location is required, carts may be stored at any location upon the customer's property, in any manner not creating a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
(2)  Accumulation of garbage and trash pending collection by the city shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  All garbage shall be thoroughly drained and wrapped prior to being placed in a cart or dumpster. 
(b)  No refuse other than garbage or trash shall be deposited in a cart or dumpster provided for such purpose. 
(c)  Refuse collected on a regular basis shall be any and all combined refuse, which, by law or regulation, can be placed in a cart or dumpster. Excluded from any regular collection is metal debris, construction and demolition debris, yard waste, and unusual, heavy, bulky or hazardous combined refuse. 
(3)  All residential customers using carts and/or dumpsters provided by the city and/or contractor of the city for the purpose of refuse collection and/or yard waste collection shall be subject to the following responsibilities: 
(a)  All carts and/or dumpsters shall be kept reasonably clean. 
(b)  All residential customers shall exercise reasonable care to avoid damage to carts and/or dumpsters. In the event damage results from negligent or intentional acts of a customer, such customer shall reimburse the city and/or contractor of the city for its loss therefrom. 
(c)  No cart and/or dumpster provided by the city and/or contractor of the city shall be removed from the premises to which it is assigned. Any residential customer vacating property to which a cart and/or dumpster has been assigned shall notify the city and/or its contractor at least three working days before such vacation, so that such cart and/or dumpster may be returned, if required, to city and/or contractor of the city inventory. 
(d)  All residential customers using containers provided by the city and/or contractor of the city shall comply with all regulations of the director relative to the use and care thereof. 
(e)  The city may promulgate additional rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 4, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-105. - Commercial collection service; general regulations. 
Commercial refuse collection service shall be provided by the city and/or contractor upon the following terms and conditions: 
(a)  The city and/or contractor of the city shall provide exclusive refuse collection service to any commercial customer within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The city and/or contractor of the city shall provide a suitable number of carts or dumpsters for accumulation of garbage and trash on commercial premises. The city reserves the right to add or remove carts and/or dumpsters based on the volume of solid waste generated by any customer or group of customers. 
(c)  Prior to the time and day designated for collection, the commercial customer shall make all carts and dumpsters available at the prescribed location for proper disposal. 
(d)  Commercial customers shall comply with all regulations of the director relative to such commercial collection service. 
(e)  No cart and/or dumpster provided by the city and/or contractor of the city shall be removed from the premises to which it is assigned. Any commercial customer vacating property to which a cart and/or dumpster has been assigned shall notify the city and/or its contractor at least three working days before such vacation, so that such cart and/or dumpster may be returned, if required, to city and /or contractor of the city inventory. 
(f)  The city may promulgate additional rules not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 5, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-106. - Unusual, heavy or hazardous materials. 
The city and/or its contractor shall neither collect nor dispose of unusual, heavy or hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 6, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-107. - Frequency of refuse removal. 
(a)  Commercial refuse shall be removed daily or at such longer intervals as may be approved by the city and/or contractor of the city, but in no case shall such interval be longer than one week. No commercial refuse shall be permitted to accumulate in any manner, which creates a health or safety hazard. 
(b)  Residential refuse shall be removed once each week. No residential refuse shall be permitted to accumulate in any manner, which creates a health or safety hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 7, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-108. - Yard waste. 
The city's contractor shall provide customers within the corporate limits of the city collection services for yard waste. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 8, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 1516, § 2, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 7-109. - Metal debris, and heavy and bulky items. 
The city and/or its contractor will offer collection of metal debris and heavy and bulky items as defined herein to residential customers within the corporate limits of the city. The governing body of the city shall establish by resolution a schedule identifying the rules, regulations and rates for this program. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 9, 6-16-03)  
Sec. 7-110. - Rates and charges. 
The charges to be made and collected for collection and disposal of refuse, and any other waste as defined herein by the city and/or its contractor, including all services incident thereto, shall be as established from time to time by ordinance of the city's governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 10, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 1516, § 3, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 7-111. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person or persons, firms, partnership or corporation convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be fined a sum of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or confinement for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons, firms, partnerships, or corporations found in violation shall be required top correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
(c)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal or correction of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1502, § 11, 6-16-03)  
DIVISION 2. - FEES 
 
Sec. 7-112. - Solid waste and related collection fees. 
In accordance with the definitions and provisions in Chapter 7, Article I, Division 1 of the City of Goodland, Kansas, the following fees are hereby established for the collection of waste materials. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 1, 6-25-03)  
Sec. 7-113. - Residential refuse collection service fees. 
(a)  All residential refuse customers within the City of Goodland shall be charged a base rate for the collection of refuse in the amount of $16.50 per month. The base rate includes one collection of refuse each week. 
(b)  All rural residential refuse customers shall be charged a base rate for the collection of refuse in the amount of $19.00 per month. The base rate includes one collection of refuse and the tipping fee for such collection, each week. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 2, 6-25-03; Ord. No. 1528, § 1, 1-3-05; Ord. 1588, § 1, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 1599, § 1, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 1685 , § 1, 11-16-15)  
Sec. 7-114. - Commercial refuse collection service fees. 
(a)  All commercial refuse customers within the City of Goodland shall be charged a base rate for the collection of refuse in the amount of $27.00 per month. The base rate includes one collection of refuse each week. 
(b)  Additional containers. Any commercial customer may request additional containers for refuse. Each additional container shall be charged and billed by the contractor at the rate of $25.00 per month. This rate for the additional containers includes one collection of refuse each week. 
(c)  All Class B Commercial refuse customers shall be charged an annual fee of $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 3, 6-25-03; Ord. No. 1516, § 4, 4-5-04; Ord. No. 1528, § 2, 1-3-05; Ord. No. 1588, § 2, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 1599, § 2, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 1685 , § 2, 11-16-15)  
Sec. 7-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1516, § 5, adopted Apr. 5, 2004, repealed § 7-115, which pertained to yard waste collection fees and derived from Ord. No. 1503, § 4, adopted June 25, 2003.  
Sec. 7-116. - Metal debris and heavy and bulky item collection fee. 
Any residential customer may request by special arrangement the collection of certain metal debris, and/or heavy bulky item debris. Such collection shall be in accordance with the city approved rules, regulations and fees as established by the contractor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 5, 6-25-03)  
Sec. 7-117. - Payment of fees for the collection of waste material. 
All waste collection bills due the city and/or its contractor shall be payable monthly and all such bills shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each month. Unless payment is made as herein called for, service may be discontinued until such delinquent customer shall have paid all of the arrearage to the city and/or its contractor. In the event there is no electric or water utility service to the property, the waste container will be removed from the premises and the service shall be discontinued until such delinquent customer shall have paid all arrearages to the city and/or its contractor. 
(Ord. No. 1504, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 1622, § 1, 8-1-11)  
Secs. 7-118—7-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL CODE 
 
Sec. 7-201. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Environmental Code." 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-202. - Legislative finding of fact. 
The governing body has found that there exists within the city unsightly and hazardous conditions due to: dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair of walls, siding, fences or structure exteriors; accumulations increasing the hazards of accidents or other calamities; structural defects; uncleanliness; unsightly stored or parked material, equipment, supplies, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof. Such conditions are inimical to the general welfare of the community in that they have a blighting influence on the adjoining properties, the neighborhood and the city, or are injurious to the health and safety of the residents of the city. The governing body desires to promote the public health, safety and welfare by the repair, removal, abatement, and regulation of such conditions in the manner hereafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 2, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-203. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, preserve, upgrade, and regulate the environmental quality of industrial, commercial and residential neighborhoods in this city, by outlawing conditions which are injurious to the health, safety, welfare or aesthetic characteristics of the neighborhoods and to provide for the administration and enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 3, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-204. - Rules of construction. 
For the purpose of this article, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(1)  Any part thereof. Whenever the words premises, structure, building or yard are used they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(2)  Gender. Words of gender shall be construed to mean neuter, feminine or masculine, as may be applicable. 
(3)  Number. Words of number shall be construed to mean singular or plural, as may be applicable. 
(4)  Tense. Words of tense shall be construed to mean present or future, as may be applicable. 
(5)  Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 4, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-205. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases listed below when used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Abandoned motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is not currently registered or tagged pursuant to K.S.A. 8-126 to 8-149 inclusive, as amended; or parked in violation of the ordinance; or incapable of moving under its own power; or in a junked or wrecked condition. 
(2)  Accessory structure means a secondary structure detached from the principal structure but on the same premises, including, but not limited to, garages, sheds, barns, or outbuildings. 
(3)  Commercial or industrial means used or intended to be used primarily for other than residential purposes. 
(4)  Dilapidation, deterioration or disrepair shall mean any condition characterized by, but not limited to: holes, breaks, rot, decay, crumbling, cracking, peeling or flaking paint, rusting, or other evidence of physical damage, neglect, lack of maintenance, excessive use or weathering. 
(5)  Exterior means those parts of a structure which are exposed to the weather or subject to contact with the elements; including, but not limited to: sidings, facings, veneers, masonry, roofs, foundations, porches, screens, shutters, windows, doors or signs. 
(6)  Garbage means without limitation any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable waste matter that results from the handling, preparation, cooking, serving, delivering, storage, or use of foodstuffs. 
(7)  Person means any individual, individuals, corporation, partnership, unincorporated association, other business organization, committee, board, trustee, receiver, agent or other representative who has charge, care, control or responsibility for maintenance of any premises, regardless of status as owner, renter, tenant or lessee, whether or not in possession. 
(8)  Premises means any lot, plot or parcel of land including the structures thereon. Premises shall also mean any lot, plot or parcel of land without any structures thereon. 
(9)  Refuse means garbage and trash. 
(10)  Residential means used or intended to be used primarily for human habitation. 
(11)  Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground including any appurtenances belonging thereto. 
(12)  Trash means combustible waste consisting of, but not limited to: papers, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, furniture, bedding, rags, leaves, yard trimmings, or tree branches and noncombustible waste consisting of, but not limited to: metal, tin, cans, glass, crockery, plastics, mineral matter, ashes, clinkers, or street rubbish and sweepings. 
(13)  Weathered means deterioration caused by exposure to the elements. 
(14)  Yard means the area of the premises not occupied by any structure. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 5, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-206. - Public officer. 
The city manager of the City of Goodland shall be the public officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 6, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-207. - Enforcement standards. 
No person shall be found in violation of this article unless the public officer, or his or her authorized representative, after a reasonable inquiry and inspection of the premises, believes that conditions exist of a quality and appearance not commensurate with the character of the neighborhood. Such belief must be supported by evidence of a level of maintenance significantly below that of the rest of the neighborhood. Such evidence shall include conditions declared unlawful under section 7-208 but shall not include conditions which are not readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 7, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-208. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to exist on any residential, commercial or industrial premises, conditions which are injurious to the health, safety or general welfare of the residents of the community or conditions which are detrimental to adjoining property, the neighborhood or the city. For the purpose of fair and efficient enforcement and administration, such unlawful conditions shall be classified as follows: 
(a)  Exterior conditions (yard) shall include, but not be limited to, the scattering over or the parking, leaving, depositing or accumulation on the yard of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, wire, metal, tires, concrete, masonry products, plastic products, supplies, equipment, machinery, auto parts, junk or refuse; 
(2)  Abandoned motor vehicles; 
(3)  Furniture, stoves, refrigerators, televisions, sinks, bicycles, lawn mowers, or other such items of personal property; or 
(4)  Nauseous substances, carcasses of dead animals or places where animals are kept in an offensive manner. 
(b)  Exterior conditions (structure) shall include, but not be limited to, deteriorated, dilapidated, or unsightly: 
(1)  Exteriors of any structure; 
(2)  Exteriors of any accessory structure; or 
(3)  Fences, walls, or retaining walls. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 8, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-209. - Order of violation. 
(a)  The governing body shall serve upon the owner, any agent of the owner of the property or any other person, corporation, partnership or association found by the public officer to be in violation of section 7-209 an order stating the violation. The order shall be served on the owner or agent of such property. Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery, or by personal service. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery, to the last known address of the owner. 
(b)  If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. The order shall state: 
(1)  The condition which has caused the violation of this article; and 
(2)  That the person in violation shall have: 
a.  Ten days from the receipt of the order to alleviate the exterior conditions (yard) violation; and/or; 
b.  Forty-five days from the receipt of the order to alleviate the exterior conditions (structure) violation; or in the alternative to subsections (1) and (2) above, 
c.  Ten days from the receipt of the order, plus any additional time granted under subsection (3), to request, as provided in section 7-212, a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative on the matter; and 
(3)  Provided, however, that the governing body [or its designee named herein] shall grant one or more extensions to the time periods stated in subsections (2)b. and c., above, if the owner or agent of the property demonstrates that due diligence is being exercised in the abatement of the conditions which have caused the violation of this article; and 
(4)  That failure to alleviate the condition or to request a hearing may result in prosecution under section 7-210 and/or abatement of the condition by the city according to section 7-211 with the costs assessed against the property under section 7-214. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 9, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1617e.  
Sec. 7-210. - Penalty. 
The public officer, or his or her authorized representatives, may file a complaint in the municipal court against any person found to be in violation of section 7-208; provided; however, that such person shall first have been sent a notice as provided in section 7-209 and that the person has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the governing body within the time periods specified in section 7-209. Upon such complaint in the municipal court, any person found to be in violation of section 7-208 shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, or by imprisonment, for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. For the purposes of this article, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation is permitted to exist. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 10, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-211. - Abatement. 
In addition to, or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 7-210, the public officer, or his or her authorized representatives, may seek to remedy violations of this article in the following manner. If a person to whom an order has been served pursuant to section 7-209 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the governing body within the time periods specified in section 7-209, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten days after passage of the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in section 7-214. 
A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation in one of the following ways: 
(a)  Personal service upon the person in violation; 
(b)  Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery; or 
(c)  In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by the public officer, or his or her authorized representatives and filed with the city clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists. 
(d)  If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 11, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15)  
Sec. 7-212. - Hearing. 
If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in section 7-209, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body. Failure to make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person's right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be held by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible after the filing of the request therefore, and the person shall be advised by the city of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the person and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the governing body or its designated representative. The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its designated representative shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the governing body, and the resolution shall be served upon the person in the manner provided in section 7-211. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 12, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-213. - Appeals. 
Any person affected by any determination of the governing body under sections 7-211 or 7-212 may appeal such determination in the manner provided by K.S.A. 60-2101. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 13, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-214. - Costs assessed. 
If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to section 7-211, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 14, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15)  
Sec. 7-215. - Construction. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its laws nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this ordinance shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the Kansas Constitution, by any other law or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 15, 9-5-06)  
Secs. 7-216—7-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HEALTH NUISANCES; ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 1560, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, repealed §§ 7-301—7-309. Sections 1—10 of said ordinance, enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 
 
Sec. 7-301. - Nuisances unlawful; defined. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit any nuisance within the city as defined, without limitation, as follows: 
(a)  Filth, excrement, lumber, rocks, dirt, cans, paper, trash, metal or any other offensive or disagreeable thing or substance thrown or left or deposited upon any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, park, public or private enclosure or lot whether vacant or occupied; 
(b)  All dead animals not removed within 24 hours after death; 
(c)  Any place or structure or substance which emits or causes any offensive, disagreeable or nauseous odors; 
(d)  All stagnant ponds or pools of water; 
(e)  All grass or weeds or other unsightly vegetation not usually cultivated or grown for domestic use or to be marketed or for ornamental purposes; 
(f)  Abandoned iceboxes or refrigerators kept on the premises under the control of any person, or deposited on the sanitary landfill, or any icebox or refrigerator not in actual use unless the door, opening or lid thereof is unhinged, or unfastened and removed therefrom; 
(g)  All articles or things whatsoever caused, kept, maintained or permitted by any person to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of the public or of any neighborhood; 
(h)  Any fence, structure, thing or substance placed upon or being upon any street, sidewalk, alley or public ground so as to obstruct the same, except as permitted by the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 1, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 21-4106:4107.  
Sec. 7-302. - Public officer. 
The city manager of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be the public officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 2, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-303. - Complaints; inquiry and inspection. 
The public officer, or his or her authorized representatives, shall make inquiry and inspection of premises upon receiving a complaint or complaints in writing signed by two or more persons stating that a nuisance exists and describing the same and where located or is informed that a nuisance may exist by the board of health, chief of police or the fire chief. The public officer, or his or her authorized representatives, may make such inquiry and inspection when he or she observes conditions which appear to constitute a nuisance. Upon making any inquiry and inspection the public officer, or his or her authorized representatives shall make a written report of findings. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 3, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-304. - Right of entry. 
The public officer, or his or her authorized representatives, has the right of access and entry upon private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inquiry and inspection to determine if a nuisance exists. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 4, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-305. - Order of violation. 
(a)  The governing body shall serve upon the owner, any agent of the owner of the property or any other person, corporation, partnership or association found by the public officer to be in violation of section 7-301 an order stating the violation. The order shall be served on the owner or agent of such property. Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery, or by personal service. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery, to the last known address of the owner. 
(b)  If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding twenty-four-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 5, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1617e.  
Sec. 7-306. - Same—Contents. 
The order shall state the condition(s) which is (are) in violation of section 7-301. The order shall also inform the person, corporation, partnership or association that: 
(a)  He, she or they shall have ten days from the receipt of the order to abate the condition(s) in violation of section 7-301; provided, however, that the governing body (or its designee named in section 7-302) shall grant one or more extensions of the ten-day period if the owner or agent of the property demonstrates that due diligence is being exercised in the abatement of the conditions in violation of section 7-301; or 
(b)  He, she or they have ten days from the receipt of the order, plus any additional time granted under subsection (a), to request a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative of the matter as provided by section 7-309; 
(c)  Failure to abate the condition(s) or to request a hearing within the time allowed may result in prosecution as provided by section 7-307 and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided by section 7-308. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 6, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-307. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
Should the person, corporation, partnership or association fail to comply with the order to abate the nuisance or request a hearing the public officer may file a complaint in the municipal court of the city against such person, corporation, partnership or association and upon conviction of any violation of provisions of section 7-301, be fined in an amount not to exceed $100.00 or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days or be both fined and imprisoned. Each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues after notice has been served shall constitute an additional or separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 7, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-308. - Abatement. 
In addition to, or as an alternative to prosecution as provided in section 7-307, the public officer may seek to remedy violations of this article in the following manner. If a person to whom an order has been served pursuant to section 7-305 has neither alleviated the conditions causing the alleged violation nor requested a hearing before the governing body within the time periods specified in section 7-306, the public officer may present a resolution to the governing body for adoption authorizing the public officer or other agents of the city to abate the conditions causing the violation at the end of ten days after passage of the resolution. The resolution shall further provide that the costs incurred by the city shall be charged against the lot or parcel of ground on which the nuisance was located as provided in section 7-310. A copy of the resolution shall be served upon the person in violation in one of the following ways: 
(a)  Personal service upon the person in violation; 
(b)  Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery; or 
(c)  In the event the whereabouts of such person are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable diligence, an affidavit to that effect shall be made by the public officer and filed with the city clerk, and the serving of the resolution shall be made by publishing the same once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper and by posting a copy of the resolution on the premises where such condition exists. 
(d)  If the owner or the agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice or order sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period, the governing body of the city may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property or provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 8, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15)  
Sec. 7-309. - Hearing. 
If a hearing is requested within the ten-day period as provided in section 7-306, such request shall be made in writing to the governing body. Failure to make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person's right to contest the findings of the public officer. The hearing shall be held by the governing body or its designated representative as soon as possible after the filing of the request therefore, and the person shall be advised by the city of the time and place of the hearing at least five days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the person may be represented by counsel, and the person and the city may introduce such witnesses and evidence as is deemed necessary and proper by the governing body or its designated representative. The hearing need not be conducted according to the formal rules of evidence. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the findings of the governing body or its designated representative shall be prepared in resolution form, adopted by the governing body, and the resolution shall be served upon the person in the manner provided in section 7-308. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 9, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-310. - Costs assessed. 
If the city abates or removes the nuisance pursuant to section 7-308, the city shall give notice to the owner or his or her agent of the total cost of the abatement or removal incurred by the city. Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery. The notice shall also state that the payment is due within 30 days following receipt of the notice. The city also may recover the cost of providing notice, including any postage, required by this section. The notice shall also state that if the cost of the removal or abatement is not paid within the 30-day period, the cost of the abatement or removal shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments and charged against the lot or parcel of land on which the nuisance was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest has been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 1560, § 10, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15)  
Secs. 7-311—7-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 7 of Ord. No. 1422, adopted Sept. 20, 1999, repealed §§ 7-401—7-404, and §§ 1—3 of said ordinance added similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former §§ 7-401—7-404 derived from the 1983 Code, Ord. No. 883, and Ord. No. 1229. 
 
Sec. 7-401. - Adoption of code incorporated. 
There is hereby incorporated by the governing body of the city that certain uniform housing code known as the 1997 Uniform Housing Code as compiled by the International Conference of Building Officials and all supplements thereto of which not less than three copies have and are now filed in the office of the city clerk of the and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length therein and from the date on which this code shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling on all dwellings and premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1422, § 1, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 7-402. - Amendments to code. 
Section 203.1 of said 1997 Uniform Housing Code is amended to read as follows: 
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decision or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a housing advisory and appeals board consisting of those same persons who sit on the building board of appeals pursuant to the current adopted uniform building code. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary of said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in section 1201 of this code. Copies of all rules of procedure adopted by the board shall be delivered to the building official who shall make them accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1422, § 2, 9-20-99)  
Sec. 7-403. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time determined by the building official. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1422, § 3, 9-20-99)  
Secs. 7-404—7-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WEEDS AND VEGETATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1378, adopted June 16, 1997, repealed Ord. No. 1373 which had been codified as §§ 7-501—7-507, and enacted similar provisions as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 7-501. - Weeds to be removed. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or any other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises to permit weeds to remain upon said premises or any other area between the property lines of said property and centerline of any adjacent street or alley, including but not specifically limited to sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements, right-of-ways and any other areas, public or private. All weeds as hereinafter defined are hereby declared a nuisance and are subject to abatement as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 1, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 7-502. - Definitions. 
Weeds, as used herein, means any of the following: 
(1)  Brush and woody vines shall be classified as weeds; 
(2)  Weeds and grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property; 
(3)  Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature. 
(4)  Weeds which are located in an area which harbors rats, insects, animals, reptiles, or any other creature which either may or does constitute a menace to health, public safety or welfare; 
(5)  Weeds and grasses on or about residential property which, because of its height, has a blighting influence on the neighborhood. Any such weeds and indigenous grasses shall be presumed to be blighting if they exceed eight inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 2, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1619, § 1, 5-2-11)  
Sec. 7-503. - Public officer; notice to remove. 
The city manager shall designate a public officer, who shall be the city building official, to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. The public officer or an authorized assistant shall notify in writing the owner, occupant or agent in charge of any premises in the city upon which weeds exist in violation of this article, by mail or by personal service, once per calendar year. Such notice shall include the following: 
(a)  That the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property is in violation of the City Weed Control Law. 
(b)  That the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property is ordered to cut the weeds within ten days of the receipt of notice. 
(c)  That the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property may request a hearing before the governing body or its designated representative within five days of the receipt of the notice. 
(d)  That the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property does not cut the weeds, the city or its authorized agent will cut the weeds and assess the cost of cutting, including an administrative fee, against the owner, occupant, or agent in charge of the property. 
(e)  That the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the property will be given an opportunity to pay the assessment, and, if it is not paid, it will be added to the property tax as a special assessment. 
(f)  That no further notice shall be given prior to removal of weeds during the current calendar year. 
(g)  That the public officer should be contacted if there are any questions regarding the order. 
If there is a change in the record owner of title to property subsequent to the giving of notice, pursuant to this subsection, the city may not recover any costs or levy an assessment for the cost incurred by the cutting or destruction of weeds on such property unless the new record owner of title to such property is provided notice as required by this section. 
If the owner or agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice sent pursuant to this section during the preceding 24-month period the building official of the City of Goodland may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property in the manner provided for herein. Except as specifically provided in this subsection the building official may provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a non-resident of the City of Goodland, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 3, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 1509, § 1, 8-18-03)  
Sec. 7-504. - Abatement of costs. 
(a)  Upon the expiration of ten days after receipt of the notice required by section 7-503, and in the event that the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises shall neglect or fail to comply with the requirements of section 7-501, the public officer or an assistant shall cause to be cut, destroyed and/or removed all such weeds and abate the nuisance created thereby at any time during the current calendar year. 
(b)  The public officer or an authorized representative shall give notice to the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises by restricted mail of the cost of abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall state that payment of the costs is due and payable within 30 days following the receipt of the notice. 
(c)  If the cost of removal or abatement remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice, a record of costs of cutting and destruction and/or removal shall be certified to the city clerk who shall cause such costs to be assessed against the particular lot or piece of land on which such weeds were so removed. The city clerk shall certify the assessment to the county clerk at the time other special assessments are certified for spreading on the tax rolls of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 4, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 7-505. - Right of entry. 
The public officer and the public officer's authorized assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds in a manner not inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 5, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 7-506. - Unlawful interference. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or to attempt to prevent the public officer or the public officers authorized representative from entering upon such lot or piece of ground or from proceeding with such cutting and destruction. Such interference shall constitute an ordinance violation. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 6, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 7-507. - Noxious weeds. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall affect or impair the rights of the city under the provisions of Chapter 2, Article 13 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, relating to the control and eradication of certain noxious weeds. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the terms "noxious weeds" shall mean kudzu (Pueraria lobate), field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), Russian knapweed (Centaurea picris), hoary cress (Lepidium draba), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), quackgrass (Agropyron repens), leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula), burragweed (Franseria tomentosa and discolor), pignut (Hoffmanneseggia densiflora), musk (nodding), thistle (Carduus nutans L.), and Johnson grass (Sorghum halpense). 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 7, 6-16-97)  
Sec. 7-508. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates this article shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1378, § 8, 6-16-97)  
Secs. 7-509—7-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS AND UNFIT STRUCTURES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 15 or Ord. No. 1562, adopted Sept. 5, 2006, repealed §§ 7-601—7-614. Sections 1—14 of said ordinance enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. See Code Comparative Table for amendatory history. 
 
Sec. 7-601. - Purpose. 
The governing body has found that there exist within the corporate limits of the city structures which are unfit for human use or habitation because of dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire or accidents, structural defects or other conditions which render such structures unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise inimical to the general welfare of the city, or conditions which provide a general blight upon the neighborhood or surrounding properties. It is hereby deemed necessary by the governing body to require or cause the repair, closing or demolition or removal of such structures as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1751.  
Sec. 7-602. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Enforcing officer means the city manager of the City of Goodland shall be the enforcing officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Structure shall include any building, wall, superstructure or other structure which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 2, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1750.  
Sec. 7-603. - Enforcing officer; duties. 
The enforcing officer, or his or her authorized representative, is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including the following: 
(a)  Inspect any structure which appears to be unsafe, dangerous or unfit for human habitation; 
(b)  Have authority to enter upon premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of making such inspections. Entry shall be made so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to any person in possession of the structure. If entry is denied, the enforcing officer may seek an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(c)  Report all structures which he or she believes to be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation to the governing body; 
(d)  Receive petitions as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 3, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-604. - Procedure; petition. 
Whenever a petition is filed with the enforcing officer or his or her authorized representative, by at least five residents charging that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the enforcing officer on his or her own motion that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, report such findings to the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 4, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-605. - Same—Notice. 
The governing body upon receiving a report as provided in section 7-604 shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner's agent, any lienholder of record and any occupant of the structure may appear and show cause why the structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 5, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1752.  
Sec. 7-606. - Same—Publication. 
(a)  The resolution shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of each week. At least 30 days shall elapse between the last publication and the date set for the hearing. 
(b)  A copy of the resolution shall be mailed within three days after its first publication to each owner, agent, lienholder and occupant at the last known place of residence and shall be marked "deliver to addressee only." Service of process may be made by return receipt delivery, which is effected by certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service or other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, the date of delivery, the address where delivered and the person or entity effecting delivery. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 6, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1668 , § 1, 1-5-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1752.  
Sec. 7-607. - Same—Hearing, order. 
If, after notice and hearing, the governing body determines that the structure under consideration is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall cause the resolution to be published once in the official city newspaper and a copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholders of record and occupants in the same manner provided for the notice of hearing. The resolution shall fix a reasonable time within which the repair or removal of such structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of such structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is completed, the governing body will cause the structure to be razed and removed. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 7, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-608. - Duty of owner. 
Whenever any structure within the city shall be found to be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of the property to render the same secure and safe or to remove the same. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 8, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-609. - Same—Failure to comply. 
(a)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with the order to repair, alter, improve or vacate the structure, the enforcing officer or his or her authorized representatives, may cause the structure to be repaired, altered, improved, or to be vacated and closed. 
(b)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with the order to remove or demolish the structure, the enforcing officer or his or her authorized representatives, may cause the structure to be removed and demolished. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 9, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-610. - Same—Make site safe. 
Upon removal of any structure, the owner shall fill any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other action necessary to leave the premises in a safe condition. If the owner fails to take such action, the enforcing officer may proceed to make the site safe. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 10, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-611. - Assessment of costs. 
(a)  The cost to the city of any repairs, alterations, improvements, vacating, removal or demolition by the enforcing officer or his or her authorized representatives, including making the site safe, shall be reported to the city clerk. 
(b)  The city shall give notice to the owner of the structure by restricted mail of the cost of removing the structure and making the premises safe and secure. The notice shall also state that payment of the cost is due and payable within 30 days following receipt of the notice. 
(c)  If the costs remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice, the city clerk may sell any salvage from the structure and apply the proceeds or any necessary portion thereof to pay the cost of removing the structure and making the site safe. Any proceeds in excess of that required to recover the costs shall be paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was located. 
(d)  If the proceeds of the sale of salvage or from the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the city has created a lien pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto, are insufficient to recover the above stated costs, or if there is no salvage, the balance shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall be assessed as special assessments against the lot or parcel of land on which the structure was located and the city clerk, at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs to the county clerk and who shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city as other city taxes are collected and paid. The city may pursue collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and applicable interest has been paid in full. 
(e)  If there is no salvage material, or if the moneys received from the sale of salvage or from the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the city has created a lien pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto, are insufficient to pay the costs of the work and the costs of providing notice, such costs or any portion thereof in excess of that received from the sale of salvage or any insurance proceeds may be financed, until the costs are paid, out of the general fund or by the issuance of no-fund warrants. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 11, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1755.  
Sec. 7-612. - Immediate hazard. 
When in the opinion of the governing body any structure is in such condition as to constitute an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public, the governing body may direct the enforcing officer or his or her authorized representatives to erect barricades or cause the property to be vacated, taken down, repaired, shored or otherwise made safe without delay. Such action may be taken without prior notice to or hearing of the owners, agents, lienholders and occupants. The cost of any action under this section shall be assessed against the property as provided in section 7-611. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 12, 9-5-06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, K.S.A. 12-1756.  
Sec. 7-613. - Appeals from order. 
Any person affected by an order issued by the governing body under this article may, within 30 days following service of the order, petition the district court of the county in which the structure is located for an injunction restraining the enforcing officer from carrying out the provisions of the order pending final disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 13, 9-5-06)  
Sec. 7-614. - Scope of ordinance. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the constitution, any other law or ordinance. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise or to exercise those powers granted specifically by K.S.A. 12-1750:1756. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 14, 9-5-06)  
Secs. 7-615—7-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 7-701. - Emergency telephone service. 
The governing body finds and determines it to be in the public interest, and for the protection of the public health, to provide for the operation of an emergency telephone service and the levying of an emergency telephone tax for payment of such service in those portions of the jurisdiction for which emergency telephone service has been contracted, all as provided by K.S.A. 12-5301 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 1)  
Sec. 7-702. - Emergency telephone tax. 
There shall be imposed an emergency telephone tax to provide funds for the payment of emergency telephone service in an amount not to exceed two percent of the tariff rate in those portions of the jurisdiction for which emergency telephone service is or shall be contracted, and such imposition shall be effective 61 days after the publication of this article unless a petition is filed with the county election officer signed by not less than five percent of the registered voters of the city. In the event the petition is filed, the imposition of the tax shall be effective upon a majority of the voters casting ballots in favor of the installation of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 2)  
Sec. 7-703. - Tax rate established. 
The initial tax rate is hereby established at two percent of the tariff rate in those portions of the jurisdiction for which emergency telephone service has been contracted. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 3)  
Sec. 7-704. - Same—Annually. 
At least once each calendar year, the governing body shall establish a tax rate, not to exceed the amount authorized, that together with any surplus revenues carried forward will produce sufficient revenues to fund the expenditures authorized by this article. Amounts collected in excess of that necessary within a given year shall be carried forward to subsequent years. The governing body shall make its determination of such tax rate each subsequent year no later than September 1 and shall fix the new rate to take effect commencing with the first billing period of each customer on or before the next January 1. Immediately upon making its determination and fixing the rate, the governing body shall publish in its minutes the new rate, and it shall notify by registered mail every service supplier at least 90 days before such new rate will become effective. 
(Ord. No. 1178, § 4)  
Secs. 7-705—7-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FAIR HOUSING 
 
Sec. 7-801. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 1)  
Sec. 7-802. - Definitions. 
(a)  Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(b)  Family includes a single individual. 
(c)  Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
(d)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant. 
(e)  Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 7-804 through 7-806. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 2)  
Sec. 7-803. - Unlawful practice. 
Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) and section 7-807 the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing set forth in section 7-803 shall apply to: 
(a)  All dwellings except as exempted by subsection (b). 
(b)  Nothing in section 7-804 shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24 month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempted from the application of this title only if such house is sold or rented (A) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person and (B) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 7-804 of this section, but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his or her residence. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b), a person shall be deemed in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 3)  
Sec. 7-804. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
As made applicable by section 7-803 and except as exempted by sections 7-803(b) and 7-807, it shall be unlawful: 
(a)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(b)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(c)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. 
(d)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(e)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 4)  
Sec. 7-805. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 7-803(b). 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 5)  
Sec. 7-806. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 6)  
Sec. 7-807. - Exemption. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 7)  
Sec. 7-808. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this act shall be in the city manager (hereinafter referred to as chief executive officer) of the city. 
(b)  The chief executive officer may delegate any of these functions, duties, and powers to employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. The chief executive officer shall by rule prescribe such rights of appeal from the decisions of the hearing examiners to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city, to boards of officers or to himself or herself, as shall be appropriate and in accordance with law. 
(c)  All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner affirmatively to further the purposes of this section and shall cooperate with the chief executive officer to further such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 8)  
Sec. 7-809. - Education and conciliation. 
The chief executive officer shall commence such education and conciliatory activities as will further the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 9)  
Sec. 7-810. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the chief executive officer. Complaints shall be in writing and shall contain such information and be in such form as the chief executive officer requires. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the chief executive officer shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or about to commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection (c), the chief executive officer shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve it. If the chief executive officer decides to resolve the complaints, he or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this article without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of the chief executive officer who shall make public any information in violation of this provision shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than one year. 
(b)  A complaint under subsection (a) shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended within 30 days of the date the original complaint is filed. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him or her and with the leave of the chief executive officer, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his or her answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified. 
(c)  If within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the chief executive officer, the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this article, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint with the secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The chief executive officer will assist in this filing. 
(d)  If the chief executive officer has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within 30 days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days hereafter commence a civil action in any appropriate court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights granted or protected by this article, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(e)  In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
(f)  Whenever an action filed by an individual shall come to trial, the chief executive officer shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 10)  
Sec. 7-811. - Investigations; subpoenas giving of evidence. 
(a)  In conducting an investigation the chief executive officer shall have access at all reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record, and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation; provided, however, that the chief executive officer first complies with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The chief executive officer may issue subpoenas to compel his or her access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United States district court for the district in which the investigation is taking place. The chief executive officer may administer oaths. 
(b)  Upon written application to the chief executive officer, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the chief executive officer to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the chief executive officer. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her. 
(c)  Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the chief executive officer to revoke or modify the subpoena. The chief executive officer shall grant the petition if he or she finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(d)  In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the chief executive officer or other person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom the subpoena was addressed resides, was served, or transacts business. 
(e)  Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the chief executive officer shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the chief executive officer, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record, or other document submitted to the chief executive officer pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or shall willfully neglect, or fail to make or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both. 
(f)  The city attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the chief executive officer participates as a part or as amicus pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 11)  
Sec. 7-812. - Enforcement by private persons. 
(a)  The rights granted by sections 7-803 through 7-806 may be enforced by civil actions in state or local courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred; provided however, that the court shall continue such civil case brought pursuant to this section or section 7-810(d) from time to time before bringing it to trial if the court believes that the conciliation efforts of the chief executive officer are likely to result in satisfactory settlement of the discrimination housing practice complained of in the complaint made to the chief executive officer and which practice forms the basis for the action in courts; and provided, however, that any sale, encumbrance, or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued under the authority of this article, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer, or tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action under the provisions of this article shall not be affected. 
(b)  The court may grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, and may award to the plaintiff actual damages and not more than $1,000.00 punitive damages, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff; provided, that the plaintiff in the opinion of the court is not financially able to assume the attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 12)  
Sec. 7-813. - Interference, coercion, or intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by sections 7-803 through 7-806. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 13)  
Sec. 7-814. - Prevention of intimidation in fair housing cases. 
Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, by force or threat of force willfully injuries, intimidates or interferes with, or attempts to injure, intimidate or interfere with: 
(a)  Any person because of his or her race, color, religion or national origin and because he or she is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, or contracting or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any dwelling, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or 
(b)  Any person because he or she is or has been, or in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of persons from: 
(1)  Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (a); or 
(2)  Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate; or 
(c)  Any citizen because he or she is or has been or in order to discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (a), or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate shall be fined not more than $1,000.00, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and if bodily injury results shall be fined not more than $10,000.00, or imprisoned not more than ten years, or both; and if death results shall be subject to imprisonment for any term of years or for life. 
(Ord. No. 1237, § 15)  
Secs. 7-815—7-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1384, adopted Sept. 2, 1997, repealed §§ 7-701—7-713. In as much as §§ 7-901—7-913 pertain to similar subject matter, the editor has treated the designation of repealing §§ 7-701—7-713 as a scrivener's error and additionally treated said ordinance as superseding §§ 7-901—7-913 as herein set out. Formerly §§ 7-901—7-913 derived from the 1991 Code. 
 
Sec. 7-901. - Statement of purpose. 
In order to promote public health, safety and welfare, the governing body of the city of Goodland, Kansas finds it necessary to substantially restrict the placement of inoperable vehicles on private property and to encourage the removal of vehicles which may: 
(a)  Constitute breeding grounds for flies, mosquitoes and other insects, rats, mice and other rodents, and skunks; 
(b)  Constitute a danger to persons, particularly children, because of broken glass, sharp metal protrusions, insecure mounting on blocks, jacks or other supports, and the danger of fire or explosion; 
(c)  Encourage pilfering and theft; 
(d)  Constitute a blighting influence upon the area in which they are located, thereby causing a diminution in value of the surrounding property; or 
(e)  Impair fire protection by blocking access for fire suppression equipment to adjacent buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 1, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 7-902. - Definitions. 
Where used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Building official means the duly appointed building official of the city, or his or her designated representative. 
Inoperable means junked, wrecked, fully or partially dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which it was originally constructed. Any of the following conditions shall raise a rebuttable presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
(1)  The absence of a current registration plate upon any vehicle other than a vehicle not required to bear a registration plate; 
(2)  The placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, or other supports; or 
(3)  The absence of one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon public streets. 
Occupant means a person vested with a legal right to control the possession or use of real property, regardless of whether such person holds any title to such property. 
Owner means a person vested with legal or equitable title to real property. 
Property means any real property which is set aside for use pursuant to applicable land use regulations, or upon which is located a structure designed for occupancy, regardless of whether such structure is in fact occupied. 
Stock car is a vehicle which is specialized and equipped for stock car racing as follows: 
(1)  All doors are secured shut either by being welded, bolted or chained; 
(2)  The interior of the vehicle contains racing seats or bucket seats, but not bench seats; 
(3)  The vehicle is equipped with five point seat belts; 
(4)  The vehicle contains a four point roll cage and a minimum of three bars in place of the windshield in front of the driver's seat; 
(5)  The vehicle contains no glass, plastic, upholstery, lights, mirrors, interior tin or other coverings; 
(6)  The vehicle does not have a stock fuel tank but instead contains a fuel cell; 
(7)  The vehicle runs under its own power. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed on a permanent foundation to meet building codes and capable of being fully enclosed. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except, devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationery rails or tracts. 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 2, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 1432, § 1, 3-20-2000)  
Sec. 7-903. - Storage of inoperable vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise stated in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, park or store an inoperable vehicle upon any property, or permit any such vehicle to be placed, parked or stored upon property owned or occupied by such person. It shall be lawful for a person to place, park or store one stock car upon property so long as the stock car is surrounded by a six-foot site fence that complies with the Code of the City of Goodland, section 8-205. 
(b)  Inoperable vehicles may be placed, parked or stored upon property only under the following circumstances: 
(1)  One inoperable vehicle may be located on private property in the open air for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicles may be located upon private property when located within a structure. 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 3, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 1432, § 2, 3-20-2000)  
Sec. 7-904. - Administration. 
(a)  The building official is authorized to investigate alleged violations of this article, with or without complaints from the public, and to implement and establish investigation and enforcement procedures consistent with all of the provisions hereof. 
(b)  The building official is authorized to enter upon and inspect any property, public or private, to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article. Such inspections may be conducted with or without notice; provided, that owners or occupants of private property shall be notified in advance of an inspection when it is reasonably practical to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 4, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 7-905. - Removal and disposition of inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  When the building official determines that an inoperable vehicle is placed, parked or stored in violation of this article, or that the location or condition of such vehicle endangers public safety, health, or welfare, he or she may order such vehicle to be repaired, removed or the violation otherwise cured. 
(1)  The notice shall state the condition(s) which is (are) in violation of this article. The notice shall also inform the owner or occupant of the private property that: 
a.  He, she or they shall have ten days from the date of receiving the notice to abate the condition(s) in violation; and 
b.  Failure to abate the condition(s) within the time allowed may result in prosecution as provided herein and/or abatement of the condition(s) by the city as provided herein. 
(b)  Any order issued pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the owner or occupant, if known, of the property upon which such vehicle is located. If such order cannot, with the exercise of reasonable diligence be so delivered, then service shall be made by leaving a copy of the order in some conspicuous place upon the property and mailing a notice that such copy has been left upon property to such individual or individuals by first class mail. Nothing in this subsection (b) shall be construed to prevent the building official from promptly removing a vehicle which, in his or her judgement, poses an immediate threat of serious injury or death. 
(c)  In the event the owner or occupant of private property fails or refuses to comply with the order to remove or make safe an inoperable vehicle, the building official may remove and dispose of such vehicle. Inoperable vehicles removed by the building official pursuant to this article shall be treated as impounded vehicles and may be sold or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. Proceeds from the disposition of an inoperable vehicle by the city shall be applied against the cost of removal and disposition; any excess shall be refunded to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, or the owner of the property from which it was removed, if known. If neither the owner of the vehicle nor the owner of the property can be located, such proceeds shall be deposited to the city's general fund; provided, that the owner of the vehicle or of the property from which it was removed may apply for the refund of any excess proceeds from the disposition thereof within one year from the date of impoundment. Any unreimbursed costs attributable to removal and disposition of an inoperable vehicle by the city may be certified to the county clerk and levied as a special assessment against the real property from which such vehicle was removed. The city clerk shall certify the same to the county clerk for extension on the tax rolls of the county against real property in the same manner as other special assessments. 
(d)  Vehicles moved off the premises by the owner or occupant within the allotted ten days, shall not be returned to such property in an inoperable or like condition. 
If the owner or agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise failed to effectuate receipt of a notice sent pursuant to this section during the preceding twenty-four month period the building official of the City of Goodland may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or remove a nuisance from such property in the manner provided for herein. Except as specifically provided in this subsection the building official may provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers, conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a non-resident of the City of Goodland, notice provided by this section shall be given by telephone communication or first class mail. 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 5, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 1509, § 1, 8-18-03)  
Sec. 7-906. - Penalties. 
Should the person, corporation, partnership or association fail to comply with the notice to abate the nuisance, the public officer may file a complaint in the municipal court of the city against such person, corporation, partnership or association and upon conviction of any violation of provisions of section 7-903 be liable for the following minimum punishments: 
	Fine 	Imprisonment 
First conviction 	$ 50.00 	No minimum 
Second conviction 	100.00 	No minimum 
Third conviction 	200.00 	10 days 
Fourth conviction 	300.00 	20 days 
Fifth or subsequent conviction 	500.00 	30 days 
 
(Ord. No. 1384, § 6, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 7-907. - Impoundment and storage fees. 
(a)  Impoundment fee. Whenever the Goodland Police Department or code enforcement officer shall come into possession of a motor vehicle or other property and shall cause to the same to be removed to the Goodland Police Department impoundment lot, an impoundment fee in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged to the owner thereof. 
(b)  Storage fee. In addition, a storage fee in the amount of fifteen ($15.00) per day shall be charged to the owner thereof for every day that the vehicle or other property remains in the impoundment lot after such owner has received his/her notice as specified herein. Monies collected as a result of the impoundment fee and storage fee shall be turned over to the city clerk. These monies shall be deposited into a specific account, and shall be used for police equipment and training. 
(c)  Notice of fees. Prior to the imposition of said storage fee, the Goodland Police Department or code enforcement officer shall serve in person or by certified mail upon the registered owner and any lienholder listed on the title thereof a notice stating the City of Goodland will impose the storage and impound fees as set forth above. No vehicle or other property shall be released from the impoundment lot until the towing fee, impoundment fee and storage fee have been paid to the City of Goodland. A refusal to pick up the aforementioned notice shall constitute notice. 
(Ord. No. 1396, §§ 1—3, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 1630, 3-19-12)  
Secs. 7-908—7-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Hazardous materials enumerated, § 7-111. 
 
Sec. 7-1001. - Hazardous material defined. 
As used in this article, the term "hazardous material" shall mean any compressed gas, explosive, flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizer, poison, radioactive material or any substance that due to its nature may cause death, disability or injury upon contact therewith. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 1, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1002. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any container which shall have a capacity of 150 gallons or less which shall be used for the purpose of supplying fuel. Trailers, containers or tanks containing anhydrous ammonia or other material primarily used by farmers for fertilizer purposes when such vehicles, trailers, containers or tanks are parked or housed upon property designated for the placement of such vehicle, trailer, containers or tanks, by any farmers cooperative, elevator company or farm supply store located within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 2, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1003. - Transportation. 
Except as provided in section 7-1004, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to transport any hazardous material upon any street, avenue, highway, road, alley or any other public right-of-way in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 3, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1004. - Hazardous materials routes. 
The provisions of section 7-1003 shall apply to all streets, avenues, highways, alleys or other public right-of-ways within the city except those specified within this section where transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed. Transportation of hazardous materials shall be allowed upon the following streets, avenues, highways or roadways: 
(a)  17th Street. 
(b)  Caldwell. 
(c)  8th Street. 
(d)  Cattletrail. 
(e)  Hwy. 24. 
(f)  Hwy. 27. 
(g)  Cherry from Hwy. 24 to 17th Street. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 4, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1005. - Parking of vehicles or trailers and hazardous materials. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to park any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material within the city. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers parked for continuous periods of time not to exceed one hour where such vehicles, trailers or semi-trailers are parked along those routes specified in section 7-1004. 
(c)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer carrying any hazardous material where such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is not parked within 500 feet of any structure used for human habitation. 
(d)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to any vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer while loading or unloading during the course of normal commercial business. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 5, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1006. - Removal of illegally parked trailers. 
If any vehicle, trailer or a semi-trailer is found parked in violation of the provisions of this article, any law enforcement officer may require the owner, operator or lessee of the trailer to move it within two hours. If such removal is not accomplished on the order of any such officer, it may be accomplished by any such officer by any reasonable means. The expense of such removal shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 6, 2-16-93)  
Sec. 7-1007. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or company violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than five days or by both fine and imprisonment, provided that each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1304, § 7, 2-16-93)  
Secs. 7-1008—7-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
 
Sec. 7-1101. - Storage. 
Containers allowed for the storage of liquefied petroleum within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be limited to a maximum size of 500 gallons aggregate water capacity. Containers of a size greater than 100 gallons water capacity shall be placed on a metal or concrete stand permanently attached to the ground. Each container used for the storage of liquefied petroleum shall have a label approved by DOT or ICC stating the capacity of the container, a serial number, and be in compliance with NFPA 58. Liquefied petroleum containers supplying trailer houses shall be governed by section 9-119 of the Code for the City of Goodland. This article shall not apply to liquefied petroleum bulk storage facilities for the resale of liquefied petroleum. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 3-19-01)  
Sec. 7-1102. - Portable containers. 
Portable containers are allowed to be used in buildings or areas of buildings undergoing construction or for temporary heating as set forth in the Fire Code adopted by the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 2, 3-19-01)  
Sec. 7-1103. - Permit and approval required. 
Prior to the storage and use of liquefied petroleum, a person, firm or corporation shall apply for a plumbing permit in the office of inspections/code enforcement. Prior to approval of the application the building inspector or fire chief for the City of Goodland shall make a site inspection to approve the location of the storage tank and inspect the appliances that will use liquefied petroleum as a fuel source. The installation of liquefied petroleum burning appliances, piping and all appurtenances shall meet all codes adopted by the governing body of the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 3, 3-19-01)  
Sec. 7-1104. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 3-19-01)  
Chapter 8 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 8-101. - Taxicab license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to manage or operate a motor vehicle for the transportation of passengers for hire within the city without first having obtained from the city a license therefor to be issued by the city clerk. 
(K.S.A. 8-235; Ord. No. 850, § 1)  
Sec. 8-102. - Definition. 
All motor or self-propelled vehicles used for carrying passengers for hire from one point to another within the city, or from a point within the city to a point outside the city, shall be designated as taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 2)  
Sec. 8-103. - Registration number. 
Before the city clerk shall issue the license, the applicant shall list with the city clerk the state license number and engine number of each and every car or vehicle used and operated in such service. Each vehicle so operated shall be given a separate registration number by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3)  
Sec. 8-104. - License fee. 
Before the city clerk shall issue a license to manage or operate a motor vehicle for the transportation of passengers for hire, as provided for in this article, the applicant for such license shall pay the city clerk the sum of $1.00 as license fee for each car. Such charge shall be an annual charge and such license may be renewed annually, and shall authorize applicant to operate any vehicle covered by the insurance policy or policies herein provided for. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3)  
Sec. 8-105. - Driver's license. 
All drivers operating vehicles for transportation of passengers for hire shall have a class "C" driver's license from the State of Kansas, as provided by the state law. 
(K.S.A. 8-234b)  
Sec. 8-106. - Insurance. 
The applicant shall also deposit with the city clerk a copy of the insurance policy on each vehicle, with coverage in the amount required by state law. The policy shall further provide that it cannot be canceled until written notice of such cancellation shall have been filed with the city clerk by the insurance carrier or the insured. If such policy is canceled, then the license for the operation of such motor vehicle shall automatically become void and of no effect until a new insurance policy, as herein provided, is filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3)  
Sec. 8-107. - Influence of drugs or intoxicated. 
Any driver of motor vehicles for the transportation of passengers for hire, who shall be convicted in this state of driving a motor vehicle in an intoxicated condition, or while under the influence of drugs, shall not be permitted to operate or drive motor vehicles for transportation of passengers for hire within the city. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 4)  
Sec. 8-108. - Suspension of license. 
The governing body upon satisfactory proof that any person operating any motor or self-propelled vehicle for which a license as provided by the provisions of this article, has been guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article, or the ordinances of the city, regarding the use of the streets of the city for driving, or incompetency or misconduct, may, in their discretion and in addition to the punishment hereinafter prescribed, suspend, for a period of time to be fixed by the governing body, the license issued for the operation of such vehicle, or may, in their discretion, absolutely revoke such license, and during such period of time as such license may be suspended, or after such license may have been revoked, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, their agents or employees, to operate the vehicle upon the streets of the city for any of the purposes hereinbefore named, without first securing the consent of the governing body of the city, if such license be suspended, or without first applying for, and securing, a new license for such car, after the original license shall have been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 5)  
Sec. 8-109. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police is hereby designated as taxicab inspector, and it shall be his or her special power and duty to enforce all the provisions of this article. The chief shall furnish the governing body all information concerning the violation of any of the provisions of this article, or the ordinances, of the city, regarding the use of the streets of the city for traffic, or the misconduct or incompetency of any person operating any motor or self-propelled vehicle for which a license is required, by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 6)  
ARTICLE II. - JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS 
 
Sec. 8-201. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or any agent, officer, member or employee thereof, to maintain, operate or conduct any junk or salvage yard in the corporate city limits without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 1)  
Sec. 8-202. - Definition. 
For the purpose of construing and applying this article, a "junk or salvage yard" is any place or premises where used motor vehicles, farm machinery, or tractors, or parts thereof, or other used articles are collected, dismantled or taken apart or where old metal or rags, or bones or paper, or any or all of these or similar used articles are collected, whether for sale, processing or other purposes whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 2)  
Sec. 8-203. - Application. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation desiring a license to maintain, operate or conduct any junk or salvage yard within the city, shall make application therefor to the city council, in writing, which application shall contain the following information: The name of the applicant and his or her street address; if for a partnership or association, the name of each partner or associate and the home address of each, and if for a corporation, the name thereof, the names of the officers thereof and their addresses, the state in which the corporation is incorporated and the place of its principal office and place of business. Such application shall further show the location at which the applicant proposes to maintain, operate or conduct such junk or salvage yard and the name under which the business is to be maintained, operated or conducted. Such application must be accompanied by the license fee hereinafter prescribed. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 3)  
Sec. 8-204. - Notice. 
Before any application for a license under this article shall be entertained by the city council, the applicant must have given public notice of such application by publication in the official city paper at least ten days before the application, such notice must be filed with the city clerk. The city council shall consider any application of a license at its first regular meeting after the filing of such application and after notice and proof thereof have been given and made as hereinafter provided and the notice of hearing shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 4)  
Sec. 8-205. - Granting license. 
(a)  When the city council shall be satisfied that the applicant for a license hereunder shall have made proper application and given notice as required in section 8-204, a license shall be granted upon the payment of the fee required under this article when the city council shall be satisfied that the business proposed to be carried on shall not be or become a nuisance under the laws of Kansas or the same shall not be hazardous to the health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The governing body in its discretion may require that the premises, upon which any junk or salvage yard may be located, be enclosed by a substantial fence to prevent trespassing thereon or the deposit or scattering of salvage or other material from the yard upon the street, parking or sidewalk adjacent to such premises. 
(b)  A substantial fence is a fence that is sight obscuring, and constructed of material that will enhance the beauty of the surrounding area. Such fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height, as measured from the ground level at the position where the fence will be placed. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 5)  
Sec. 8-206. - Fees. 
Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation engaging in the business of maintaining, operating or conducting any junk or salvage yard or business in the city shall pay an annual license fee of $25.00. Licenses shall be for one year from date of issuance, subject to revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 6)  
Sec. 8-207. - Nontransferable. 
Every license issued hereunder shall be nontransferable, both as to the license and to the location of such licensed business and shall be subject to revocation as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 7)  
Sec. 8-208. - Revocation. 
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the governing body at any time upon notice to and the affording of an opportunity to any license to be heard on the question of revoking his or her license and upon a showing that the licensee has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of this article. Upon any such revocation, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 8)  
Sec. 8-209. - Register. 
Every person, firm, partnership, association or corporation maintaining, operating or conducting any junk or salvage yard in the city, shall keep a register, in which he or she shall at the time of the purchase or receipt of any article or articles purchased, received or kept in such junk or salvage yard, enter the name and address of any and all persons from whom he or she received such property and shall keep the register open at all times to inspection of any police officer asking or demanding the same and shall have been received. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 9)  
Sec. 8-210. - Minors. 
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or any agent, officer or employee thereof shall purchase, take or receive any article or property of or from a minor unless such minor be accompanied by his or her legal or natural guardian. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 10)  
Sec. 8-211. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, or any person acting for or employed by such person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provisions, regulation or requirement of this article, shall upon conviction be fined in any sum not exceeding $100.00. Each day that any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall maintain, operate or conduct a junk or salvage yard within the city without a license therefor or after the license shall have been revoked, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1216, § 11)  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 8-301. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall be considered to have the following meanings: 
Canvasser or solicitor shall mean any individual not a resident of Sherman County, whose business is mainly or principally carried on by traveling either by foot, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Such definition shall include any person, who, for himself, herself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Peddler shall mean any person, not a resident of Sherman County, Kansas, traveling by foot, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad boxcar or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. 
Residence shall mean and include every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more person, contained within any type of building structure. 
Soliciting shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever; or 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or character; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication. 
Street salesman shall mean any person, not a resident of Sherman County, Kansas, engaged in any manner in selling merchandise of any kind from a vehicle or stand temporarily located on the public streets or sidewalks of this city. 
Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor are defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, not a resident of Sherman County, Kansas, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within such city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. Such definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 1, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-302. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the activities defined in the preceding sections of this article, within the corporate limits of the city without then having an unrevoked and unexpired license therefor in his or her possession and issued by the city clerk. 
(b)  The governing body may waive the license requirements of this section for any person, firm or corporation exempt from the payment of a license fee under section 8-306(c). 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 2, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-303. - Same—Application required. 
Before the city clerk may issue any license required by this article, he or she shall require a sworn application in writing prepared in duplicate on a form to be supplied by the city clerk which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant. 
(3)  Identification of applicant including drivers license number, date of birth, expiration date of license and description of applicant. 
(4)  Identification of vehicle used by applicant including license therefor used by applicant in conducting his or her business. 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the business to be carried on or the goods to be sold and the length of time such applicant has been engaged in the business. 
(6)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing such relationships, including the authority by the employer authorizing the applicant to represent the employer in conducting business. 
(7)  The length of time which business is proposed to be carried on. 
(8)  The place where services are to be performed or where the goods or property proposed to be sold or orders taken for the sale thereof are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(9)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 90 days prior to the date of making application which picture shall be at least two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; or in lieu thereof, the fingerprints of the applicant may be taken by the chief of police or his or her designee and filed with the application. 
(10)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has within two years prior to the date of the application been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor (other than minor traffic violations) or violation of any municipal law regulating peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers and giving the nature of the offenses, the punishment assessed therefor, if any, and the city and state where conviction occurred. 
(11)  The applicant's Kansas Sales Tax number. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 3, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-304. - Same—Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the above application from an applicant the city clerk shall refer the same to the chief of police who shall cause an investigation of the facts stated therein to be made within a period not to exceed five days. 
(b)  If as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or the facts stated therein to be untrue, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his or her findings and endorse his or her disapproval of the application and the reasons for the same and shall return the application to the city clerk who then shall notify the applicant that his or her application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(c)  If however, the investigation of such application discloses that the character and business responsibility and the facts stated in the application are satisfactory and true, the chief of police shall endorse his or her findings and approval on the application and return the same to the city clerk who shall, upon payment of the license and investigation fees prescribed, issue a license to the applicant to engage in the business described in the application. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer and shall show the name and address of the licensee, the date of issuance and length of time the license shall be operative, and the nature of the business involved. The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of all such licenses issued and submit a copy of such license to the chief of police. The licensee shall carry the license certificate at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 4, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-305. - Same—Investigation fee. 
At the time of filing the application, a fee of $20.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated in the foregoing application. The payment of such fees shall not be required from any producer, grower or agent or employee of such grower, engaged in the sale of agricultural, farm, garden, or aquacultural products grown by such growers within the State of Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 5, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 1530, § 1, 6-5-05)  
Sec. 8-306. - License fee; time limits; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c), the fee for the license required pursuant to section 8-302 shall be in the amount of $5.00 per each day, or portion thereof, that the licensee shall operate within the city limits. In no event, however, shall fees in excess of $100.00 be collected from a licensee during any twelve-month period of time. 
(b)  Any such license granted upon application as required hereinabove shall be limited to and effective only on the days set out in the license. 
(c)  No license fee shall be required of: 
(1)  Any person selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller; 
(2)  Any businesses, trades or occupations which are part of fairs or celebrations sponsored by the city or any other governmental subdivision, or the state, or when part of all of the expenses of the fairs or celebrations are paid for by the city, any other governmental subdivision, or the state; and 
(3)  Any not-for-profit or charitable organization as determined by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 6, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-307. - Denial, revocation or suspension of license; notice. 
The city clerk or chief of police may deny any application or may revoke or suspend for a period of not to exceed 30 days any license issued under this article, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conducting a business as defined in section 8-301 in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the city. Notice of the denial, revocation or suspension of a license shall be given in writing to the applicant or mailed to his or her last known address and the city clerk shall set forth the grounds of such denial, revocation or suspension. 
(5)  Conviction of the crime of theft, larceny, fraud, embezzlement or any felony within two years prior to the application date. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 7, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-308. - Appeal to governing body. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or city clerk in the denial of an application or revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this article, shall have the right of appeal to the governing body. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk within 14 days after notice of revocation, suspension or denial of the license has been given to or mailed to such applicant's last known address and shall set forth the grounds for appeal. 
(c)  The governing body shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided herein for notice of denial, revocation or suspension. 
(d)  The decision and order of the governing body on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 8, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-309. - Regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make a false or fraudulent statement concerning the quality or nature of his or her goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same. 
(b)  Licensees are required to exhibit their license at the request of any person to whom they attempt to sell their goods, wares or merchandise or take orders for future delivery of the same. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 9, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-310. - Use of streets and sidewalks. 
Except when authorized in writing by the city clerk, no peddler, solicitor or canvasser or any other person shall have exclusive right to any location in the public streets for the purpose of selling or soliciting sales, nor shall any person be permitted a stationary location in the public streets, nor shall any person be permitted to operate in the sidewalks and streets within the fire limits of the city or any congested area where his or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 10, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-311. - Disturbing the peace. 
Except when authorized in writing by the city clerk, no licensee nor any person on his or her behalf, shall use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any of the street, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 11, 10-6-97)  
Sec. 8-312. - Penalty. 
Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 12, 10-6-97)  
Chapter 9 - MOBILE HOMES, CAMPERS AND HOUSE TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
Terms as used in this article shall be defined as follows: 
Building is any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Camp is a trailer camp. 
Health officer is the county health officer of Sherman County, Kansas. 
House trailer is a vehicular, portable dwelling unit designed especially for short-term occupancy, such as: Travel trailers, campers, converted buses and other similar units whether self-propelled, pulled or hauled and are designed primarily for highway travel without a special permit; and/or does not comply with all the requirements of the minimum housing code as a dwelling unit. 
Inspection officer is the city building inspector or official inspector designated by the city manager. 
Mobile home is a movable, detached single-family dwelling unit with all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and having plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(2)  Designed and constructed on a chassis that is capable of being transported after fabrication on its own wheels (or detached wheels). 
(3)  Arrive at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on supports, connections to utilities and the like. 
Mobile home, double wide or sectional is a mobile home, as defined above, and having been built in two sections, approximately of equal length, at the factory, which two sections are transported over the road separately, with assembly into one structure of a width of not less than 20 feet occurring at the destination. Small room or porch additions shall not be defined as double wide. 
Mobile home park is a tract of land containing five acres or more with suitable drives, utilities and other supporting elements, and devoted to the sole purpose of accommodating mobile homes and modular homes on a permanent basis. A mobile home park cannot be located in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
Mobile home, single wide is a mobile home, as defined above, and being of a width of not more than 14 feet, measured between the permanent sidewalls thereof. 
Mobile or modular home subdivision is an area of land containing not less than 20 lots, and the public streets necessary to serve such lots, the purpose of which is to convey in feet the individual lots for the location of mobile homes and/or modular homes in a permanent fashion on permanent foundations. Each individual lot must contain a minimum of 7,000 sq. feet for a mobile home subdivision and 7,500 sq. feet for a modular home subdivision. 
Mobile home space is the area of land within a mobile home park set aside for use as a site for one mobile home, including the open spaces around the mobile home, as are required in this article. 
Modular home is a residential structure, assembled in total or in several sections at a factory, and transported over the road by truck to its destination. A modular home, as distinct from a mobile home, shall have exterior building materials and appearance similar to the customary single family structures in the neighborhood, and shall be permanently situated on a concrete slab or foundation and meet all building codes. 
Occupy, occupancy, or occupied is the use of any mobile home or house trailer by any person for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes for any period of four or more consecutive days. 
Person is any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation. 
Roadway is any private street located within a park or camp and providing for the general vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the park or camp. 
Service building is a building housing all of the following: Separate toilet facilities for men and women, laundry facilities and separate bath or shower accommodations. Such building may also include other associated uses such as an office and recreational facilities for use in park. 
Street is a right-of-way which affords principal means of vehicular access to or through a mobile home or trailer park, and which is held in fee by the public or a governmental unit thereof. 
Trailer is a vehicle equipped with wheels and normally towed over the road behind an automobile or light truck. 
Trailer, advertising is a trailer, as defined above, but carrying or having attached thereto, a sign, billboard or other media for advertising purposes, such advertising being the prime purpose and use of the trailer. 
Trailer camp is a tract of land with five acres or more, containing sites for the overnight or short-term parking of house trailers. A trailer camp cannot be located in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. 
Trailer, hauling is a trailer, as defined above and designed and normally used for over the road transportation of belongings, equipment, merchandise, livestock and other objects, but not equipped for human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 1; Ord. No. 922, § 4)  
Sec. 9-102. - Location of mobile homes, house trailers. 
Provisions relating to mobile homes and house trailers in the city shall be as follows: 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, a single wide mobile home may be permitted only in an approved mobile home park. A double wide or sectional mobile home may be permitted in an approved mobile home park or on a foundation on a lot which complies with all of the regulations of the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the city. A mobile home may also be permitted by the governing body, after public hearing, for purposes of temporary relief from a local disaster, such as fire, wind or flood damage; provided, that such mobile home shall be removed from the premises within six months of its original placement. A mobile home shall not be temporarily or permanently parked or located on any public street or alley, not on any lot containing a residential or business structure, except when in complete conformity with the zoning and other ordinances of the city; 
(b)  A mobile home may be occupied at a construction site by a night watchman when approved by the inspector when deemed necessary for security purposes. Such permission may be canceled by the inspector upon three days' written notice, when in his opinion the intent of this section is being violated; 
(c)  A mobile home may be occupied other than within a park for a period not to exceed 30 days when a permit is secured in accordance with section 9-106(c) of this article; 
(d)  A house trailer may be occupied other than within a camp for a period not to exceed 30 days when a permit is secured in accordance with section 9-106(c) of this article; 
(e)  A house trailer may occupy a mobile home space in a park for a period not to exceed 30 days; provided, that a service building as required for a trailer camp is within 500 feet of the space so occupied. Under no circumstances shall the number of mobile home spaces within a park be occupied by house trailers in excess of five percent of the total number of mobile home spaces provided, or a total of three, whichever is larger. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 2)  
Sec. 9-103. - Park license. 
All persons operating parks existing on the effective date of this code shall obtain a park license, upon the expiration of their existing license, with such new license being issued only after approval by the city inspection officer and the county health officer and only after payment of the required fee. All persons developing new parks after the effective date of this code shall obtain a park license before occupancy of such park, with such license being issued only after payment of the required fee. The park licenses for both existing and new parks shall be renewed annually, 12 months from the date of the previous license, after approval by the inspection officer and health officer and after the payment of the required fee. No person shall operate a park without a current park license. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 3)  
Sec. 9-104. - Camp license. 
All persons operating camps existing on the effective date of this code shall obtain a camp license, upon the expiration of their existing park license, with such new license being issued only after approval by the inspection officer and the health officer and only after payment of the required fee. All persons developing new camps after the effective date of this code shall obtain a camp license before occupancy of such camp, with such license being issued only after compliance with, and in accordance to, the same procedure as described in section 6-103 of this article for issuance of a park license involving approval by appropriate officers, annual renewal and payment of the required fee. No person shall operate a camp without an approved current license. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 4)  
Sec. 9-105. - Permits for individual mobile homes, house trailers. 
Prior to occupying a mobile home or a house trailer located other than within a park or camp, a permit shall be obtained as permitted by subsections 9-102(c) and (d) with such permit being issued only after approval of the required application by the inspection officer and after payment of the required fee. 
Mobile homes shall obtain the required license for parking as defined in this section. Even though the license is issued for a one-year period, the license shall not be authorization to continue a mobile home location in violation of conditions of this article, and the unused portion of the license is not refundable. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 5)  
Sec. 9-106. - License, permit fees. 
License and permit fees for mobile homes, parks, trailers and camps shall be as follows: 
(a)  The annual license fee for a park shall be as follows: 
(1)  One mobile home space ..... $ 15.00 
(2)  Two mobile home spaces ..... 30.00 
(3)  Three to 15 mobile home spaces ..... 40.00 
(4)  Sixteen to 25 mobile home spaces ..... 50.00 
(5)  Twenty-six to 50 mobile home spaces ..... 70.00 
(6)  Fifty-one to 75 mobile home spaces ..... 100.00 
(7)  Seventy-six to 150 mobile home spaces ..... 200.00 
(8)  Over 150 mobile home spaces ..... 200.00 
Plus $10.00 for each ten mobile home spaces, or major fraction thereof, over 150. 
(b)  The annual license fee for a camp shall be as follows: 
An inspection fee of $2.00 per house trailer space, with a maximum fee of ..... 50.00 
(c)  A temporary permit may be issued for a mobile home or house trailer to be occupied other than within a park or camp, permitted in accordance with sections 9-102(c) and 9-102(d) of this article, for a period not to exceed 30 days, upon the payment of a fee of $5.00. There shall not be more than two such permits issued for the placement of a mobile home or house trailer in accordance with sections 9-102(c) and 9-102(d) on the same property in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 6)  
Sec. 9-107. - Existing parks. 
All persons operating existing parks shall obtain the appropriate license as required by section 9-103 or 9-104 of this article upon the expiration of the current park license. The inspection officer shall determine the appropriate classification for each park based on the records that have been filed with the various departments of the city in the applications for the existing license. 
(a)  All persons operating parks existing on the effective date of this code shall be permitted to operate as nonstandard parks; 
(b)  In addition, all existing parks shall comply with sections 9-120 and 9-121 of this article; 
(c)  No addition for a new park shall be made to any existing park except as permitted by section 9-108 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 7)  
Sec. 9-108. - Applications for license for new parks and camps. 
All persons developing new parks and camps shall make an application to the inspection officer for the appropriate park or camp license. Applications for mobile home parks may be made only after a development plan has been approved by the planning commission and recommended to the governing body of the city for their approval. When platting is required the development plan shall be submitted at the preliminary platting stage and when approved shall constitute approval by the planning commission and recommended to the governing body of the city for their approval. When platting is not required, a sketch plan showing the relationship of the mobile home spaces to the roadways, parking, open space and other information affecting the overall environment of the park may be submitted at any time for approval by the planning commission and recommended to the governing body of the city for their approval. 
The application to the inspection officer shall be in triplicate, in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the following: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  The location and legal description of the park or camp; 
(c)  Three complete sets of plans showing compliance with all applicable provisions of this article, including a plot plan drawn to scale, at not less than one inch equal to 100 feet, showing the park or camp dimensions; 
(d)  Number and location of mobile home or house trailer spaces; 
(e)  Location and width of roadways, sidewalks, off-street parking and easements; 
(f)  Location, size and specifications of buildings, sewers, water system and water supply system; 
(g)  The existing topography and a drainage grading plan. 
The submitted plans may be approved by the inspection officer for construction only after they have been reviewed and approved by the health officer, and one returned to the applicant. Approval and issuance of a park license for such new parks, and of a camp license for such new camps, shall not be made until construction in accordance with the approved plans has been completed. 
An application for any addition to an existing park shall be processed as an application for a new park. Only those existing parks determined to be nonstandard parks as set forth in section 9-107 of this article or existing parks complying with this article may be expanded. Such application, in addition to the information as required above, shall designate the portion of the park that is nonstandard. The expansion of any park shall conform to this article and under no circumstances shall the total park area be less than the area required for a new park. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 8)  
Sec. 9-109. - Application for mobile home park. 
Any person desirous of locating a mobile home in accordance with this code may make an application to the inspection officer for a mobile home park license. Such application shall be in triplicate, in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the following: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  The location and legal description of property where the mobile home is requested to be located; 
(c)  Three copies of a plot plan drawn to scale at not less than one inch equal to 30 feet, showing the boundaries and dimensions of the application area; 
(d)  Location of existing buildings and/or structures, if any, and how such mobile home will be located and connected to the utilities. The submitted plans may be tentatively approved by the inspection officer and health officer only if such plans shall show that compliance with the following minimum requirements can be met: 
(1)  Area to be provided or allotted the mobile home shall contain not less than 3,500 square feet or the area required for a single-family dwelling in the district wherein located, whichever is larger. This shall not in any way interfere with the area required for a structure already located on the property. 
(2)  A side setback of six feet, a front setback of 25 feet, a rear setback of ten feet, and a clearance of 20 feet from any building located on the property, can and will be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 9)  
Sec. 9-110. - Application; temporary permit, individual mobile home, house trailer. 
Any person desirous of locating a mobile home or house trailer in accordance with sections 9-102(c) and 9-102(d) of this article, shall make an application to the inspection officer for a temporary permit. Such application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the following: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(b)  The location and legal description of property where the mobile home or house trailer is requested to be located; and 
(c)  Shall provide all other applicable information as follows: 
(1)  Those applications requested in accordance with section 9-102(c) or 9-102(d) shall give the reason such application is being applied for, and shall give the number of days the mobile home or house trailer is intended to be parked which in no event shall exceed 30. The application shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale, showing the legal description and boundaries of the application area, location of existing buildings, and the location of where the mobile home or house trailer will be parked. 
(2)  The connection of the mobile home or house trailer to any utility shall be in accordance with all applicable regulations of the code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 10)  
Sec. 9-111. - Park, camp location. 
All parks and camps shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure adequate drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. Plans and specifications for the drainage and grading system, including roadways, storm sewers and appurtenances, and general drainage and grading shall be approved by the city building inspector. No park or camp shall be located in an R-1, R-2 and R-3 district. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 11)  
Sec. 9-112. - Park, camp layouts. 
Provisions relating to mobile home park and trailer camp layouts shall be as follows: 
(a)  Area. Mobile home parks shall contain a minimum of 3,500 square feet for each mobile home. Trailer camps shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet for each trailer or camping space; 
(b)  Setbacks. All mobile homes and house trailers shall be so located as to maintain a setback no less than 20 feet from any public street or, highway right-of-way; as to maintain a setback no less than ten feet from the edge of a park or camp roadway or sidewalk; and as to maintain a setback no less than ten feet from any side or rear boundary line when such boundary is not common to any public street or highway right-of-way; 
(c)  Clearance. All mobile homes or house trailers shall be so located as to maintain a clearance of not less than 17 feet from another mobile home, house trailer or appurtenance thereto within the same mobile home park or trailer camp; and as to maintain a clearance of not less than 17 feet from any building or service building within the park or camp; 
(d)  Roadways and sidewalks. All mobile home or house trailer space shall abut upon a park or camp roadway, with no mobile home or house trailer having its direct access from a public street or highway unless such mobile home is located on a lot in a mobile home subdivision or is located in accordance with section 9-109 of this article. All two-way roadways shall not be less than 30 feet, one-way roadways may be 20 feet. All roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway, with all deadend roadways being provided an adequate vehicular turn around (cul-de-sac) with a diameter of not less than 80 feet from centerline of turn around or cul-de-sac. All roadways within the park or camp shall be surfaced with a minimum of three-inch aggregate-asphalt pavement or six-inch reinforced concrete. Any other type of surfacing must be approved by the governing body of the city; 
(e)  Identification of roadways and spaces. All park and camp roadways and mobile home or house trailer spaces shall be clearly identified with letters or numerals of a light reflecting material. Such letters or numerals are to be a minimum of two inches in height. Such identification shall be in complete agreement with the plan prepared under section 9-107 or section 9-109 of this article; 
(f)  Recreation space. Each mobile home park shall devote sufficient area to recreation space for the use and enjoyment of the occupants of the park, for approval on a plat submitted to the planning commission and recommended to the governing body of the city for their approval, prior to construction. Required setbacks and clearances, and the roadways, shall not be considered as recreational space; 
(g)  Lighting. All park and camp roadways shall be lighted from dusk to dawn in a proper and sufficient manner, as provided by the plat for construction and with approval of the planning commission and governing body of the city. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 12)  
Sec. 9-113. - Service buildings. 
Each park serving or intended to serve one or more house trailers, and all camps, shall be provided with one or more service buildings which shall: 
(a)  Be located no nearer than 17 feet from a mobile home or house trailer in a camp; 
(b)  Be so located that any house trailer which it serves shall not be parked more than 500 feet from it; 
(c)  Be of permanent type construction and be adequately lighted; 
(d)  Be of moisture resistant material to permit frequent washing and cleaning; 
(e)  Have one flush type toilet, one lavatory and one shower or bathtub for females; and one flush type toilet, one lavatory, one shower or bathtub for males for up to 20 house trailers. One additional unit of the above plumbing facilities shall be provided for each sex for each 20 additional house trailers served or major fraction thereof. All lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be connected with both hot and cold running water; 
(f)  Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit in the building and provide hot water (140° F.) at a minimum rate of eight gallons per hour for the required fixture units; 
(g)  Have an accessible, adequate, safe and potable water supply of cold water; 
(h)  Have all rooms well ventilated with all openings effectively screened; 
(i)  Have at least one slop water closet or other facility suitable for cleaning and sanitizing waste receptacles located inside park premises; 
(j)  Comply with all applicable ordinances of this code, regarding the construction of buildings and the installation of electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning systems; 
(k)  Be maintained in a clean sanitary condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupants or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 13)  
Sec. 9-114. - Water supply. 
Provisions relating to the water supply in mobile home parks and trailer camps in the city shall be as follows: 
(a)  Required. An accessible, safe and potable supply of water as approved by the health officer shall be provided in each park or camp. If city water is available to the park or camp, it shall be used; 
(b)  Layout. The size and location of water mains and fire hydrants shall be in accordance with the fire code of the city, and with approval of the city building official; 
(c)  Service connections. Individual water service connections shall be provided at each mobile home space. Such connections shall be located at least four inches above ground surface, at least three-quarters inch in diameter and equipped with a three-quarters inch valve outlet. The outlet shall be protected from surface water flooding and all pipes shall be protected against freezing. Below ground shutoff valves may be used but stop and waste valves shall not be used. When service connections are provided for house trailer spaces they shall comply with the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 14)  
Sec. 9-115. - Sewage disposal. 
Provisions relating to sewage disposal in mobile home parks and trailer camps shall be as follows: 
(a)  Individual sewer connections. Sewer connections shall be provided for each mobile home space in accordance with this code. If individual connections are provided for house trailers, they shall be of similar construction; 
(b)  Design. Any sewage system connection to the city sewer system shall be in accordance with all applicable requirements of this code; 
(c)  Camps. Shall provide sanitary stations for the sole purposes of removing and disposing of wastes from holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 15)  
Sec. 9-116. - Garbage and refuse. 
Provisions for garbage and refuse storage, collection and disposal shall be maintained so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution, and all garbage and refuse storage areas that uses can or barrel type containers, shall be properly screened from public view, and shall comply with the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 16)  
Sec. 9-117. - Rodents and insects. 
Provisions relating to infestation of rodents and insects in mobile home parks and trailer camps shall be as follows: 
(a)  Maintenance free from infestation. Mobile home parks and trailer camps shall be maintained free of excessive insect or rodent infestation; 
(b)  Preventive environmental maintenance. The mobile home park or trailer camp management shall keep all areas outside of the confines of the individual mobile homes or house trailers reasonably free of breeding, harboring and feeding places for rodents and insects. Such areas shall be kept free of litter, trash, salvage material, junk and weeds or other obnoxious vegetation growths in excess of 12 inches in height. Individual mobile home or house trailer occupants shall be responsible for the extermination of any insect or rodent infestation occurring within individual mobile homes or house trailers. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 17)  
Sec. 9-118. - Electricity. 
A weather proof electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided for each mobile home or house trailer space. All electrical wiring shall comply with applicable provisions of the electrical code of the city. No power lines shall be permitted to lie on the ground. All electric wiring must be underground in mobile home parks and trailer camps. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 18)  
Sec. 9-119. - Fuel gas. 
Provisions relating to fuel gas in mobile home parks and trailer camps shall be as follows: 
(a)  Liquefied petroleum gas. When liquefied petroleum gas is used, containers for such gas shall not hold more than 25 gallons water capacity; shall be the liquefied petroleum gas containers approved by the Interstate Commerce Commission for its intended purpose; and shall be integrally attached to the mobile home or house trailer in a manner approved by the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association, Inc. In the absence of the heretofore mentioned installation, aboveground or underground containers may be connected to mobile homes if such containers are located on a firm fire resistive base no closer to a mobile home or building as set forth in section 9-114 of this chapter. Such containers shall be connected to a mobile home as required by this code for any permanent structure and shall be equipped with an excess flow valve at the discharge valve of the container. Gas lines shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches below grade from the container to a point at or below the mobile home; 
(b)  Natural gas. Natural gas may be connected to mobile homes or house trailers under the following conditions: 
(1)  All gas lines supplying mobile homes or house trailers shall be of adequate size to provide a sufficient supply of gas that will allow all appliances in the mobile home or house trailer to operate at their normal rate of capacity. 
(2)  Where a gas utility company supplies gas to individual mobile homes or house trailers the service line to the mobile home or house trailer shall be sized as required by the utility serving the same and a meter loop shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the utility company. 
(3)  All gas lines including gas service lines serving the mobile home or house trailer shall be buried not less than 18 inches below grade to a point at or below the mobile home or house trailer and otherwise be installed in accordance with this code. 
(4)  For each individual mobile home or house trailer there shall be a gas stop cock and an American Gas Association approved flexible connector. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 19)  
Sec. 9-120. - Register. 
It shall be the duty of a person operating each park and camp to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home and house trailer owners and tenants located within each park and camp. The register shall contain the name and address of each occupant, and the dates or arrival and departure of each mobile home or house trailer. The person operating each park or camp shall keep the register available for inspection at all reasonable hours by law enforcement officers, assessor, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The original records of the register shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of registration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the person operating each park and camp to notify the inspection officer of damage exceeding $500.00 by fire or storm to any mobile home or house trailer in his park or camp. The inspection officer shall compile all such information into categories of losses and their causes, as nearly as can be determined for future reference. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 20)  
Sec. 9-121. - Alterations and additions. 
Provisions relating to alterations and additions to mobile homes and house trailers shall be as follows: 
(a)  Alterations and additions to mobile homes which are affected by provisions herein, within or to a park and facilities, shall be made only after application to the inspection officer and in conformity with all of the sections of this code; 
(b)  No additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a part of any mobile home or house trailer; 
Exception: Accessory structures not exceeding an area of 300 square feet, carports and residential patio structures may be attached to or become a part of a mobile home if such structure complies in all respects to the building codes of the city, and with the written approval of the inspection officer. Skirting of mobile homes is permissible only with noncombustible materials; 
(c)  Every mobile home regulated by the article shall be anchored to the ground by a method approved by the inspection officer. This anchorage shall be adequate to withstand the minimum horizontal wind and uplift pressures as set forth in the building code of the city, for permanent structures. This regulation shall apply to all new mobile home parks and individual installations, and shall also thereafter apply whenever a mobile home is moved in, relocated or replaced in existing parks; 
(d)  Any single wide mobile home owner who maintained a single wide mobile home on a tract of land either owned or rented by him or her on the date of July 18, 1972, may continue to maintain such mobile home. Upon such tract of land, he or she may replace the mobile home by another mobile home. The tract of land which includes a permanent installed mobile home may be sold as one unit and does not have to comply with this article. However, if the mobile home is removed from property and tract of land is sold, leased or rented, the tract of land must meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 21)  
Sec. 9-122. - Same—Exclusions; roofs. 
(a)  A mobile home having less than three-inch nominal wall studs shall be excluded from this section and there shall be no roof structure constructed as a permanent addition thereto except that this section shall not apply to mobile homes which have walls constructed surrounding the perimeter of the mobile home. It shall be within the sole province of the city building inspector to determine, after inspection, whether the walls are of sufficient strength to allow the construction of a permanent roof structure. 
(b)  The construction of a roof structure as a permanent addition to a mobile home shall cause the entire mobile home to become a permanent structure and shall not thereafter be moved in the manner of a mobile home on the streets, roads and highways of the city. 
(c)  Each roof structure as allowed herein shall be securely anchored to the wall system of the mobile home in accordance with standard working procedure in a workmanlike manner and shall be inspected prior to application of the roof sheeting so that anchors and ties may be viewed to determine whether the roof structure is adequately and properly secured, and within ten days after completion of said roof structure inspected and approved by the city building inspector. 
(d)  Each mobile home to which this section applies shall have an adequate foundation set upon a proper footing around the perimeter of the structure to support the additional weight imposed upon the structure and shall have hurricane band anchors set permanently in the concrete. It shall be the duty of the owner of the mobile home to, prior to construction of the roof structure as allowed herein, notify the city building inspector to determine whether the mobile home meets the requirements of this section. 
(e)  Any mobile home having a metal roof shall have said metal roof removed prior to the completion of the permanent roof construction, but if the owner of said mobile home receives prior permission of the city building inspector, then the owner may retain a portion or portions of the metal roof as allowed by the city building inspector. 
(f)  All such building construction as allowed by this section shall be subject to the approval of the city building inspector and shall require the necessary permits and inspections as provided herein and by the laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1131)  
Sec. 9-123. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not exceeding one year or by both such fine or imprisonment. Each day that a violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 857, § 22)  
Chapter 10 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Established. 
A Municipal Court of the City of Goodland is hereby created and established to be presided over by a municipal judge.  
Sec. 10-102. - Code of procedure. 
The provisions of the Kansas Code of Procedure for municipal courts, being Chapter 12, Articles 41 to 46 inclusive, Kansas Statutes Annotated, are by this reference incorporated into and made a part of this article, the same as if set out in full.  
Sec. 10-103. - Place; time. 
The municipal judge shall hold court in a place of his or her choosing and at the time he or she directs.  
Sec. 10-104. - Court costs. 
(a)  Pursuant to Charter Ordinance No. 12 of the City of Goodland, Kansas, court costs in the municipal court of the city of Goodland, Kansas, are hereby established and shall be assessed at the rate of $70.00 per case in said court; provided that not more than one court cost shall be assessed per incident, no matter the number of charged violations arising from said incident. 
(b)  All court costs collected by the municipal court or the clerk of the court shall be paid pursuant to Kansas statute and the rules, regulations and orders of the municipal court. 
(c)  All monies remaining in the hands of the municipal court or the clerk of the court after the payments as set out in subsection (b) shall be paid to into the general fund of the city. 
(C.O. No. 12; Ord. No. 1274, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1324, §§ 1—3, 7-5-94; Ord. No. 1354, §§ 1—4, 5-20-97; Ord. No. 1416, §§ 1—4, 7-6-99; Ord. No. 1551, §§ 1—4, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 1592, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 1593, §§ 1, 2, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 1609, §§ 1—3, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 1969, §§ 1—4, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 10-105. - Alternative community service program. 
The City of Goodland believes that it would be in the best interest of those persons found by the municipal court to have violated the ordinances of the City of Goodland to have an alternative to traditional sentencing; and that an alternative community service program would accomplish this goal. Therefore, it is resolved by the City of Goodland that such alternative community service program be provided for by the municipal court of the City of Goodland. 
(Res. No. 1088, 5-16-94) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 1088, adopted May 16, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included as § 10-105 at the discretion of the editor. The policy regarding an alternative to traditional sentencing is not set out herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk.  
Chapter 11 - POLICE  
ARTICLE I. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Organization. 
The police department of the City of Goodland, shall consist of a chief of police, and an assistant chief of police, to be appointed by the governing body as provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1)  
Sec. 11-102. - Power of police chief. 
The chief of police shall at all times have power to make or to order an arrest, with proper process, for any offense against the laws of the state or the city, and bring the offender to trial before the proper officer of the city or of the county or of the state, and to arrest without process, in all cases where any such offense shall be committed or attempted to be committed, in his or her presence. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2)  
Sec. 11-103. - Police power. 
All sworn police officers shall have power to arrest all offenders against the laws of the state, or of the county, or of the city, by day or by night, and keep them in a city prison, or other place to prevent their escape, until a trial can be had before the proper officer. 
(Code 1979)  
Sec. 11-104. - Responsible to mayor. 
The chief of police, in the discharge of his or her duties, shall be subject to the orders of the city manager. The policemen, in the discharge of their duties, shall be subject to the orders of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 3; Code 1983)  
Sec. 11-105. - Police duties. 
The chief of police and all police officers while on duty shall devote their time and attention to the discharge of their respective duties. It shall be their general duty at all times to the best of their ability to observe good order, peace, quiet, and enforce all of the city ordinances and laws of Kansas throughout the city. It shall be their further duty to arrest or cite all persons found at any time, day or night, in the act of violating any such ordinances or laws or abiding or abetting such violation. All persons arrested for violation of any laws of the State of Kansas, shall be held for the sheriff or county attorney of Sherman County. The officers shall procure all the necessary evidence in their power pertaining to any offense and shall furnish a list of witnesses to the proper officers of the city or of the State of Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 5)  
Sec. 11-106. - Suspension powers. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to suspend an officer under his or her control for a period of time not to exceed three calendar months, when the officer has not followed the specific orders of chief of police, or has been guilty of an offense enumerated in section 11-107 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 6)  
Sec. 11-107. - Reasons for dismissal. 
Upon complaint being made to any city commissioner, that the chief of police, assistant chief of police, or policeman has been intoxicated or has been gambling, or has abused the power of his or her office, or been guilty of a brutal or indecent act, or has taken or received any money, property or valuable thing whatever, other than his or her legal set salary or fees, as consideration for doing or omitting to do a particular act, or has refused to make an arrest in a proper case, or consented to or connived to the escape of any person legally arrested in custody, or has refused to abide by the officer who is his or her superior, the officer so receiving such complaint shall lay his or her name before the commission at their first meeting thereafter. The city commission shall then thereafter carefully consider and honestly inquire as to the truth of such complaint, and if they find the accused guilty, they shall forthwith, by order, to be entered in their journal, remove him from office. He or she shall not be again appointed to such office unless two-thirds of the commissioners-elect consent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 7; Code 1983)  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICE UNIT 
 
Sec. 11-201. - Police reserve unit established. 
There is hereby established a police reserve unit in the city. Members of the police reserve unit shall, upon recommendation of the chief of police, be appointed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 985; Code 1983)  
Sec. 11-202. - Power of chief. 
The chief of police shall have full power, control and command over all reserve police personnel, and he or she shall direct the use of all firearms and equipment. He or she shall direct the reserve police unit in its activities and functions. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 2)  
Sec. 11-203. - Rules and regulations. 
The reserve police unit and the members thereof shall be subject to all rules and regulations as set forth by the chief of police, which rules and regulations will be approved by the governing body of the city. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 3)  
Sec. 11-204. - Compensation. 
All members of the reserve police unit shall serve without pay and each member shall be required to furnish his or her own uniform and personal equipment. The city will pay the premiums on workmen's compensation insurance upon the personnel. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 4)  
Sec. 11-205. - Nonliability of city. 
The city shall not be liable for any injuries occurring to members of the reserve police force, whether such injuries occurred while such members are acting as reserve policemen or while they are off duty, except insofar as such injuries are covered by workmen's compensation insurance. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 5)  
Chapter 12 - PUBLIC OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - UNIFORM OFFENSE CODE 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Incorporating uniform public offense code. 
There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating public offenses within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, that certain code known as the "Uniform Public Offense Code," Edition of 2019, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas. Said uniform public offense code shall be incorporated in its entirety with the exception of: 
Section 9.9.1 "Unlawful Possession of Marijuana and Tetrahydrocannabinols," 
Section 9.9.2 "Unlawful Possession of Drug Paraphernalia and Simulated, Controlled Substances," 
Section 9.9.3 "Unlawful Distribution of Controlled Substances," 
Section 9.9.4 "Unlawful Possession of Controlled Substances," 
Section 9.9.5 "Unlawful Possession of a Simulated Substance," and 
Section 9.9.6 "Distribution of a Non-controlled Substance." 
No fewer than three copies of said uniform public offense code shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1726," and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the city clerk to be opened to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The police department, municipal judge and all administrative departments of the city charged with enforcement of the ordinance shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies of such uniform public offense code similarly marked, as may be deemed expedient. 
(Code 1991; Ord. No. 1312, 10-1-93; Ord. No. 1329, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1342, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1359, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 1382, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 1402, § 1, 8-3-98; Ord. No. 1425, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 1438, § 1, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 1488, § 1, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 1507, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 1521, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 1533, § 1, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 1581, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 1597, §§ 1, 2, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 1603, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 1611, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1624, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-11; Ord. No. 1637, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1650, §§ 1, 2, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 1660, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-14; Ord. No. 1677 , §§ 1, 2, 8-17-15; Ord. No. 1695 , §§ 1, 2, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1707 , §§ 1, 2, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 1714 , § I, 8-6-18; Ord. No. 1726 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12-201. - Urinating/defecating in public. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, public building, public property, private parking lot, or in any place open to the public or exposed to the public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation utilizing appropriate fixtures in any restroom or other facility designed for the sanitary disposal of human waste. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $500.00 or may be confined for a period of time not to exceed 30 days or by both such fines and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1366, §§ 1, 2, 1-20-97)  
Sec. 12-202. - Prohibited noises. 
(1)  Statement of intent. No provision of this section shall be construed to limit or abridge the rights of any person, to speak, peacefully assemble and express opinions. It is the purpose of this section to protect individuals from unreasonable intrusions caused by excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(a)  Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss which demands immediate action. 
(b)  Motor vehicle means every vehicle defined as a motor vehicle in the standardtraffic ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(c)  Motorcycle means every vehicle defined as a motorcycle in the standard traffic ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(d)  Motorized bicycle means every vehicle defined as a motorized bicycle in the standard traffic ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(e)  Neighboring inhabitants includes those persons in single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, boarding house rooms, hotel rooms or motel rooms within the vicinity of the noise. 
(f)  Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
(g)  Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
1.  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; 
2.  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or 
3.  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
(h)  Person means any individual, association, partnership, or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency, or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision if a state. 
(i)  Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not designated to carry persons including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
(j)  Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, or alley. 
(k)  Racing means the use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, out-distance or prevent another vehicle from passing, to arrive at a given destination ahead of another vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of drivers over long distance driving routes. 
(l)  Real property boundary means the property line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
(m)  Residential area means single-family, two-family and multifamily zoning district classifications. 
(n)  Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal or interval forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and frequency. 
(3)  General prohibitions. In addition to the specific prohibitions outlined in this section, no person shall unreasonably make, continue, or cause to be made, continued, or permitted, any noise disturbance. This section shall not apply to noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way which is otherwise authorized. 
(4)  Specific prohibitions. The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are hereby declared to be in violation of this section. 
(a)  Emergency signaling devices. It shall be unlawful to intentionally sound or permit the sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in this section. Testing of a signaling device shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. or the closing time of a commercial establishment, whichever shall occur later. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time. It shall be unlawful to sound or permit the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm is automatically terminated within two minutes of activation, or within a reasonable time after notification of activation. 
(b)  Powered model vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of a powered model vehicle or vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or in a public space between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(c)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, and similar devices. It shall be unlawful to operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device: 
1.  In such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants; or 
2.  In such manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential, real property boundary; or 
3.  At any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such instrument or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto; or 
4.  In such a manner as to create a continuing noise disturbance within 50 feet (15.25 meters) from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or space open to the public. 
(d)  Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. It shall be unlawful to repair, rebuild, modify, or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorized bicycle or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary in any residential district, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  Motor vehicle racing. It shall be unlawful to race any motor vehicle between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  Abatement orders. In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, any city law enforcement officer may issue an order requiring the immediate abatement of any source of sound in violation of this section. 
(6)  [Congregating and gathering.] No person shall congregate with other persons, participate in, or be in any part of a gathering of people from which sound emanates of a sufficient volume so as to be a violation of this section. No person shall visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering of people is taking place except persons who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating said disturbance. A police officer shall order all persons present in any group or gathering from which such sound emanates, other than owners or tenants of the dwelling unit, to immediately disperse in lieu of being charged under this section. Failure to disperse shall subject such person or persons to be being so charged. Owners or tenants of the dwelling unit shall immediately abate the disturbance and, failing to do so, shall be in violation of this section. 
(7)  Notice of violation. Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to this section, any violation shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by any city law enforcement officer. 
(8)  Other remedies. No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common-law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this section. 
(9)  Exceptions. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of any emergency, or for the performance of emergency work. 
(b)  Noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration planned by school/university, governmental or community groups. 
(c)  Trash and waste pickup operations. 
(d)  Church bells and campanile chimes. 
(e)  Railroads. 
(f)  Air conditioners. 
(10)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1445, § I, 12-4-00)  
Sec. 12-203. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1657, § 1, adopted June 16, 2014, repealed § 12-203 in its entirety, which pertained to possession or carrying of certain firearms; prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 1571, §§ 1—7, adopted Jan. 22, 2007; Ord. No. 1579, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2007.  
Chapter 13 - PUBLIC PROPERTY  
ARTICLE I. - CITY CEMETERY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 13 of Ord. No. 1350 repealed Ord. No. 345 from which §§ 13-101—13-110 derived. Ord. No. 1350 further provided for similar provisions as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Survey. 
The plots, lots, blocks, avenues and walks of the cemetery of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be known and designated according to the surveys and plats accepted and adopted by the governing body of the said city, and now filed and recorded and to be hereafter filed and recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Sherman County, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 1, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-102. - Marking. 
The corners of blocks in said cemetery shall be marked and defined by markers of suitable dimensions not less than 18 inches in length, placed not less than one foot in the ground, and all lots of said cemetery shall be marked and defined by marker of suitable dimensions as determined by the governing body of said city. No monument, curbing, fence, tree or any other permanent lot ornament shall be erected or planted in said cemetery other than such as are approved by the governing body of said city. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 2, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-103. - Sale price. 
All lots or parts of lots surveyed and platted or hereafter to be surveyed and platted not heretofore sold, shall be sold as specified herein. All burial plots, regardless of size, shall be $50.00, which shall be applied to a capital improvement fund to be used for cemetery improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 3, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-104. - Deeds. 
Upon the receipt of purchase money by the city clerk, there shall be issued to the purchaser a certificate, under the seal of the city, which certificate shall be signed by the chairman of the city commission and countersigned by the city clerk and such certificate so signed as aforesaid shall convey the estate which, by law in such cases made and provided is intended to be conveyed, for the sole purpose of interment. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 4, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-105. - Permit for burial and kiosk information. 
(a)  No person, corporation or other entity shall bury any dead in the cemetery without first procuring from the city clerk a burial permit. Such permit shall give a description of the deceased, and designate the burial plot, the lot and block in said cemetery in which the burial is to be made. No grave shall be opened until the full purchase price of the burial plot has been received by the city and the certificate for such plot issued. There shall be a $100.00 fee for the issuance of the burial permit. A separate permit shall be required for each interment. The burial permit fee shall be applied to a capital improvement fund to be used for cemetery improvements. 
(b)  When a deceased is not interred in the Goodland Cemetery, information about the deceased may appear on the kiosk if a permanent marker that includes the deceased's name is placed in the Goodland Cemetery and a kiosk permit is purchased for a fee of $100.00. The permit shall indicate the location of the deceased's remains, provide the name, date of birth (if available) and date of death of the deceased, and will designate the burial plot, lot and block where the permanent marker is set in the cemetery. The kiosk permit fee shall be applied to a capital improvement fund to be used for cemetery improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1678 , 9-21-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1678 , adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 13-105 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13-105 pertained to permit for burial and derived from Ord. No. 1350, § 5, adopted April 1, 1996.  
Sec. 13-106. - Records to be kept. 
The city clerk shall keep a record of the permits issued under this article, showing the date of issue, to whom issued, description of the deceased and the location of the burial plot in which the deceased was buried. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 6, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-107. - Limitation of ownership. 
No individual shall at any one time be the owner of more than four plots in said cemetery; provided that religious, patriotic, or benevolent societies or orders may purchase and hold at any time such number of plots as shall be approved by the governing body of said city. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 7, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-108. - Rules and regulations. 
In addition to any city ordinance the governing body of the City of Goodland shall adopt rules and regulations which govern the use and operation of the Goodland Cemetery. Three copies of such shall be on file in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 8, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-109. - Motorcycles, mopeds, etc. prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor cycle, moped or other similar transportation device in the Goodland Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 9, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-110. - Animals prohibited. 
No animals shall be allowed in the Goodland Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 10, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-111. - Hours. 
The cemetery will be open from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Any person who enters the cemetery, other than during the hours immediately hereinbefore set out shall be guilty of a trespass. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 11, 4-1-96)  
Sec. 13-112. - Penalty. 
Any person, corporation or other entity who violates any provisions of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1350, § 12, 4-1-96)  
Secs. 13-113—13-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 13-201. - Transfer of functions of cemetery board. 
All of the functions of the cemetery board the directors thereof, the secretary, treasurer, sexton and assistants, and all other officers and agents of the cemetery board are hereby transferred to the parks department of the city except the oversight and custody of the funds known as the Tree Fund and the Fence Fund. 
(C.O. No. 17, § 3)  
Sec. 13-202. - Transfer of books, records, etc. 
From and after the effective date of Charter Ordinance No. 17, the cemetery board and all personnel, provided therefor by ordinance, shall no longer serve in the capacities designated by ordinance and they shall, transfer all books, records, accounts, equipment, material and other tangibles in their possession, to the parks department of the city except funds presently held and known as the Tree Fund and Fence Fund. 
(C.O. No. 17, § 4)  
Sec. 13-203. - Administration. 
The city cemetery shall be administered by the city manager in accordance with sections 1-308 and 1-311. 
(C.O. No. 17, § 5)  
Sec. 13-204. - Staffing. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to hire such employees and officers as are necessary for the execution of this article subject to the provisions of section 1-311. 
(C.O. No. 17, § 6)  
Secs. 13-205—13-209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1e, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed §§ 13-205—13-209 in their entirety. Former §§ 13-205—13-209 pertained to advisory board created; same—appointment; same—organization; same—duties; same—meetings and reports, respectively, and derived from C.O. No. 17, §§ 7—11.  
Sec. 13-210. - Special trust fund unaffected. 
The special trust fund known as the Perpetual Fund, provided for by the provisions of sections 13-301 through 13-303 shall not be affected by the provisions of this article. 
(C.O. No. 17, § 12; Code 1991)  
Sec. 13-211. - Operation and maintenance with aid of county. 
The City of Goodland, Kansas declares that it deems it necessary and expedient to enter into an interlocal cooperation agreement with Sherman County, Kansas, for the purpose of operating and maintaining the city cemetery with the aid of Sherman County, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1337, 5-15-95)  
Secs. 13-212—13-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CEMETERY ENDOWMENT FUND 
 
Sec. 13-301. - Endowment fund created. 
There is hereby created pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1408 an endowment fund for the purpose of caring for the Goodland Cemetery. The City of Goodland may set aside any monies that it now has on hand for cemetery purposes not otherwise allocated, any cemetery fund not otherwise appropriated, any contributions for endowment purposes or other property belonging to the Goodland Cemetery for the purpose of an endowment fund. Any monies received for the issuance of burial permits shall be paid into the endowment fund, which is hereby created. The city may receive subscriptions and set aside profits in the future for such endowment fund. 
(Ord. No. 1351, §§ 1, 2, 4-1-96)  
Secs. 13-302—13-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1f, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. IV in its entirety. Former Art. IV, §§ 13-401—13-407, pertained to High Plains Museum Board and derived from Ord. No. 1287, §§ 1—5, 7, 9; Ord. No. 1400, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998. 
 
Secs. 13-401—13-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC RECREATION AND PLAYGROUNDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1g, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. V in its entirety, save and except § 13-509. Former Art. V, §§ 13-501—13-508, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1286, §§ 1—7, 9. 
 
Secs. 13-501—13-508. - Reserved.  
Sec. 13-509. - City parks. 
(a)  City laws extended to park. The laws of the city shall extend to and cover all city parks. 
(b)  Police jurisdiction over parks. The city shall have police regulations governing any public parks belonging to the city and the chief of police and law enforcement officers of the city shall have full power to enforce city laws governing city parks and shall maintain order therein. 
(c)  Damaging park property. It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized city employees, to willfully or wantonly remove, injure, tarnish, deface or destroy any building, walk, bench, tree or improvement or property of any kind belonging to any park owned by the city. 
(d)  Dangerous weapons not allowed. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), it shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have in his or her possession any firearm or dangerous weapon or to shoot or discharge the same within the limits of any city parks. 
(2)  The provisions of subsection (1) above shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers. 
(e)  Vehicle regulations. 
(1)  Motor vehicles, including any vehicle licensed to operate on public streets, roads and highways and motorbikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and other motorized off-the-road vehicles shall be operated in a safe and prudent manner at all times in park areas. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (4), it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in any area not designated for such purpose. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (4), it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within any city park except upon roads, drives and parking areas established by the city. 
(4)  Subsections (2) and (3) above shall not apply to authorized city employees while engaged in the maintenance and care of the park. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle in any park area at a speed in excess of 20 m.p.h. 
(f)  Hunting. It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue, catch, trap, maim, kill, shoot or take any wildlife, either bird or animal, in any manner at any time while in any city park. 
(g)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or kindle any campfire or fire in any city park, except that ovens, stoves, or grills provided for that purpose by the city and private individuals may be used for cooking purposes only, and the fire from such usage must be extinguished by the person, persons or parties starting such fire, immediately after use thereof. 
(h)  Camping prohibited. Overnight camping is hereby prohibited in city parks except where posted. A permit may be obtained from the chief of police for overnight camping, subject to certain restrictions. 
(i)  Sanitation. All waste material, paper, trash, rubbish, tin cans, bottles, containers, garbage and refuse of any kind whatsoever shall be deposited in disposal containers provided for such purposes. No such waste or contaminating material shall be discarded otherwise. No sticks, stones, trash or other objects shall be thrown or discarded in or on any park lands, fountains, pools, drinking fountains, sanitary facilities, or other improvements. 
(j)  Prohibition against alcoholic beverages and cereal malt beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use, consume or have on the premises of any park or other city property within the city any alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage. 
(k)  Preservation of natural state. It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized city employees, to take, injure, or disturb any live or dead tree, plant, shrub, or flower, or otherwise interfere with the natural state of city parks. 
(l)  General regulations. The city may post such rules and regulations, as are approved by the governing body, pertaining to the use of the city parks in a conspicuous place in each city park. Violations of these posted rules shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1634, §§ 1—12, 7-16-12)  
Sec. 13-510. - City dog parks and off-leash areas. 
(a)  In accordance with section 2-202, dogs may be allowed to run at-large within dog parks and off-leash areas as designated by the governing body. The designation of such parks and off-leash areas shall be made or revoked through resolution and at the recommendation of the city manager or designee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to violate any of the following regulations regarding the use of any city designated dog park or off-leash area in a park owned by the City of Goodland: 
(1)  Entrance within the dog park between sunset and sunrise or when otherwise closed is prohibited. No animals other than dogs may be brought into the dog parks. 
(2)  Owners shall immediately close and secure the gate upon entering or exiting the confines of the park's fenced enclosure. 
(3)  No large dogs (over 25 pounds) will be allowed in the small-dog areas of the dog park. Such areas will be clearly marked. 
(4)  No small dogs (under 25 pounds) will be allowed in the large dog areas of the dog parks. Such areas will be clearly marked. 
(5)  All dogs that enter the park must be over five months of age, not in heat, and have proof of current rabies vaccination. Aggressive, vicious or contagious dogs are prohibited from use of the park. Dogs may not be brought into the park if they are sick or unhealthy, have a history of aggressiveness, or have been adjudicated a dangerous dog. 
(6)  All dogs must be leashed when entering or leaving the park's fenced enclosures. Dogs must never be left unattended. The dog owner must be in reasonable control of his or her dog(s) at all times and keep a leash available at all times. 
(7)  Owners must be at least 14 years of age and remain within the park's fenced enclosure and in control of all dogs under their care at all times when within the park. Owners are limited to two dogs per visit. 
(8)  Owners shall immediately pick up their dogs' excrement and deposit it in the designated receptacle. All owners must have in his or her possession a baggy or some other form of equipment to clean up after his or her dog(s). All waste must be placed in a bag and placed in a waste receptacle provided at the park. 
(9)  Owners must immediately fill any holes their dogs dig. 
(10)  No alcoholic beverages, glass containers, bicycles, skateboards, motorbikes, scooters, or roller blades will be allowed in the dog park area. Littering is prohibited. Smoking is prohibited inside the park and within ten feet of the park's perimeter. 
(11)  Professional dog trainers and behaviorists are not permitted to use the park to conduct their business. 
(12)  All dog bites must be reported to law enforcement and follow the procedure set out in section 2-207 of the Goodland Municipal Code. 
(13)  The city manager or designee reserves the right to close a dog park for maintenance and repair, public safety reasons or for special events. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Enter or remain in a dog park at such time as such park is closed to the public as set out herein or at such time as provided under the rules and regulations adopted by the governing body. 
(2)  Fail to immediately leash and restrain a dog in the dog park when advised to do so by the city manager or designee. 
(3)  Fail to immediately leave the dog park when ordered to do so by the city manager or designee. 
(d)  Owners assume all risks, loss or injury for themselves or their dog(s) associated with or resulting from the use of the park. Owners making use of the dog park shall be responsible for injuries caused by their dogs to other persons and dogs. Persons responsible for any injuries or property damage shall hold the City of Goodland harmless for any such damage. 
(e)  Violators of dog park rules and regulations may be subject to one or more of the following: 
(1)  Removal from the park; 
(2)  Suspension of park privileges; 
(3)  Issuance of a uniform criminal complaint or notice to appear. 
(f)  The city manager or designee shall promulgate additional regulations as are necessary to address health and safety concerns related to the operation of such parks. 
(Ord. No. 1723 , § 1, 5-6-19  
Secs. 13-511—13-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GOODLAND MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL 
 
Sec. 13-601. - Trespassing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons not employed by the Goodland Municipal Swimming Pool or authorized by the manager of the pool to swim in the pool or trespass within the fences surrounding the pool during the hours that the pool is not open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 1)  
Sec. 13-602. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 761, § 2)  
Secs. 13-603—13-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1h, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. VII in its entirety. Former Art. VII, §§ 13-701—13-703, pertained to municipal dump grounds and derived from Ord. No. 708, §§ 2—4. 
 
Secs. 13-701—13-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 13-801. - Board created. 
There is hereby established an organization known as the Goodland Airport Advisory Board. The purpose of the Goodland Airport Advisory Board, hereinafter called "board," shall be to provide the governing body with information and advice pertaining to policy for the operation, programs, property, gifts to the Goodland Airport, Renner Field, hereinafter called "airport," loans to the airports, exhibits, displays and employees of the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 1)  
Sec. 13-802. - Powers. 
The provisions relating to the powers of the board shall be as follows: 
(a)  The board shall have the power to expend any moneys allocated to the airport by the governing body, and to hire and terminate employees of the airport. The board shall also advise the governing body as to the promotion and expansion of the airport; 
(b)  The board shall advise the governing body of its recommendations for acquisition and disposition of airport property, and shall make recommendations to the governing body for appointment of members to the board. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 2)  
Sec. 13-803. - Membership, terms of office. 
Provisions relating to membership and terms of office shall be as follows: 
(a)  The initial board membership shall be appointed by the mayor with approval by the governing body; subsequent appointments to the board shall be made by the governing body, with recommendations from the board; 
(b)  Five members of the board shall be appointed from residents of Sherman County, Kansas. One member shall be appointed from the city governing body as an ex officio for a total of six board members; 
(c)  One member shall serve for a term of one year, whose term shall expire on the third Tuesday of June, 1983; two members for a term of two years, whose terms shall expire on the third Tuesday of June, 1984; and two members for a term of three years, whose terms shall expire on the third Tuesday of June, 1985. All subsequent terms shall expire on the third Tuesday of June and be for a term of three years. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by appointment by the governing body, with recommendations from the board, for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 3; Ord. No. 1552, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 1584, 10-15-07)  
Sec. 13-804. - Organization. 
The board shall select its own officers annually in the month of June, the officers to be a president, vice-president, secretary and treasurer, and any other officers by the board deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 4)  
Sec. 13-805. - Meetings and reports. 
The board shall meet at least once each month and report its activities to the governing body through the governing body representative or the city manager after each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 5)  
Sec. 13-806. - Budget. 
Budget requests by the board shall be submitted to the governing body no later than August 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1129, § 6)  
Secs. 13-807—13-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - GOODLAND MUNICIPAL AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING 
 
Sec. 13-901. - Intent. 
Regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the vicinity of the Goodland Municipal Airport by creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein; referring to the Goodland Municipal Airport Airspace Plan (Part 77) Map or its successors or amendments thereto, which is incorporated in and made a part of this ordinance; providing for enforcement; establishing a Board of Adjustments; and imposing penalties. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by Chapter 3 of Statutes of the State of Kansas. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the Goodland Municipal Airport, and property of occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of the Goodland Municipal Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Goodland Municipal Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared that: 
(1)  The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the Goodland Municipal Airport; 
(2)  It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and 
(3)  The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. 
It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 1, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-902. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Goodland Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning". 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 2, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-903. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribe to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means the Goodland Municipal Airport. 
Airport elevation means the official height published for the Airport on the Federal Aviation Administration approved airport layout plan, measured in feet above mean sea level. 
Airport hazard means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport, which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones. These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces defined in Federal Aviation Regulation Part 77. 
Board of adjustments. The board of adjustments shall consist of the setting planning commission. 
City planning commission means a board as established under Article 14 of the City of Goodland Zoning Regulations. 
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them. 
Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system or a precision approach radar. It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA-approved airport layout plan or a military service's military airport planning document. 
Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. 
Runway means a defined area of an airport prepared for the landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
Structure means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. 
Tree means any object of natural growth. 
Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for an intended use by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA-approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or by a planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
Width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 3, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-904. - Airport zones established. 
(a)  Zones defined. In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they apply to the Goodland Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on the "Airspace Plan (Part 77)" sheet from the airport layout plan drawings, prepared in coordination with the airport manager, approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, which is attached and made a part of this article by reference. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of the utility runway visual approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of the precision instrument runway approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(7)  Transitional zones. Transitional zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at a 90-degree angle to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(8)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface to each runway. The radius of each arc is 5,000 feet for all runways designated as utility or visual; and 10,000 feet for all other runways. The radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That value will be the highest determined for either end of the runway. When a 5,000-foot arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two adjacent 10,000-foot areas, the 5,000-foot arc shall be disregarded on the construction of the perimeter of the horizontal surface, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(9)  Conical zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
(b)  Determination of zones where uncertainty may arise. The location of all zones as indicated and described on the "Goodland Municipal Airport Airspace Plan (Part 77)" Map shall prevail where there is uncertainty in application to any or all lands located within such zones. Such determination of the zones, including all real property, shall be made by scaling and using mathematical methods in conjunction with property descriptions. The responsibility for making such determination shall be with the airport manager. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 4, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-905. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or be maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically, being at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. Slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes upward 50 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(7)  Transitional zones. Slopes upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 3,656 feet above mean sea level at the Goodland Municipal Airport. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides and at the same elevation as the precision instrument runway approach surface, and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(8)  Horizontal zone. 155 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 3806 feet above mean sea level at Goodland Municipal Airport. 
(9)  Conical zone. Slopes upward and outward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
When an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 5, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-906. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between airport and aircraft; 
(2)  Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others; 
(3)  Result in a glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; 
(4)  Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; or 
(5)  Otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 6, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-907. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the airport manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 7, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-908. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone created under this article unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. 
(1)  However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. 
(2)  Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this article, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the city building inspector determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 70 percent torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the city planning commission for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and to be reasonable under the circumstances, may be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate and maintain, at the owner's expense thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 8, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-909. - Enforcement of article. 
It shall be the duty of the airport manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for a variance shall be made to the airport manager upon a form published and furnished for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the airport manager shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 9, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-910. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable under Art. 15 of the City of Goodland, Zoning Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 10, 4-5-04)  
Sec. 13-911. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1515, § 11, 4-5-04)  
Secs. 13-912—13-914. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1i), adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed §§ 13-912—13-914 in their entirety. Former § 13-912—13-914 pertained to board of adjustment, appeals, and judicial review, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 1515, §§ 12—14, adopted April 5, 2004.  
Chapter 14 - SEWER REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC, PRIVATE; SEWERS, DRAINS 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Hearing board shall mean the city council of the city when holding hearings. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
Slug shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceed for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent shall mean the superintendent of sewage works and/or of water pollution control, or the city clerk of the City of Goodland, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Watercourse shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. 1)  
Sec. 14-102. - Unlawful deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. II, § 1)  
Sec. 14-103. - Unlawful discharges. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 14-104. - Unlawful facilities. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. II, § 3)  
Sec. 14-105. - Owner's responsibility. 
The owner of all houses, building, or properties used for human employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. II, § 4)  
Sec. 14-106. - Private sewage disposal system. 
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 14-105 of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of sections 14-105 through 14-113 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 1)  
Sec. 14-107. - Permit, construction. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee established by the building inspector shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 2)  
Sec. 14-108. - Inspection, superintendent. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 3)  
Sec. 14-109. - Compliance with state health recommendations. 
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Kansas. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of trench bottom for each system shall not be less than 150 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 4)  
Sec. 14-110. - Direct connection with public sewer upon availability. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in 14-109 of this article, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 5)  
Sec. 14-111. - Private disposal facilities kept sanitary. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 6)  
Sec. 14-112. - Additional requirements by health officer. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 7)  
Sec. 14-113. - Time limit on connection with public sewer. 
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. III, § 8)  
Sec. 14-114. - Application, permit. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building official. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 1)  
Sec. 14-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 1481, adopted July 1, 2002, repealed § 14-115, which pertained to classes, building sewer permits, and fees, and derived from Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 2. See § 14-214, for similar provisions.  
Sec. 14-116. - Costs, expenses borne by owner. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 3)  
Sec. 14-117. - Separate, independent building sewer. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 4)  
Sec. 14-118. - Old building sewers approved by building official. 
Old building sewers may be used on connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 5)  
Sec. 14-119. - Construction of building sewers, conform to city codes. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 6)  
Sec. 14-120. - Elevation, building sewer. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 7)  
Sec. 14-121. - Connection not allowed. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 8)  
Sec. 14-122. - Requirements, building sewer into public sewer. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the building official before installation. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 9)  
Sec. 14-123. - Inspection; notify city inspector. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 10)  
Sec. 14-124. - Excavations, barricades, lights. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. IV, § 11)  
Sec. 14-125. - Discharges not allowed in sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including interior or exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 1)  
Sec. 14-126. - Stormwater, unpolluted drainage; discharged. 
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the building official. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the building official to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 2)  
Sec. 14-127. - Wastes not allowed in public sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(a)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, and other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(b)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer; 
(c)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works; 
(d)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(e)  Any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the superintendent. 
Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(4)  Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million by weight; or 
(5)  Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
(6)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 3)  
Sec. 14-128. - Duties, superintendent. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 14-127 of this article, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life to constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
(a)  Reject the wastes; 
(b)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(c)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(d)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 14-133 of this article.  
Sec. 14-129. - Grease, oil, sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the building official, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 6)  
Sec. 14-130. - Preliminary treatment, flow-equalizing facilities. 
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expenses. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 7)  
Sec. 14-131. - Control manholes. 
Where required by the building official, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the building official. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 8)  
Sec. 14-132. - Measurements, tests, analyses; determination. 
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon 
suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer at the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples). 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 9)  
Sec. 14-133. - Special agreement, arrangement, industrial concern. 
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. V, § 10)  
Sec. 14-134. - Destruction, unauthorized person. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. VI)  
Sec. 14-135. - Right of entry. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. VII, § 1)  
Sec. 14-136. - Observe safety rules. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 14-135 above, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 14-132 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. VII, § 2)  
Sec. 14-137. - Credentials, identification. 
The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. VII, § 3)  
Sec. 14-138. - Penalty. 
Provisions relating to the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article except section 14-134 of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each 24-hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 975, Art. VIII)  
ARTICLE II. - USER CHARGE SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1501, Articles I—VII, adopted Oct. 6, 2003, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 14-201—14-216, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 890, § 3; Ord. No. 1095, § 1; Ord. No. 1240, Arts. I—VI; and Ord. No. 1481, § 1, adopted July 7, 2002. 
 
Sec. 14-201. - Policy. 
It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the city to collect charges from all users who 
contribute wastewater to the city's treatment works. The proceeds of such charges so derived will be used for the purposes of operation and maintenance (including replacement) of, and retiring the debt for, such public wastewater treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. I, 10-6-03)  
Sec. 14-202. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 200 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Normal domestic wastewater shall mean wastewater that has a BOD concentration of not more than 200 mg/L and a suspended solids concentration of not more than 200 mg/L. 
Operation and maintenance shall mean all expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials, labor, utilities, and other items which are necessary for managing and maintaining the treatment works to achieve the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. 
Replacement shall mean expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances, which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement. 
Reserve shall mean expenditures for emergency or unanticipated costs necessary to maintain and/or expand and to assure proper capacity and performance of the city's treatment works. 
Residential contributor shall mean any contributor to the city's treatment works whose lot, parcel of real estate, or building is used for domestic dwelling purposes only. 
Shall is mandatory. May is permissive. 
SS (denoting suspended solids) shall mean solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Treatment works shall mean any devices and systems for the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage, or liquid industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power, and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities, and any works including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer systems. 
Useful life shall mean the estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated. 
User charge shall mean that portion of the total wastewater service charge, which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance, and replacement of, and debt service retirement for, the wastewater treatment works. 
Water meter shall mean a water volume measuring and recording device, furnished and/or installed by the City of Goodland, Kansas, or furnished and/or installed by a user and approved by the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. II, §§ 1—12, 10-6-03)  
Sec. 14-203. - User charge system. 
(1)  The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to pay costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement costs, costs associated with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment works, which the city may, by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge system, and any reserve funds necessary and approved by the governing body of the city. 
(2)  That portion of the total user charge collected which is designated for operation and maintenance including replacement purposes as established in section 14-204, and reserve funds, shall be deposited in a separate nonlapsing fund known as the "Sewer Utility Fund" and will be kept in three primary accounts as follows: 
(a)  An account designated for the specific purpose of defraying operating and maintenance costs (excluding replacement) of the treatment works (operation and maintenance account—treatment and collection). 
(b)  An account designated for the specific purpose of ensuring replacement needs over the useful life of the treatment works (replacement account—capital improvement reserve fund and municipal equipment reserve fund). Deposits in the replacement account shall be made at least quarterly from the operation, maintenance and replacement revenue in the amount of $59,200.00 annually. 
(c)  An account designated for the specific purpose of reserving funds for operation and maintenance of the city's treatment works and the construction of improvements and expansions of such system. 
(3)  Fiscal year-end balances in the operation and maintenance account, replacement account and the reserve account shall be carried over to the same accounts in the subsequent fiscal year, and shall be used for no other purposes than those designated for these accounts. 
(4)  Monies, which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance and replacement fund, shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustment of the user charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. III, §§ 1—3, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 1527, § 1, 11-1-04)  
Sec. 14-204. - Monthly charges. 
(a)  Water meters. Each user shall pay for the services provided by the city based on their use of the treatment works as determined by water meters acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Residential charges. All residential contributors within the city shall be charged a base charge in the amount of $14.00 per month. 
(c)  Nonresidential charges. For nonresidential contributors, monthly user charges will be based on water used during the current month as determined by the contributor's water meter. Provided: if a nonresidential contributor has a consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not returned to the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that contributor may be based on a wastewater meter(s) or separate water meter(s) installed and maintained at the contributor's expense, and in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(1)  The base charge per month shall be $8.00. In addition, each contributor shall pay a usage rate for operation and maintenance including replacement and reserve of $1.75 per 100 cubic feet of water (or wastewater) used (or contributed) as determined in section 14-203 of the Code of the City of Goodland. 
(d)  Incremental increases. Beginning January 1, 2020 and continuing each year thereafter, the base charge for residential and nonresidential contributors shall increase by $0.20 annually. 
(1)  Incremental increases may be waived for the following year if such action is recommended by the city manager and receives approval by the city commission. 
(2)  Any action to waive said incremental increases shall only apply to the following year. 
(e)  Surcharge. For those contributors that contribute wastewater, the strength of which is greater than normal domestic wastewater, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge will be collected. The surcharge for operation and maintenance including replacement is $0.91 per pound of BOD and $0.91 per pound of SS, and the additional surcharge for debt retirement is $0.00 per pound of BOD and $0.00 per pound of SS. 
(f)  Toxic discharge. Any user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge from the city's treatment works, or any user who discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation, maintenance, or replacement of the treatment works, shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible plant operating personnel and approved by the city commission. 
(g)  To whom charges apply. The user charge rates established in this article apply to all users of the city's treatment works, regardless of their location. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. IV, §§ 1—6, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 1527, §§ 2, 3, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 1572, § 1, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 1713 , § 1, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 14-205. - Payment of bills. 
(1)  Monthly bills. All users shall be billed monthly. Bills shall be payable monthly, and shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of the month in which the bill is received. A service cutoff notice will be sent out on the first day after the due date. Ten days after the due date, service will be discontinued for nonpayment of the bill due. 
(2)  Reduction of bills. The city clerk will have no authority to remit or diminish the monthly user charge for any user, except for the following: 
(a)  To make corrections as necessary for errors in metering, billing, or when receiving payments; and 
(b)  If leaks occur in the buried portion of the water line between the meter and the building occupied for a residential user during the three-month period defined in section 14-204, and after such leaks are verified by the water superintendent, the city clerk may adjust such user's monthly average water usage when determining the monthly user charge. 
(3)  Late payment charge. Bills due the city, not paid by the fifteenth day of the month of billing, shall be subject to a late payment charge of five percent of the unpaid balance of the monthly bill. The late payment charge shall be added to the bill and shall be collected with and in the same manner as the original bill. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. V, §§ 1—3, 10-6-03)  
Sec. 14-206. - Revisions to user charge rates. 
The city will review the user charge system annually and revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement, reserve, and debt retirement, and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement, reserve and debt retirement costs among users and user classes. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. VI, § 1, 10-6-03)  
Sec. 14-207. - Sewer tap fees. 
(a)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation that desires to make a connection to the sewer system of the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be charged a tap fee of $250.00 inside the city limits or $500.00 outside the city limits. 
(b)  If the city extends the sewer system to accommodate the connection of the facilities, the owner or developer shall pay the actual cost of such extension in addition to the applicable tap fee. 
(c)  The tap fee and any charges for an extension of the sewer main shall be paid in full prior to the connection to the main sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 1501, Art. VII, § 1, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 1687 , § 1, 2-1-16)  
Chapter 15 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parking and transporting hazardous materials, § 7-1001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - SIDEWALKS; CONSTRUCTION, GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 15-101. - Established grade. 
All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in this city shall be constructed on the established grade, the grade to be so established that there shall be one-fourth inch of slope per foot. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 1)  
Sec. 15-102. - Location on blocks. 
All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed must match existing sidewalks in each block as to location or abut the curb provided that paved access is provided between sidewalks located on adjacent properties. If no sidewalk exists in a block, the sidewalk must abut the curb. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 2; Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 4-6-98)  
Sec. 15-103. - Width of sidewalks. 
All sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in any residential zones, as defined by the zoning laws of the City of Goodland, shall be a minimum of three feet in width by four inches in thickness, and all other sidewalks constructed or reconstructed in all other zones according to the zoning laws of the city shall be a minimum of four feet in width by four inches in thickness. Any variation must be approved by the city building inspector or an agent of same. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 3)  
Sec. 15-104. - Specifications for sidewalks. 
Provisions relating to the cement specifications for sidewalks shall be as follows: 
(a)  Cement shall be Portland cement; 
(b)  Aggregate must meet the specifications set by AASHO for concrete or MA 1 by Standard Specifications of State Highway Commission; 
(c)  Water shall be clean and free of any foreign debris; 
(d)  Expansion joints and contraction joints shall be approved by city building inspector; 
(e)  Curing, placing and finishing of concrete to conform with AASHO specification; 
(f)  Any variation must be approved by the city building inspector or an agent of same. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 4)  
Sec. 15-105. - Conform to specifications; penalty. 
All sidewalks constructed in this city shall be in accordance with the specifications set out in this article. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to construct or have constructed any sidewalk in this city, without first obtaining a sidewalk permit from the city building inspector or an agent thereof, which permit shall cost a fee of $2.00. Any property owner who shall construct or have constructed a sidewalk voluntarily which does not conform to the specifications therefor, and the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00 and in addition, the city may require that any property owner remove any sidewalk which is built after the passage of this article on his or her property without a permit and in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 817, § 5)  
Sec. 15-106. - Obstruction of sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave or allow to be left any implements, tools, boxes, merchandise goods, trash cans, crates, showcases advertising or other obstructions on any of the sidewalks or other public ways of this city, longer than it is necessary for loading or unloading the same; provided that in the event the chamber of commerce or other merchants' association desires to hold a sidewalk bazaar on a special or annual occasion, whereupon merchandise shall be displayed and sold upon the sidewalks of the city, or in the event that one particular merchant desires to display and sell merchandise upon the sidewalk in front of his or her business on a special promotions endeavor, such chamber of commerce, association or merchant shall first file an application for a permit to do so with the city building official. The permit application shall specifically state the beginning date and the ending date for the display. In no case shall a permit be granted for longer than six months. Sufficient walk space must remain so that pedestrians may continue to use the sidewalk. For purposes of this section, sufficient walk space shall be defined at no less than 75 percent of the sidewalk. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to revoke a sidewalk display permit as set out in subsection (a) if such display threatens the health and safety of persons using said sidewalk or if in the opinion of the building inspector such display becomes unsightly or a general nuisance. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation applying for a permit as provided herein agrees that it will hold the city harmless from any liability caused thereby and further that it will indemnify the city for any cost, including attorney fees or judgments rendered against the city based upon a lawsuit or lawsuits alleging negligence in the display as allowed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1604, §§ 1—4, 10-7-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1604, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 7, 2009, repealed § 15-106 in its entirety and enacted a new § 15-106 as set out herein. Formerly, § 15-106 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 854, Code 1983; Ord. No. 1320, § 1, adopted Mar. 3, 1994; and Ord. No. 1370, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 18, 1997.  
Secs. 15-107—15-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREET, ALLEY AND DRIVEWAY APPROACH CONSTRUCTION  
DIVISION 1. - STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 15-201. - Definitions. 
Streets shall be defined to mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the placement of utilities and including the terms: road, highway, land, place, avenue, alley or other similar designations. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1(a))  
Sec. 15-202. - Permits. 
Whenever any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, utility, association or other legal entity finds it necessary to perform any construction, maintenance or repair, excavation or other work on any of the streets of the City of Goodland, the legal entity must first obtain from the office of the city building inspector, a permit prior to the beginning of such work. The permit will be issued for each location wherein such work shall be done. The permit shall be obtained for the cost of $2.00 per opening; provided, that projects including but not limited to gas, water, sewer, underground electrical, telephone or television taps, where more than ten feet of service is open, there shall be a minimum charge of $2.00 plus $0.10 per foot of ditch or trench opening. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1(b))  
Sec. 15-203. - Right of entry. 
Upon receipt of the permit, the legal entity shall then be allowed to make such entry as may be necessary to accomplish the work which is to be done. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1)  
Sec. 15-204. - Excavation refilled, compacted. 
When the work is completed in streets or alleys, the opening or excavation shall be refilled with earth and compacted by mechanical means in lifts not to exceed 12 inches to as near the same compaction as the original undisturbed area around such excavation or refilled with flowable fill to a point six inches below grade. When the work is completed in streets and alleys with existing paved surfaces, the legal entity shall be required to supply and install a six-inch thick, six-sack concrete mix over the excavation site and screed to grade. If weather conditions prohibit the installation of the concrete surface, then the legal entity, at its cost, shall install a temporary material approved by the public works director over the excavation. The legal entity, at its cost, shall be required to remove the temporary material and replace with a permanent concrete surface when the weather conditions allow. The legal entity shall be responsible for any settling or failure of the surface to match the original grade for a period of six months after the completion of work and should there be any defects in the workmanship then the legal entity shall correct the same at its expense. Brick streets are exempted hereinfrom and are governed by section 15-205. 
(Ord. No. 996, § 1; Ord. No. 1448, § 1, 2-20-01)  
Sec. 15-205. - Bricks removed, replaced. 
Any construction, maintenance, or repair, excavation or other work done upon the streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city which shall require the removal of bricks from the street, alley or thoroughfare shall be done with great care in order to preserve as many of the bricks as is reasonably possible and replace the brick in approximately their original location if the replacement is deemed reasonable and feasible in the opinion of the city building inspector. If the brick cannot be replaced, then they shall be taken to the city stock piles for the brick by the person or other legal entity performing the work on the streets. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 2)  
Sec. 15-206. - Minimum design standards; paving of streets and other public ways. 
(a)  The designs set out in Ordinance No. 1223 are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference, for the purpose of setting forth minimum design standards for paving of streets, alleys, and public ways, in relation to curb and gutter details, valley gutters, typical street sections, alley entrances, joints, entranceways, and associated criteria in relation to the use of asphaltic concrete or concrete. No fewer than three copies of the Minimum Design Standards shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as established by Ordinance No. 1223 and as Incorporated by the Code of the City of Goodland," and shall be filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours of business. 
(b)  These standards shall be used in conjunction with and in addition thereto, appropriate additional specifications such as base compaction requirements, bituminous material and heating of the same, aggregate material and graduation sizes appropriate for asphaltic concrete and concrete, placement and compaction temperatures, material mixing standards, transportation of materials to jobsites, joints, curing, covering, smoothness, construction requirements, staking grades, insurance requirements, bonds, bidding advertising, barricading, inspection, and laboratory testing, such that a complete set of plans and specifications may be developed therefrom by a competent engineering firm licensed to do business in the State of Kansas. Such plans and specifications at the time of final submission to the city, and upon approval by the city shall have the seal of an engineer licensed to do business in the State of Kansas. 
(c)  Upon submittal of a complete set of plans and specifications for a specific project, the city commission and city staff shall review such plans and specifications proposed for a specific construction project or projects for any street, alley, or other public way, and determine if such a proposal is acceptable or unacceptable to the city. 
(d)  The city commission may, upon presentation of similar written minimum design standards as contained herein, approve other written minimum standards for design, as long as such written standards do not materially differ from those contained herein, or otherwise result in a lessor standard, product, or quality. 
(K.S.A. 12-3009—12-3012; Ord. No. 1223; Code 1985)  
Sec. 15-207. - Penalty. 
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of sections 15-202 through 15-205 of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each such individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company utility, association or other legal entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which violation is continued or permitted. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or other legal entity, upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 and the costs of conviction. Furthermore, the permit issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked and any work being performed shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 994, § 3)  
Secs. 15-208—15-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVEWAY APPROACHES 
 
Sec. 15-211. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Applicant. The applicant for a driveway approach permit shall be the property owner, or his/her contractor licensed to do business in the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Commercial property. Any property zoned and occupied by commercial structures. 
Corner. The point at which the face of the curbs, or the edge of pavements in the case of streets without curbs, would intersect if extended into the street intersection. 
Curb return. That portion of curb next to a street, alley or driveway approach which includes the radius of curvature to connect the two intersecting traffic ways. 
Curb transition. That portion of a curb on each side of a driveway approach which slopes from full height to meet the gutter grade and which connects the driveway approach to the street curb. 
Driveway. A place on private property for the operation and/or parking of automobiles and other vehicles. 
Driveway approach. An area constructed between the roadway of a public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from such roadway to private property. For convenience and safety the minimum width of the driveway approach shall be not less than 16 feet when measured from the upper ends of the transition curbs. 
Driveway approach, commercial. A driveway approach providing ingress and egress to any commercial property. 
Driveway approach, residential. A driveway approach providing ingress and egress to any residential property. 
Person. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation. 
Sidewalk line, front. A line parallel with the property line along the edge of the sidewalk nearest the street roadway or curb; or where no sidewalk exists, a line within the street right-of-way parallel to and at least five feet from the property line. 
Street. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way which provides for public use for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the placement of utilities and including the terms: road, highway, land, place, avenue, alley or other similar designations. 
Residential property. Any property zoned and occupied by residential structures. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 1, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-212. - General. 
All driveway approaches along any state highway connection link within the city shall conform to the driveway policy of the Bureau of Traffic Engineering, Kansas Department of Transportation as administered by the City of Goodland. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break out or remove any curb along a street or alley without first obtaining a permit for a driveway approach as hereinafter provided. Further, it shall not be permissible to construct a curb cut unless a driveway approach is constructed at the same time. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, alter or extend any driveway approach without first obtaining a permit for the work as hereinafter provided. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct or alter any drainage structure or culvert to serve a driveway approach without first obtaining a permit for the work as hereinafter provided. 
Driveway approaches to adjacent properties or to a property and an alley shall be separated by a section of full height curb having a length of not less than six inches, unless agreed to in writing by both abutting owners or by the abutting owner and the director of public works and utilities in the case of a property and an alley. 
Each single parcel shall be entitled to a 20-foot wide driveway approach. Such approach width shall include the additional curb to be removed for the curb return to the transition curb used to make the change from full height to the gutter grade in the driveway approach. 
Where a driveway approach in excess of 20 feet is requested for a single parcel, the maximum widths which may be approved are as follows: 
COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL 
Frontage 	Maximum No. of Cut 	Total Width of 
Driveway Approaches 
40 feet or less 	1 	20 feet 
Over 40 feet to 100 feet 	2 	20 feet + 50% of frontage over 40 feet 
Over 100 feet to 200 feet 	3 	50 feet + 30% of frontage over 100 feet 
Over 200 feet to 300 feet 	4 	80 feet + 20% of frontage over 200 feet 
Over 300 feet to 400 feet 	5 	100 feet + 10% of frontage over 300 feet 
Over 500 feet 	6 	120 feet + 5% of frontage over 500 feet 
 
Where two or more driveway approaches are permitted, the total width permitted shall be split equally between the permitted number of approaches unless the applicant can show that there are unusual conditions which would warrant a variance or exception. 
The maximum width of a single driveway shall not exceed 35 feet unless authorized as provided in section 15-221. The maximum width of a single approach shall not exceed 45 feet unless authorized as provided in section 15-221. 
Location. The upper end of a transition curb or the beginning of a curb return at the end of any curb cut used for a driveway approach shall not be closer to the corner than 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 2, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-213. - Application for permit. 
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, utility, association or other legal entity desiring to construct, alter or extend a driveway approach across any curbing, parking, sidewalk or sidewalk space or finds it necessary to perform any construction, maintenance, or repair, excavation or other work on any of the streets of the City of Goodland, shall first make application to the building inspector for a permit therefor. Said application shall be in writing upon a form provided by the city, and made available at the inspector's office. The application shall show the type of construction, the width of the proposed driveway approach, drainage structures or culverts, if any, including size and length, location of driveway approach by lot and block number and addition or plat name, as well as by street and house number and shall also include a drawing, which also shows placement of expansion, and control joints and any adjacent driveway approaches within 25 feet of that proposed and such other information as may be required. The application shall be filed by the property owner or the agent of the owner desiring to construct said driveway approach. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 3, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-214. - Issuance of permit. 
A permit shall be issued by the building inspector after the inspector has determined that the applicant has complied with the terms of this article and paid all fees hereinafter specified. The fees for the permits for the construction of the driveway approaches provided for herein shall be issued for each location wherein such work shall be done. The permit shall be obtained for the cost of $2.00 per opening, plus a cost of $3.00 per lineal foot for the cost of cutting the existing curb. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 4, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-215. - Supervision. 
All work done under a permit issued in compliance with this article shall be inspected by the building inspector or his representative. In addition, an engineer approved by the city, may make the rules, regulations and specifications with respect to materials for and the methods of construction of driveway approaches. A permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the building inspector at any time the city approved engineer or building inspector is satisfied that the work is not being performed according to the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 5, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-216. - Materials. 
Portland cement concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of 3,500 psi at 28 days (6 sack mix). 
Asphaltic concrete, if permitted, shall be a BM-2 mix. 
Aggregate for base shall be any suitable granular material. 
Reinforcement shall conform to the requirements of ASTM, A615, A616 or A617 for deformed bars and to the requirements of ASTM, A185 for welded wire fabric. 
Expansion joint material where required shall be one-half-inch thick asphalt-impregnated premolded fiber conforming to the latest revised standard specification for preformed expansion joint filler for concrete, ASTM D175 or by using approved joint sealant materials of the type and dimensions required by the engineer. 
Drainage structures and culverts may be of any suitable materials allowed by the standard specifications of the city which are suitable for the use intended, and having an end area adequate to carry the design flows as established by the city approved engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 6, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-217. - Construction. 
The owner or his contractor shall protect the public from injury or damage during the construction of driveway approaches by providing barricades, flashing lights and other devices to properly secure the work area within the street right-of-way, and which are substantially in conformance with the "Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices." 
Base Construction. The bottom of the excavation or the top of the fill shall be known as the pavement subgrade. After the driveway approach has been excavated, a layer of approved granular material having a thickness of not less than one inch for residential approaches and not less than three inches for commercial approaches shall be compacted to subgrade similar to the densities of the surrounding soils. All soft and yielding materials and portions of the subgrade that will not compact readily when rolled or tamped shall be removed and replaced with suitable material. 
Residential driveway approaches shall be constructed using a minimum of six inches of reinforced Portland cement concrete or fiber mesh reinforced concrete, from the back of the gutter to the first required expansion joint. The minimum reinforcement shall be 6? x 6? of #6 welded wire fabric placed on chairs certified for proper placement. 
Commercial driveway approaches shall be constructed with a minimum of six inches of reinforced Portland cement concrete or fiber mesh reinforced concrete. The minimum reinforcement shall be 6? x 6? of #6 welded wire fabric placed on certified chairs for proper placement. The six-inch reinforced concrete shall run from the back of the curb to the property line. The building inspector may require additional concrete thickness and additional steel reinforcement when the driving approach will serve heavy traffic. 
When constructing a driveway approach, the owner, his contractor or the street and alley division will make all required saw cuts after the building inspector has determined the location and marked such cuts. The contractor will be responsible for the removal of the concrete curb and flow line to be removed for the placement of the new approach and driveway. The contractor will be responsible for matching the new approach to the existing grade and thickness of the gutter. The contractor will also be responsible for pining the existing curb to the new transition curb and flow line with a minimum of two pins at each end using no less than one-half-inch rebar at a depth of four inches. The new approach will also be pinned into the existing toe of the curb no less than two feet apart using one-half-inch rebar at a depth of four inches. Rebar will be required to extend into the new approach at a distance no less than 24 inches. The building inspector may require the existing curb and gutter to be removed and replaced with new materials when signs of cracking and/or heaving of the flow line is present. When the entire curb and gutter has been determined to be removed by the building inspector, three pins will be located on each end of the existing curb and gutter to tie into the new curb and gutter to the upper end of the transition curb at a depth specified above. The city street and alley division will make the saw cuts for the driveway opening and a saw cut along the front toe of the curb when the entire curb and flow line is required to be removed by the contractor or applicant because of its condition. The saw cut along the toe of the curb will be at a distance to allow the contractor to set and shore a form along the street. The contractor will be responsible for the cost of replacement and/or repair by the city street and alley division of the asphaltic concrete when damaged or removed. An inspection will be required to be made by the building inspector prior to the placement of concrete to inspect placement of required reinforcement. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 7, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-218. - Joints. 
Expansion joints. On approaches where the walk is not adjacent to the curb, a one-half-inch expansion joint shall be placed between the back of the approach and the front edge of the sidewalk section. On approaches where the sidewalk abuts the curb, one-half-inch expansion joints shall be constructed across the back six-inch sidewalk line and at the upper end of each transition curb. On approaches where there is no sidewalk present, a one-half-inch expansion joint shall be constructed at a point three feet behind the back of the curb. 
Control joints or contraction joints shall be formed by one of the following methods: sawing, forming by hand, forming by premolded filler or using full-depth construction joints. Joint depth shall be a minimum of one-fourth the slab thickness. Control joints shall be made at ten-foot intervals. Hand-formed joints shall have a maximum edge radius of one-fourth inch. Sawing of joints shall begin as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to permit sawing without excessive raveling. All joints shall be completed before uncontrolled shrinkage cracking occurs. Joints shall be continuous across the slab, unless interrupted by full-depth premolded joint filler. Joints shall extend completely through the curb. Joint openings wider than one-fourth inch shall be cleaned and sealed before allowing the opening of the parking area to traffic. 
On any driveway approach where asphaltic concrete has been approved for use, a suitable granular base with a BM-2 pavement shall be provided. The depths of base and BM-2 pavement shall be approved by the city engineer or building inspector before construction. 
Drainage structures and/or culverts shall be adequately bedded in the bottom of the ditch so that the flow line matches the ditch grade or the grade established. Back fill over and around drainage structures and culverts shall be placed so as to preserve grade and alignment. Back fill material shall not be allowed to enter either end of the structure or culvert. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 8, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-219. - Slope and driveway approaches. 
(a)  Streets with curb and gutter. 
(1)  For streets with sidewalks set back from the curb, the driveway approach shall slope upward at a minimum slope of not less than one-fourth inch per foot nor more than a maximum ten percent slope from the gutter grade to an elevation equal to the elevation of the top of the curb plus an added rise equal to one-fourth inch per foot to the front of the sidewalk line. The driveway approach at the rear sidewalk line shall be at an elevation one-fourth inch per foot higher than the front sidewalk line. 
(2)  For streets with the front sidewalk line at the curb line, the driveway approach shall start at gutter grade and slope upward to an elevation equal to the top of curb grade plus one-fourth inch per foot from the back of the sidewalk. 
(3)  For all streets, the driveway approach shall slope upward from the rear sidewalk line to the property line at a minimum slope of ten percent. 
(4)  In the case where the lot or building site lies at a lower elevation than the street grade, the requirements of subsection (a), shall be fulfilled before the driveway may slope downward into the lot unless authorized as provided in section 15-221. 
(b)  Streets without curb and gutter. In the event a sidewalk grade has not been or cannot be established, the driveway approach shall slope upward from the edge of the roadway to an elevation of not less than six inches plus one-fourth inch per foot above pavement at the property line, maintaining a slope of not less than one-fourth inch per foot nor greater than ten percent. In no case shall a driveway approach slope downward from the edge of the roadway to the property line. 
Failure by or inability of the city to establish street or sidewalk grades shall not constitute liability for the city in the event future development or events require a change in a street grade or elevation which may require the reconstruction of any existing driveway approach to comply with the provisions of section 15-219 hereinabove. 
No curb cuts shall be made beyond any property line as projected except when consented to, in writing, by the adjoining property owner involved. 
All curb returns and transition curbs shall be constructed according to specifications as presented in the Americans With Disability Act accessibility guidelines provided by the building Inspector and which is available at the building inspector's office. 
On all driveway approaches on streets without curbs and where street grades has not been established, both residential and commercial driveway approaches shall be paved or surfaced with either an asphaltic surfacing over an adequate base or with Portland cement concrete as approved by the building inspector. Where street grades have been established, driveway approaches shall be constructed as specified in subsection (a) hereinabove. 
On streets without curbs and where streets or roadside ditches exist, drainage structures or culverts having a minimum length of at least five feet longer than the width of the driveway approach at the location of the culvert shall be provided by the applicant. The culvert length may be decreased by the construction of head walls which meet the approval of the building inspector. The size of such drainage structures or culverts shall be determined by a licensed engineer or an engineer approved by the city and shall in no case be less than 12 inches in diameter or have an equivalent end area. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 9, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-220. - Maintenance and approval. 
Every driveway approach or entrance, and any related drainage structure or culvert shall be maintained and kept in a safe condition by the owner of the abutting property or by his agent, and any such driveway approach which shall not be so maintained and kept or which shall interfere with or obstruct the drainage carried by such street or ditch or the use of such street for the purpose of travel shall be repaired or replaced to conform with the specifications of this article or shall be removed. Upon the removal of any such driveway approach, that portion of the street and any related ditches shall be restored as nearly as practicable to its former condition. All curbing and/or ditches shall be replaced by and at the expense of the owner of the abutting property. Should the abutting owner fail to comply with these provisions, the city may do the work by force or by contract and place a lien against the abutting property for the cost of the work including engineering and administrative costs. Before the city proceeds to do the work by force account, the property owner shall be entitled to a hearing before the commission if an objection is filed with the city clerk within 15 days after receiving said notice. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 10, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-221. - Unusual conditions. 
The building inspector is hereby authorized to grant in writing variances from the strict provisions of this article, provided that the inspector first determines that the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The exception or variance desired arises from peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily existing in similar districts in the city or is due to the nature of the business or operation on the abutting property; 
(2)  That the exception or variance desired is not against the public interest, particularly safety, convenience and general welfare; and 
(3)  That the granting of the permit for the exception or variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 11, 12-7-98)  
Sec. 15-222. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article, or causing, permitting or suffering the same to be done, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five days nor more than 30 days of both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this division occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1406, § 13, 12-7-98)  
Secs. 15-223—15-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-301. - Building material in streets. 
No person or persons shall erect upon any street in this city, any scaffolding or other structure or place any building material in any street, except in front of the lot or lots where buildings are being erected, nor shall such material or scaffolding occupy more than one-third the width of the street, or one-half of the sidewalk; provided, that should all work cease on such building for a period of two weeks, then such obstruction shall be considered unlawful and each day's violation be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 1)  
Sec. 15-302. - Buildings in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to erect or cause to be erected upon any street, alley or public grounds in this city, any building or buildings or any other structure or obstruction whatever; provided, that this shall not be construed to prevent the erection of the necessary scaffolding and fixtures used in the construction of buildings or improvements and each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 15-303. - Glass, tacks, nails. 
No person shall throw or deposit upon any private property not his own or upon any public property any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person or to cause an unsightly appearance. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 931)  
Sec. 15-304. - Hauling material. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul over the streets, or alleys of this city any loose material of any kind, except in a vehicle having a tight box so constructed as to prevent the splashing or spilling of any of the substances therein contained upon said street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 4)  
Sec. 15-305. - Hedge fences height and shrubbery, overhanging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any hedge, hedge fence and shrubbery bordering on any street, alley or sidewalk in this city to permit the same to grow to a height of more than four feet, or so as to overhang and obstruct any sidewalk, alley or street. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 5; Ord. No. 1440, § 1, 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 15-306. - Removing barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to walk upon, drive or ride over or across any pavement in course of construction before the same has been opened for public travel, or any uncompleted grading or sidewalk construction which has not been opened for travel. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 9)  
Sec. 15-307. - Providing barricades. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, throw down, run over, or interfere with any barricade or barricades erected by the city or any contractor executing a municipal contract, placed to guard and protect any grading, paving, sidewalk construction or other work. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 10)  
Sec. 15-308. - Excavations, how graded. 
Every person who shall make any excavation or obstruction in any of the public thoroughfares or public grounds within the city, or so near such thoroughfares and grounds as to be dangerous to those traveling upon such thoroughfares and grounds, shall maintain, during the day time, sufficient and appropriate barricades and warning signals, unless otherwise specially provided by other ordinances and shall in the nighttime, in addition to such warning signals, maintain a sufficient number of red lights to effectively warn the traveling public of the existence of danger and failure or neglect to do so should be deemed unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. II, § 11)  
Sec. 15-309. - Trimming trees. 
There shall be a minimum clearance of 14 feet between the street surface and overhanging branches of any tree abutting any street and a minimum clearance of ten feet between any sidewalk and the overhanging branches of any tree abutting said sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. VI, § 1; Ord. No. 1439, § 1, 8-7-2000)  
Sec. 15-310. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of sections 15-301, 15-302, 15-304, 15-305, 15-306, 15-307, 15-308 and 15-309 shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 1173, § 1)  
Secs. 15-311—15-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1j, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. IV in its entirety. Former Art. IV, §§ 15-401—15-418, pertained to city tree board and derived from Ord. No. 899, §§ 1, 4—9, 11—18; the Code of 1983; Ord. No. 1022, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 1232, § 1; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 1995. 
 
Secs. 15-401—15-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 15-501. - Duty to remove snow and ice from sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or occupant of any lot abutting upon any sidewalk in the commercial district of the City of Goodland, either zoned as C-1 or C-2, to fail to remove from such sidewalks all snow and ice by noon following a snow storm. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 1)  
Sec. 15-502. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of section 15-501 shall upon conviction be fined in a sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 887, § 3; Code 1984)  
Sec. 15-503. - Placing of snow; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall place snow, removed from private property, upon any public street, alley or sidewalk. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1179, §§ 1, 2)  
Secs. 15-504—15-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS 
 
Sec. 15-601. - Obstructing crossing. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any corporation leasing or otherwise operating a railroad in this city to allow its trains, engines or cars to stand upon any crossing or street, to exceed ten minutes at any one time without leaving an opening in the traveled position of such street or crossing of at least 30 feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. VI, § 2)  
Sec. 15-602. - Moving trains. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any of its employees to run any train, engine or cars through, along or across any street, alley or public place in this city, at a greater rate of speed than 15 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 833, Art. VI, § 3)  
Sec. 15-603. - Penalty. 
Any person who, owning, controlling, operating or assisting in controlling or operating such railway; shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction, be fined in the sum of $25.00 for each and every day they or it shall fail to comply therewith. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 2)  
Secs. 15-604—15-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MANAGEMENT OF USES OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings, construction and installation, ch. 4. 
 
Sec. 15-701. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Public right-of-way" means only the area of real property in which the city has a dedicated or acquired right-of-way interest in the real property. It shall include the area on, below or above the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, roads, highways, parkways or boulevards dedicated or acquired as right-of-way. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service, easements obtained by utilities or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts. 
(b)  "Occupant" means any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, which enters upon the right-of-way of the city, or in any manner establishes a physical presence on, upon, in or over the right-of-way of the city, for the purpose of installing, construction, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto. 
Occupant shall not include the following: 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity installing, constructing, maintaining or operating an installation governed by Chapter 4, Article IV, of the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. Nothing herein shall exempt any person, firm, corporation, association or entity from complying with Chapter of the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity installing, constructing, or maintaining a fence governed by Chapter 4, Article VIII, of the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. Nothing herein shall exempt any person, firm, corporation, association or entity from complying with Chapter 4, of the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(3)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or entity installing, constructing or maintaining residential landscaping. "Landscaping" means the treatment of the ground surface with live planting materials, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, grass, ground cover or other growing horticultural material. Other materials such as wood chips, stone, or decorative rock may also be utilized. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 1, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-702. - Authorization from city required. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, shall enter upon the right-of-way to the city, or in any manner establish a physical presence on, upon, in or over the right-of-way of the city, for the purpose of installing, construction, maintaining or operating lines, conduits, wires, fiber optic wires, cables, pipes, pipelines, poles, towers, vaults or appliances, or related facilities or appurtenances thereto, without the express written permission of the city. The permission of the city may be granted by a franchise agreement pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-2001 et seq. or by such other agreement as the governing body determines best protects the public interest in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as granting an occupant the authority to construct, maintain or operate any facility or related appurtenance on property owned by a city outside of the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The city shall process each valid and administratively complete application for use of the right-of-way within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 2, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-703. - Health, safety, and welfare regulations. 
The authority of a provider to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall always be subject and subordinate to the reasonable public health, safety and welfare requirements and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 3, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-704. - Specific portions of right-of-way restricted. 
(a)  The city hereby prohibits the use or occupation of a specific portion of public right-of-way by a provider due to a reasonable public interest necessitated by public health, safety and welfare so long as the authority is exercised in a competitively neutral manner and is not unreasonable or discriminatory. A reasonable public interest shall include the following: 
(1)  The prohibition is based upon a recommendation of the city engineer, is related to public health, safety and welfare and is nondiscriminatory among providers, including incumbent providers; 
(2)  The provider has rejected a reasonable, competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory justification offered by the city for requiring an alternate method or alternate route that will result in neither unreasonable additional installation expense nor a diminution of service quality; 
(3)  The city reasonably determines, after affording the provider reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard, that a denial is necessary to protect the public health and safety and is imposed on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis; or 
(4)  The specific portion of the public right-of-way for which the provider seeks use and occupancy is environmentally sensitive as defined by state or federal law or lies within a previously designated historic district as defined by local, state or federal law. 
(b)  If the city denies a request to use or occupy a specific portion of the public right-of-way, the requester shall be served a notice of such denial by first class mail. The notice shall indicate that the requester shall have ten days from the date of receipt of the notice to request a public hearing by the city governing body concerning the denial. Failure to make a timely request for a hearing shall constitute a waiver of the person's right to contest the denial before the governing body. The hearing shall be held by the governing body within 30 days after the filing of the request therefore, and the potential occupant shall be advised by the city of the time and place of the hearing. Following the public hearing, if the city governing body denies a potential occupant's request to use or occupy a specific portion of the public right-of-way, such determination may be appealed to district court. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 4, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-705. - Compliance with Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Any occupant of the public right-of-way shall comply with the provisions of Standards and Guides for Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction, Maintenance, Utility, and Incident Management Operations Part VI of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 1988 Edition, Revision 3, dated September 3,1993, which is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 5, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-706. - Additional requirements. 
The city shall have the right to control placement of facilities within the public right-of-way so as to not interfere with facilities already existing in the public right-of-way and with future plans for use of the public right-of-way by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 6, 4-17-05)  
Sec. 15-707. - Emergencies. 
If there is an emergency necessitating response work or repair, any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity which has been granted permission to occupy the public right-of-way may begin that repair or emergency response work or take any action required under the circumstances, provided that the person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity notifies the city promptly after beginning the work and timely thereafter meets any permit or other requirement had there not been such an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 7, 4-17-05)  
Sec. 15-708. - Repair. 
Any occupant of the public right-of-way is hereby required to repair all damage to a public right-of-way caused by the activities of that occupant, or of any agent affiliate, employee, or subcontractor of that occupant, while occupying, installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way and to return the right-of-way, to its functional equivalence before the damage pursuant to the reasonable requirements and specifications of the city. If the occupant fails to make the repairs required by the city, the city may effect those repairs and charge the occupant the cost of those repairs. 
Any occupant of the public right-of-way is hereby required to repair any and all damage to any facilities maintained by the city or facilities of any other occupant of the public right-of-way caused by the activities of that occupant, or of any agent affiliate, employee, or subcontractor of that occupant, while occupying, installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way and to return the right-of-way, to its functional equivalence before the damage pursuant to the reasonable requirements and specifications of the city. If the occupant fails to make the repairs required by the city, the city may effect those repairs and charge the occupant the cost of those repairs. 
In restoring the right-of-way, the occupant guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 24 months following its completion. During the 24 months the occupant shall, upon notification from the city, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary, using any method as required by the city. Said work shall be completed within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 calendar days, of the receipt of notice from city. In the event the occupant is required to perform new restoration pursuant to the foregoing guarantee, the city shall have the authority to extend the guarantee period for such new restoration for up to an additional 24 months from the date of the new restoration. The 24-month guarantee period shall be applicable to failure of the surface as well as failure below the surface. Payment of an excavation fee shall not relieve the occupant of the obligation to complete the necessary right-of-way restoration. 
The occupant responsible for the excavation who leaves any debris in the right-of-way shall be responsible for providing safety protection in accordance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and any applicable federal or state requirement. 
If an excavation cannot be back-filled immediately and left unattended, the permittee shall securely and adequately cover the unfilled excavation. The permittee has sole responsibility for maintaining proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 8, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-709. - Relocation. 
Whenever requested by the city, in order to accomplish construction and maintenance activities directly related to improvements for the health, safety and welfare of the public, an occupant promptly shall remove its facilities from the public right-of-way or shall relocate or adjust its facilities within the public right-of-way at no cost to the political subdivision. Such relocation or adjustment shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible within the time set forth in any request by the city for such relocation or adjustment. Any damages suffered by the city or its contractors as a result of such occupant's failure to timely relocate or adjust its facilities shall be borne by such occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 9, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-710. - Fees. 
The following fees shall be assessed against occupants of the public right-of-way: 
(a)  A permit fee of $2.00 per opening; 
(b)  An excavation fee of $2.00 plus $.10 per foot of ditch or trench opening for each street or pavement cut; 
(c)  Repair and restoration costs associated with repairing and restoring the public right-of-way because of damage caused by the provider, its assigns, contractors, and/or subcontractors in the right-of-way; and 
(d)  A performance bond, in a form acceptable to the city, from a surety licensed to conduct surety business in the State of Kansas, insuring appropriate and timely performance in the construction and maintenance of facilities located in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 10, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-711. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Occupants shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by the negligence of the occupant, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate or subcontractor of the provider, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors or representatives, while installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way. 
(b)  The indemnity provided by this subsection does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors or subcontractors. If an occupant and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state or federal law. 
(c)  This section is solely for the benefit of the city and occupant and does not create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 11, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-712. - Claim notification. 
An occupant shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the provider or the city related to or arising out of the occupant's activities in a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 12, 4-17-06)  
Sec. 15-713. - Penalty provision. 
Any person, firm, corporation, association, utility, or entity, or agent, contractor or subcontractor thereof, violating any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a municipal offense, and shall upon conviction be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 1545, § 13, 4-17-06)  
Chapter 16 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES  
ARTICLE I. - STANDARD TRAFFIC ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 1401, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed §§ 16-102—16-106 and repealed and amended § 16-101. Sections 2 and 3 of Ord. No. 1401 have been designated as §§ 16-102 and 16-103 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 16-101. - Incorporating the standard traffic ordinance. 
There is hereby incorporated by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic within the corporate limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, that certain standard traffic ordinance known as the "Standard Traffic Ordinance for Kansas Cities," Edition of 2019, prepared and published in book form by the League of Kansas Municipalities, Topeka, Kansas. No fewer than three copies of said standard traffic ordinance shall be marked or stamped "Official Copy as Adopted by Ordinance No. 1725," and to which shall be attached a copy of this ordinance, and filed with the city clerk to be open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable hours. The police department, municipal judge and all administrative departments of the city charged with enforcement of the ordinance shall be supplied, at the cost of the city, such number of official copies of such standard traffic ordinance similarly marked, as may be deemed expedient. 
(Code 1991; Ord. No. 1303, 1-4-93; Ord. No. 1310, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1328, § 1, 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 9-18-95; Ord. No. 1360, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 7-21-97; Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 8-3-98; Ord. No. 1421, § 1, 9-20-99; Ord. No. 1437, § 1, 8-7-00; Ord. No. 1456, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 1487, § 1, 8-19-02; Ord. No. 1506, § 1, 7-21-03; Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 1532, § 1, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 1596, § 1, 3, 8-18-08; Ord. No. 1602, § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 1610, § 1, 8-16-10; Ord. No. 1623, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-11; Ord. No. 1636, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-12; Ord. No. 1649, §§ 1, 2, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 1651, § 7, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 3-3-14; Ord. No. 1659, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-14; Ord. No. 1662, 9-15-14; Res. No. 1429, § 1, 10-20-14; Ord. No. 1666, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-14; Ord. No. 1674 , § 1, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 1676 , §§ 1, 2, 8-17-15; Ord. No. 1694 , §§ 1, 2, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1706 , §§ 1, 2, 7-17-17; Ord. No. 1715 , § I, 8-6-18; Ord. No. 1725 , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 16-102. - Traffic infractions and traffic offenses. 
(a)  An ordinance traffic infraction is a violation of any section of this article that prescribes or requires the same behavior as that prescribed or required by a statutory provision that is classified as a traffic infraction in K.S.A. 8-2118. 
(b)  All traffic violations which are included within this article, and which are not ordinance traffic infractions, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall be considered traffic offenses. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 2, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 16-103. - Penalty for scheduled fines. 
The fine for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or any other traffic offense for which the municipal judge establishes a fine in a fine schedule shall not be less than $10.00 nor more than $2,500.00, except for speeding, which shall not be less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00. A person tried and convicted for violation of an ordinance traffic infraction or other traffic offense for which a fine has been established in a schedule of fines shall pay a fine fixed by the court not to exceed $2,500.00. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 3, 8-3-98)  
Secs. 16-104—16-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-201. - Careless driving prohibited. 
No person shall operate or halt any vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a careless or heedless disregard for the rights or the safety of others, or in such a manner as to endanger or be likely to endanger, any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 972)  
Sec. 16-202. - Unauthorized vehicle on airport property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive an unauthorized vehicle or place an unauthorized vehicle within the fenced boundaries of the Goodland Municipal Airport, also known as Renner Field. 
(b)  An authorized vehicle is hereby defined as any vehicle, private or governmental, that is necessary to the furtherance of any lawful airport activity or function. All other vehicles are unauthorized vehicles. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall be convicted of a violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 1)  
Sec. 16-203. - Stop, park, leave standing; vehicle. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, on the street or at the curb on the street designated as Main Street, between Eighth Street and Seventeenth Street, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on Monday and Friday of each week, so that the portion of Main Street might be kept clear of vehicles to allow the city to clean the portion of Main Street as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 856; Ord. No. 1443, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-00)  
Sec. 16-204. - Parking vehicle not bearing current registration plate prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stand, or leave any motor vehicle not bearing a currently valid registration plate or plates upon any public street, alley, thoroughfare, right-of-way, municipal parking lot, or other public area within the city. Each day the vehicle is allowed to remain parked, standing or left as above stated shall constitute a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 973)  
Sec. 16-205. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 1465, adopted Nov. 5, 2001, repealed § 16-205, which pertained to one-hour parking of truck-tractors and semitrailers, and derived from Ord. No. 1116. Similar provisions are found under § 16-211.  
Sec. 16-206. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 1403, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed § 16-206 which pertained to restricted license and derived from Ord. No. 1048.  
Sec. 16-207. - School zones. 
(a)  Enumerated . The following streets are hereby declared to be school zones, as designated by appropriate signage. Each zone runs from sign to sign, located on the streets designated below: 
Arcade from 2nd to 5th. 
Arcade from 11th to 14th. 
Broadway from 12th to 15th. 
Caldwell from 3rd to 5th. 
Caldwell from 11th to 14th. 
Cherry from 11th to 14th. 
Wyoming from 10th to 12th. 
4th from Walnut to Arcade. 
12th from Caldwell to Arcade. 
12th from Cattletrail to Texas. 
13th from Caldwell to Arcade. 
(b)  Maximum speed limits. The maximum speed limit, within a school zone, is hereby declared to be 20 miles per hour on each and every Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, beginning with the first day of school in the fall of each and every year, and ending with the last day of school in the spring of each and every year, except on legal holidays wherein school in the spring of each and every year, except in legal holidays wherein school is not in session. On those days in which the 20 mile per hour school zone speed limit is in effect, said speed limit shall only be in effect during the following hours, to wit: 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m. 
(Code 1989; Ord. No. 1322, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 1403, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-98; Ord. No. 1673 , §§ 1—3, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 1679 , §§ 1, 2, 9-21-15; Ord. No. 1698 , § 1, 9-6-16)  
Sec. 16-208. - Private property; traffic regulations. 
Whenever the person in possession or control of any private property used by the public for purposes of vehicle traffic by permission of the owner, shall cause to be posted at each entrance thereto a permanently lettered, clearly legible sign with the following legend: 
"Traffic Regulations of the City of Goodland Enforced on this Property." 
Then such private property shall thereafter be deemed to be under the traffic regulations of the city as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1261, § 1)  
Sec. 16-209. - Main trafficway designated. 
Armory Road between Caldwell Street and the Municipal Airport be, and it is hereby, designated as a main trafficway in the city, all in accordance with K.S.A. 12-685 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1276, § 1)  
Sec. 16-210. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article for which a penalty is not otherwise provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 926, § 3)  
Sec. 16-211. - Parking on city streets; abandoned/unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Alley or alleyway. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of lots or buildings in urban districts and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic. 
Heavy truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with a manufacturer's G.V.W.R. of 12,000 pounds or greater. 
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle or a motorized wheelchair, which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
Person. Every natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type unit built on or for use on a chassis and designed primarily as living quarters for recreational, camping, vacation or travel use and which has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle; that such terms shall not include a unit which has no electrical system which operates above 12 volts and has no provisions for plumbing, heating, and any other component or feature for which a standard is adopted by the State Uniform Standards Code for mobile homes and recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall also include a trailer which has on it a vessel, motor boat, sailboard, or sailboat as defined by K.S.A. 32-1102, and any amendments thereto, or containing a motorcycle or motorcycles as defined by K.S.A. 8-1438, and any amendments thereto, or motor-driven cycles, as defined by K.S.A. 8-1439, and any amendments thereto, or snowmobiles. 
Semitrailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. When the word "highway" or the word "street" is used in this chapter, it shall mean street, avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, trafficway, alley and other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  Two-hour parking. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall park or store any heavy truck, truck tractor, semi-trailer, recreational vehicle, trailer of any kind, farm machinery or boat on any street or alley within the City for a period longer than two hours of any day; provided, nothing herein shall prohibit the parking of a heavy truck, or a truck tractor without the semi-trailer attached to it on the streets and alleys within the commercial and industrial zones of the City; provided further, nothing herein shall prohibit the temporary parking of a vehicle or trailer, whether occupied or not, within the City for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the loading or unloading of property and passengers; and, provided further, nothing herein shall prohibit parking pursuant to a parking permit as set forth in subsection (d) herein. 
(c)  Abandoned/unattended vehicles. A person shall not use the public highway to abandon vehicles or use the highway to leave vehicles unattended in such a manner as to interfere with public highways operations. When a person leaves a motor vehicle on a public highway or other property open to use by the public, the City of Goodland, after 48 hours or when the motor vehicle interferes with public highway operations, may remove and impound the motor vehicle. 
(d)  Parking permits. Parking permits may be issued by the police department for temporary parking of recreational vehicles as defined herein, on the streets and alleys within the City. Said permits shall be for a period not to exceed five days. Parking permits associated with construction will be issued by the building inspector for contractors involved in the construction project. These permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed the duration of the project. 
(e)  Penalty and fines. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or company violating any of the terms and provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than five days, or both fine and imprisonment, provided that each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1465, §§ 1—4, 11-5-01; Ord. No. 1570, § 1, 12-4-06) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 1465, adopted Nov. 5, 2001, repealed § 16-211 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions herein set out. Former § 16-211, derived from Ord. No. 1305, adopted Feb. 16, 1993.  
Sec. 16-212. - Speed limits of K-27. 
This section pertains to speed limits beginning at the centerline of K-27 and the sectionline common to Section 30 and Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 39, West of the 6th P.M., and continuing thence north for a total distance of 1.657 miles, more or less. There are established the following speed limits: 
45 mile per hour for the first section of 0.369 mile, more or less, beginning at the centerline of K-27 and the sectionline common to Section 30 and Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 39, West of the 6th P.M., and continuing thence north. 
40 mile per hour for the second section of .7 miles, more or less, beginning 0.369 miles north of the sectionline common to Section 30 and Section 31, Township 8 South, Range 39, West of the 6th P.M., continuing thence north. 
(Ord. No. 1323, §§ 1—3, 6-20-94)  
Sec. 16-213. - Stop intersections. 
There shall be placed at the intersection of Twelve Street and Cattletrail Street in the City of Goodland, traffic control devices in the form of two stop signs to control traffic traveling north and south on Cattletrail Street. 
(Ord. No. 1343, § 1, 12-4-95)  
Sec. 16-214. - Parking regulations for off-street municipal parking. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall be applicable: 
(1)  Commercial motor vehicle. A motor vehicle designed or used to transport passengers or property, if: 
a.  The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds or such lesser rating, as determined by rules and regulations adopted by the secretary, but shall not be more restrictive than the federal regulation; 
b.  The vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or 
c.  The vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 172, subpart F, effective January 1, 1991. 
(2)  Farm tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry and such term shall include every self-propelled implement of husbandry. 
(3)  House trailer: 
a.  A trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode or sleeping place, either permanently or temporarily, and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways; or 
b.  A trailer or a semitrailer whose chassis and exterior shell is designed and constructed for use as a house trailer, as defined in paragraph a., but which is used instead permanently or temporarily for the advertising, sales, display or promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose except the transportation of property for hire or the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier. 
(4)  Implement of husbandry. Every vehicle designed or adapted and used exclusively for agricultural operations and only incidentally moved or operated upon the highways. Such term shall include, but not limited to, a fertilizer spreader or nurse tank used exclusively for dispensing or spreading water, dust or liquid fertilizers or agricultural chemicals, and defined in K.S.A. 2-2202, and amendments thereto, regardless of ownership. Implement of husbandry shall not include: 
a.  A truck mounted with a fertilizer spreader used or manufactured principally to spread animal dung; 
b.  A mixer-feed truck owned and used by a feedlot, as defined by K.S.A. 47-1501, and amendments thereto, and specially designed and used exclusively for dispensing feed to livestock in such feedlot; or 
c.  A truck permanently mounted with a spreader used exclusively for dispensing or spreading water, dust or liquid fertilizers or agricultural chemicals, ad defined in K.S.A. 2-2202, and amendments thereto, regardless of ownership. 
(5)  Pole trailer. Every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
(6)  Semitrailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(7)  Trailer. Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(8)  Heavy truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with a manufacturer's G.V.W.R. of 12,000 pounds or greater. 
(9)  Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(10)  Wrecker or tow truck. Any motor vehicle equipped with booms, winches or similar equipment specifically designed for recovery or towing of vehicles. 
(11)  Truck-camper. Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space. 
(12)  Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
(13)  Motor-driven cycle. Every motorcycle, including every motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, and every bicycle with motor attached, except a motorized bicycle or an electric-assisted bicycle. 
(14)  Motorized bicycle. Every device having two tandem wheels or three wheels which may be propelled by either human power or helper motor, or by both, and which has: 
a.  A motor which produces not more than 3.5 brake horsepower; 
b.  A cylinder capacity of not more than 130 cubic centimeters; 
c.  An automatic transmission; and 
d.  The capability of a maximum design speed of no more than 30 miles per hour. 
(15)  Passenger car. Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, designed for carrying ten passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
(16)  Recreational vehicle. A vehicular-type unit built on or for use on a chassis and designed primarily as living quarters for recreational, camping, vacation or travel use and which has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle, and which has a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 40 feet; but such term shall not include a unit which has no electrical system which operates above 12 volts and has no provisions for plumbing, heating and any other component or feature for which a standard is adopted by the state uniform standards code for mobile homes and recreational vehicles. 
(17)  Light truck. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property with a manufacturer's G.V.W.R. of 12,000 pounds or less. 
(18)  Motor vehicle. Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle or a motorized wheelchair, which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
(19)  Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
(20)  Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transport or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  [Prohibited/permitted parking.] 
(1)  No vehicle or motor vehicle shall be parked upon any off-street municipal parking area from 12:00 a.m. midnight to 5:00 a.m. except in clearly marked and designated areas. 
(2)  No vehicle or motor vehicle as defined in subsection (a)(1)—(11) herein shall park at anytime in any off-street municipal parking area. 
(3)  Vehicles and motor vehicles as defined in subsection (a)(12)—(17) hereof are authorized to park in any off-street municipal parking area subject to the restrictions contained herein. 
(4)  No vehicle which is not licensed for use on the streets or highways which or is otherwise inoperable shall at any time be parked upon any off-street municipal parking area. 
This section shall be in addition to all other ordinances regulating parking within the City of Goodland. 
(c)  [Penalty for violation.] Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $20.00 nor more than $500.00. Each violation which continues for a period of greater than 24 hours shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1462, §§ 1—9, 10-1-01)  
Sec. 16-215. - Compression release engine braking systems prohibited. 
(a)  Definition. The term compression release engine braking systems a/k/a Jake Brake as used herein means any device commonly known by that name or any similar device used to slow a motor vehicle by engine compression creating loud or excessive noises to be emitted through the vehicle's exhaust system. 
(b)  Use of compression release engine braking systems a/k/a jake brakes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle within the limits of the City of Goodland, Kansas, to use a compression release engine braking system a/k/a jake brake system in said motor vehicle without a properly installed and operational engine brake muffler. 
(c)  Application. The provisions hereof shall be in addition to the provisions of section 12.101 of the Code of the City of Goodland and section 9.1 of the Uniform Public Offense Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas, prohibiting disturbances of the peace and shall not by implication or otherwise be construed as replacing or in conflict with any provision of said section 12.101 of the Code of the City of Goodland and section 9.1 of the Uniform Public Offense Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(d)  Penalties for violations. Any person convicted of a violation of this section will be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1510, §§ 1—4, 10-20-03)  
Sec. 16-216. - Parking, operation of vehicles upon streets during traffic emergencies and upon streets designated as emergency routes. 
(a)  Finding of governing body. The city commission finds that the parking of vehicles on emergency routes and the operation of vehicles on streets during a disaster or when covered by a heavy accumulation of snow is a matter affecting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Goodland, Kansas, for the reason that parked, stalled, and abandoned vehicles impede snow removal operations, impede disaster response and cause serious traffic congestion. 
(b)  Declaration of traffic emergency. Whenever a disaster such as a tornado, flooding, fire, chemical spills or other disasters deemed as an emergency, the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the city manager or the director of public works, may declare a traffic emergency and until such traffic emergency is terminated, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To park a vehicle on any street designated an emergency route in subsection (f) of this section. 
(2)  To operate a motor vehicle on an emergency route during a traffic emergency caused by a disaster. 
(c)  Declaration of traffic emergency during winter weather. Whenever snow has accumulated or there is a possibility that snow will accumulate to such a depth that snow removal operation will be required, the mayor or in the absence of the mayor, the city manager or the director of public works, may declare a traffic emergency and until such traffic emergency is terminated, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To operate a motor vehicle on a city street designated as an emergency route during a traffic emergency caused by snow and ice without first having equipped such vehicle with tire chains, except that motor vehicles with four-wheel drive need not be equipped with tire chains. 
(2)  To park a vehicle on any street designated an emergency route in subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Notice of traffic emergency; termination. Upon declaring a traffic emergency, the mayor, city manager, or director of public works shall forthwith cause appropriate notice to be given to the local press, radio, and other media on the severity of the emergency and the phase which has been invoked. The traffic emergency shall be terminated by notice substantially in the same manner as it was declared. 
(e)  Removal of stranded and parked vehicles. All vehicles parked on emergency routes must be removed within two hours after declaration of a traffic emergency has been given. All stranded or abandoned vehicles impeding city operations or causing traffic congestion of any city street shall be removed immediately. After declaration of a traffic emergency, any vehicle parked on an emergency route after two-hour notice and any vehicle impeding city removal operations or causing traffic congestion may be removed or caused to be removed by a police officer to the nearest garage or other place of safety and the vehicle may not be recovered until the towing and storage charges are paid by the owner of the vehicle. 
(f)  Emergency routes; establishment; signs. The following streets are hereby established an emergency route within the city: 
Kansas from 17th to 1st 
Caldwell from 17th to Airport Entrance 
Center from 12th to 8th 
Cherry from 17th to Highway 24 
8th Street from Highway 27 to Eastridge 
9th Street from Center to Caldwell 
12th Street from Highway 27 to Harrison 
17th from Cattletrail to Cherry 
1st from Kansas to Grand 
Toelkes Avenue 
Maple Avenue 
Aspen from Maple to 2nd and Grand 
2nd and Grand to Kansas 
Arcade from 18th to 2nd 
18th Street 
The director of public works shall, upon passage of this section, cause appropriate signs to be installed along each of said streets designated emergency routes. 
(g)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation of this section shall continue, after a person is charged with the same, shall be a new and independent violation of this section chargeable to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 1575, §§ 1, 2, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 1585, § 1, 11-5-07)  
Sec. 16-217. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1693 , § 22, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed § 16-217 in its entirety. Former § 16-217 pertained to operation of micro-utility trucks on the streets within the city and derived from Ord. No. 1591, §§ 1—5, adopted May 5, 2008; and Ord. No. 1595, §§ 1—5, adopted Aug. 4, 2008.  
Sec. 16-218. - J-turn prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating a vehicle on Main Street, between 13th and 14th Streets, 4th Street, between Walnut and Arcade Avenues, and 12th Street, between Colorado and Wyoming Avenues to make a J-turn. A J-turn is defined as either making a left-hand turn across an oncoming lane or lanes of traffic in order to park at or pull adjacent to the opposite curb from the original direction of travel, or backing up from a parked position across an adjacent lane or lanes of traffic to proceed in a direction to the right of the original parked position. 
(Ord. No. 1691 , § 1, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 16-219. - Off-street parking and driveway regulations. 
(a)  Definitions . For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall be applicable: 
All-weather improved surface. A surface consisting of gravel at least ¾-inch thick and two-inches in depth, stone, brick, hot mix asphalt or concrete paving, or any such similar surface as determined by the building official. 
Building line. See section 19-202. 
Curb line. A line delineated by the alignment of the backside of the curb and gutter placed in the construction of a public street. On streets without curb and/or gutter, the property line abutting a public street shall be considered the curb line. 
Vehicle . Any device, other than a motorized bicycle or a motorized wheelchair, which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, motor homes and motorcycles. The term "vehicle" shall also include non-motorized campers, "fifth wheel" motor homes, and other similar devices. 
(b)  No person, firm or corporation shall park or store any vehicle, whether operational or not, between the curb line of a street and the building line on any residential lot, nor any residential lot lacking a building line, except that such parking shall be permitted on an all-weather improved parking surface. 
(c)  All parking areas, driveways, or any part of the property used for vehicle travel shall consist of an all-weather improved surface, with the surface clearly delineated by curbs, landscaping, or other similar features to distinguish the parking area from the remainder of the yard. 
(1)  Approved surfaces shall not include grass, carpet, shingles, plastic, cardboard, or wood chips. 
(d)  If the side yard of a property is less than eight feet wide, the storage or parking of such vehicles in said side yard is prohibited. 
(e)  No more than seven vehicles shall be parked outside on any residential lot. Provided, vehicles enclosed within a garage or solid fence six feet in height shall not be counted towards said total. 
(f)  Exceptions. 
(1)  An unimproved driveway shall be allowed if the total driveway width, including any improved surfaces, is no greater than 24 feet and demonstrates the delineation specified in this section. 
(2)  The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to the parking area for any church, school or government building. 
(3)  Whenever extraordinary hardship or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations, the building line of the neighborhood may be substituted for the building line of the individual property at the discretion of the city manager. 
(g)  Penalty. Violation of this section shall be unlawful and punishable by a fine of no less than $30.00 nor no more than $100.00. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1717 , § 1, 10-1-18)  
Secs. 16-220—16-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 1401, adopted Aug. 3, 1998 repealed Art. III, Parking Meters, in its entirety which had been derived from Ord. No. 868, Ord. No. 935, and the 1983 Code. 
 
Secs. 16-301—16-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 16-401. - Definition. 
Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride shall be considered a bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1)  
Sec. 16-402. - Traffic regulations apply to persons riding bicycles. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 2)  
Sec. 16-403. - License required; expiration. 
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon a street or other public highway in the city or upon any part thereof without first having secured and attached to such bicycle a proper license tag as provided hereinafter. Such license shall be valid for the period of time that the bicycle is owned by the applicant and shall expire upon the bicycle being sold or otherwise disposed of by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 1)  
Sec. 16-404. - Procedure; registration fees. 
Application for license to operate a bicycle shall be made to the chief of police or any employee of the police department designated by the chief of police. The application shall be accompanied by a registration fee to be paid to the police department upon the granting of a license. The registration fee shall be $2.00. Upon receipt of such application, the police department shall provide a proper tag which shall be immediately attached to the frame of the bicycle in a substantial manner. The removal of any such tag except by the proper authorities shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 2)  
Sec. 16-405. - Transfer of ownership. 
Upon the sale or other transfer of a licensed bicycle, the licensee shall remove the license plate and thereupon the license shall expire. 
(Ord. No. 962, § 3)  
Sec. 16-406. - Granting license. 
Every license issued hereunder shall be deemed to be granted subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public highway of the city with another person on the handlebars or in any position in front of the operator. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the streets and other public highways of the city. 
(c)  Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs and shall stand such bicycles in racks when available and not upon sidewalks nor in doorways or stair entrances. 
(d)  No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway of the city between 30 minutes after sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise, without a headlight visible under normal atmospheric conditions from the front thereof for not less than 500 feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly attached to such bicycle and properly lighted, or without a red light or reflector attached to and visible from 500 feet from the rear thereof. The headlight shall give a clear white light. 
(e)  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the city abreast of any other person riding or propelling a bicycle. 
(f)  Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the city shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals that are slower moving and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting. 
(g)  No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on the sidewalks in the business district of the city. 
(h)  No trick or stunt riding or riding backwards or without holding to the handlebars shall be indulged in on the public streets of the city at any time. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 6)  
Sec. 16-407. - Defacing license; taking a bicycle without permission. 
No persons shall deface, mutilate or remove a license tag placed upon any bicycle, nor shall any person take any bicycle for the purpose of riding or propelling the same upon the streets or other public highways without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 7)  
Sec. 16-408. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 8)  
Sec. 16-409. - Use of bicycles, coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard or other similar device on the sidewalks in the following described areas of the City of Goodland: In the right-of-way of Main Street from 8th Street to 17th Street; in the right-of-way of 9th Street from Broadway Street to Center Street; in the right-of-way of 10th Street from Broadway Street to Center Street; in the right-of-way of 11th Street from Broadway Street to Center Street; in the right-of-way of 12th Street from Broadway Street to Center Street; in the right-of-way of 13th Street from Broadway Street to Center Street; in the right-of-way of Center Street from 8th Street to 12th Street; and in the right-of-way of Broadway Street from 8th Street to 12th Street. 
(b)  A law enforcement officer detaining a person for violating this section may impound the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard or other similar device. In the case of the violation of this section by a person who is 18 years or older, the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, or skateboard or other similar device shall be released by the city police department if the violator appears at the city police department, and provides self-identification. Persons under the age of 18 must appear at the city police department with a parent or guardian to obtain release of the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, or other similar device; however, if no such parent or guardian resides in the city, the bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard or other similar device can be released if its owner provides a letter from a parent or guardian requesting that it be released. 
(c)  An impoundment fee of $25.00 will be collected by the city police department prior to the release of any such bicycle, coaster, roller skates, skateboard, or other similar device. 
(d)  Violation of this section is a municipal offense punishable by a fine up to $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1348, §§ 1—4, 3-4-96)  
Secs. 16-410—16-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1693 , §§ 22, adopted Aug. 1, 2016, repealed Art. V in its entirety. Former Art. V, §§ 16-501—16-506, pertained to worksite utility vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 1651, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2013. Sections 1—21 of the same ordinance added new provisions to the Code but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Art. V, utility vehicles, §§ 16-501—16-521. 
 
Sec. 16-501. - Work-site utility vehicles—Operation. 
(a)  Worksite utility vehicles may be operated upon the public streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any public street, road or alley between sunset and sunrise unless such vehicle is equipped with lights as required by law for motorcycles. No work-site utility vehicle shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway. 
(c)  Every person operating a work-site utility vehicle on the public streets, roads and alleys of the city shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 1, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-502. - Same—Valid driver's license required; penalty. 
No person shall operate a work-site utility vehicle on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver's license and is at least 18 years of age. Violation of this section shall be governed by Article 19 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 2, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-503. - Same—Definition. 
Work-site utility vehicle means any motor vehicle which is not less than 48 inches in width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than 135 inches, has an unlade weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 800 pounds and is equipped with four or more low-pressure tires, a steering wheel and bench- or bucket-type seating allowing at least two people to sit side by side, seatbelts for both the driver and passenger and may be equipped with a bed or cargo box for hauling materials. "Work-site utility vehicle" does not include a micro-utility truck. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 3, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-504. - Same—Penalty. 
Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this article shall be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Section 201, Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city may then have in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 4, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-505. - Same—Insurance required; penalty. 
(a)  Every owner of a work-site utility vehicle shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto. 
(b)  All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of work-site utility vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 5, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-506. - Same—Registration and license; fee; application; inspection; penalty. 
(a)  Before operating a worksite utility vehicle on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city, and each calendar year thereafter, the vehicle shall be registered with the Goodland Police Department and a license/decal shall be obtained and placed on the rear of vehicle, on the driver's side, clearly visible from the rear of the vehicle. 
(b)  The application shall be made upon forms provided by the city and each application shall contain the name of the owner, the owner's residence address, or bona fide place of business, a brief description of the vehicle to be registered (including make, model and serial number, if applicable). 
(c)  Proof of insurance, as required in section 16-504, shall be furnished at the time of application for registration. The annual registration fee for a work-site utility vehicle shall be $25.00 and due by the third Tuesday of January of each calendar year. The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of year that the application is made. The license issued hereunder is not transferrable. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 6, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-507. - Micro-utility trucks—Operation. 
(a)  Micro-utility trucks may be operated upon the public streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No micro-utility truck shall be operated on any public street, road or alley, unless such truck complies with the equipment requirements under K.S.A. ch. 8, art. 17, and amendments thereto. No micro-utility truck shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a micro-utility truck from crossing a federal or state highway. 
(c)  Every person operating a micro-utility truck on the public streets, roads and alleys of the city shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 7, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-508. - Same—Valid driver's license required; penalty. 
No person shall operate a micro-utility truck on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver's license and is at least 18 years of age. Violation of this section shall be governed by Article 19 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 8, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-509. - Same—Definition. 
Micro-utility truck means any motor vehicle which is not less than 48 inches in width, has an overall length, including the bumper, of not more than 160 inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of more than 1,500 pounds, can exceed 40 miles per hour as originally manufactured and is manufactured with a metal cab. "Micro-utility truck" does not include a work-site utility vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 9, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-510. - Same—Penalty. 
Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this section shall be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Section 201, Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city may then have in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 10, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-511. - Same—Insurance required; penalty. 
(a)  Every owner of a micro-utility truck shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto. 
(b)  All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of micro-utility trucks. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 11, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-512: - Same—Registration and license; fee; application; inspection; penalty. 
(a)  Before operating a micro-utility truck on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city, and each calendar year thereafter, the vehicle shall be registered with the police department and a license/decal shall be obtained and placed on the rear of the vehicle, on the driver's side, clearly visible from the rear of the vehicle. 
(b)  The application shall be made upon forms provided by the city and each application shall contain the name of the owner, the owner's residence address, or bona fide place of business, a brief description of the vehicle to be registered (including make, model and serial number, if applicable). 
(c)  Proof of insurance, as required in section 16-504, shall be furnished at the time of application for registration. The annual registration fee for a micro-truck utility vehicle shall be $25.00 and due by the third Tuesday of January of each calendar year. The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of year that the application is made. The license issued hereunder is not transferrable. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 12, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1701 , § 1, 1-3-17)  
Sec. 16-513. - Utility terrain vehicles—Operation. 
(a)  Utility terrain vehicles may be operated upon the public streets, roads and alleys within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No utility terrain vehicle shall be operated on any public street, road or alley, unless such truck complies with the equipment requirements under K.S.A. ch. 8, art. 17, and amendments thereto. No utility terrain vehicle shall be operated on any interstate highway, federal highway or state highway; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit a utility terrain vehicle from crossing a federal or state highway. 
(c)  Every person operating a utility terrain vehicle on the public streets, roads and alleys of the city shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to a driver of a vehicle imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 13, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-514. - Same—Valid driver's license required; penalty. 
No person shall operate a utility terrain vehicle on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has a valid driver's license and is at least 18 years of age. Violation of this section shall be governed by Article 19 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 14, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-515. - Same—Definition. 
Utility terrain vehicle means any motor vehicle with off-road design which is less than 65 inches in width and an overall length of no more than 150 inches, has an unladen weight, including fuel and fluids, of no more than 2,000 pounds, equipped with a steering wheel, foot pedals, roll cage, at least four tires and a non-straddle seat with seatbelts. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 15, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-516. - Same—Penalty. 
Unless specifically provided for herein, a violation of this section shall be deemed an ordinance traffic infraction. Upon an entry of a plea of guilty or no contest or upon being convicted of such violation, the penalty imposed shall be in accordance with Section 201, Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, or such other similar provision as the city may then have in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 16, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-517. - Same—Insurance required; penalty. 
(a)  Every owner of a utility terrain vehicle shall provide liability coverage in accordance with Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland, and amendments thereto, and the Kansas Automobile Injury Reparations Act, K.S.A. 40-3101 et seq., and amendments thereto. 
(b)  All provisions of Section 200 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance, and amendments thereto, including penalty provisions, shall be applicable to all owners and operators of utility terrain vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 17, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-518. - Same—Registration and license; fee; application; inspection; penalty. 
(a)  Before operating a utility terrain vehicle on any public street, road or alley within the corporate limits of the city, and each calendar year thereafter, the vehicle shall be registered with the police department and a license/decal shall be obtained and placed on the rear of the vehicle, on the driver's side, clearly visible from the rear of the vehicle. 
(b)  The application shall be made upon forms provided by the city and each application shall contain the name of the owner, the owner's residence address, or bona fide place of business, a brief description of the vehicle to be registered (including make, model and serial number, if applicable). 
(c)  Proof of insurance, as required in section 16-504, shall be furnished at the time of application the annual registration fee for a utility terrain vehicle shall be $25.00 and due by the third Tuesday of January of each calendar year. The full amount of the license fee shall be required regardless of the time of year that the application is made. The license issued hereunder is not transferrable. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 18, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 1701 , § 2, 1-3-17; Ord. No. 1704 , § 1, 6-5-17)  
Sec. 16-519. - Same—Equipment required for operators and riders. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall operate or ride upon a utility terrain vehicle unless wearing a helmet which complies with minimum guidelines established by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration pursuant to the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 for helmets designed for use by motorcyclists and other motor vehicle users. Violation of this section shall be governed by Article 16 of the Standard Traffic Ordinance as adopted by the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 19, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-520. - Operation of off-road vehicles is prohibited. 
For the purposes pertinent to this article, off-road vehicle shall include any motorized non-highway vehicle 50 inches or less in width, having a dry weight of 1,500 pounds or less, traveling on three or more non-highway tires, and having a seat to be straddled by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 20, 8-1-16)  
Sec. 16-521. - Operation of golf carts is prohibited. 
For the purpose pertinent to this article, "golf carts" shall include any motor vehicle that has not less than three wheels in contact with the ground, an unladen weight of not more than 1,800 pounds, is designed to be operated at not more than 25 miles per hour and is designed to carry not more than four persons, including the driver. 
(Ord. No. 1693 , § 21, 8-1-16)  
Chapter 17 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1671, adopted April 6, 2015, repealed Arts. I—IV, and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. I derived from Ord. No. 1471, adopted March 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1480, adopted July 1, 2002; and Ord. No. 1556, adopted Aug. 21, 2006. Former Art. II derived from Ord. No. 1471, adopted March 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1480, adopted July 1, 2002; Ord. No. 1499, adopted May 5, 2003; Ord. No. 1514, adopted Jan. 19, 2004; Ord. No. 1556, adopted Aug. 21, 2006; Ord. No. 1569, adopted Dec. 4, 2006; Ord. No. 1583, adopted Oct. 1, 2007; Ord. No. 1598, adopted Jan. 5, 2009; Ord. No. 1633, adopted July 16, 2012; and Ord. No. 1645, adopted May 20, 2013. Former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 1471, adopted March 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1480, adopted July 1, 2002; Ord. No. 1484, adopted July 15, 2002; Ord. No. 1499, adopted May 5, 2005; Ord. No. 1526, adopted Nov. 1, 2004; Ord. No. 1539, adopted Nov. 21, 2005; Ord. No. 1540, adopted Nov. 21, 2005; Ord. No. 1556, adopted Aug. 21, 2006; Ord. No. 1583, adopted Oct. 1, 2007; Ord. No. 1614, adopted Sept. 20, 2010; and Ord. No. 1645, adopted May 20, 2013. Former Art. IV derived from Ord. No. 1471, adopted March 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1517, adopted April 19, 2004; Ord. No. 1539, adopted Nov. 21, 2005; Ord. No. 1540, adopted Nov. 21, 2005; Ord. No. 1569, adopted Dec. 4, 2006; Ord. No. 1617, adopted Feb. 7, 2011; and Ord. No. 1633, adopted July 16, 2012. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 17-101. - Rates. 
The governing body shall review annually the rates for the utilities provided by the City of Goodland. Said rates shall be set by ordinance of the governing body of said city and shall be based upon the following categories and their respective definitions. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-102. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City shall include all departments and operations of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Commercial shall include, but not be limited to, all businesses, government operations, commercial enterprises, dwelling complexes containing 20 or more dwelling units, offices, shops, hotels, churches, schools and institutions. 
Small commercial. Service for commercial is AC, 60 cycles, 120 volts or 120/240 volts single-phase 240 volts three-phase 3-wire, 120/240, 120/208 volts or 277/480 three-phase 4-wire, or at any of the city's standard distribution voltages as available. Customers requiring services at secondary voltages other than that already established by the city shall be required to provide suitable space for location of the city's transformation, metering and associated equipment. Secondary voltage other than that already established shall be provided by special permission of the utility. Single-phase motors and other single-phase power and heating units served under this schedule shall not exceed ten horsepower and single-phase motors shall not aggregate more than 15 horsepower, except by special permission of the electrical department of the City of Goodland. Service for industrial is AC, 60 cycles, single-phase or three-phase, at any of the city's standard voltage (13,800 volts or less) where the service may be supplied by a single-power transformation location. Three-phase loads shall be balanced. All motors over five horsepower are to be three-phased balanced loads. 
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and townhouses, but not hotels or motels. 
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building that contains living facilities for not more than one family and that includes provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Good credit. Good credit is not being delinquent, or in arrears, for any and all utility charges, more than two times in the prior 24 months. 
Large commercial shall include, but not be limited to, all businesses, government operations, commercial enterprises, dwelling complexes containing 20 or more dwelling units, offices, shops, hotels, churches, schools and institutions and shall have a single meter at one location meeting or exceeding 2,000 KWH for three consecutive months, and said customers metered demand meeting or exceeding 40 KW per month for the same three consecutive months. 
Low-income shall include any household whose total annual gross income is $18,000.00 or less. Total annual gross income shall be calculated by adding together the income of all members of said household. 
Residential shall include all residential dwellings containing less than 20 individual dwelling units. 
Residential electric service. Service for residential is AC, 60 cycles, 120/240 volts, 3-wire, single-phase or 120 volt, 2-wire. Single-phase heating loads shall not aggregate over 25 KW except at the utility's option. Three-phase motors shall be on a separate meter, and may at the utility's option be assessed an additional charge. 
Returned-check fee. There is hereby set a fee for the return of a check to the city in the amount of $30.00 plus the amount of the check. 
Standard residential electric drop. The standard residential electric service drop provided by the City of Goodland, Kansas, shall be above-ground or overhead service within the corporate boundaries of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
DIVISION 2. - UTILITY PAYMENT 
 
Sec. 17-103. - Billing; delinquency/termination notice. 
All electric, water, solid waste and sewer bills due the city shall be payable monthly, and all such bills shall be paid on or before the 15th day of the month in which the said bill is received. 
A delinquency and termination notice will be sent on the first day after the due date. Ten calendar days after the due date service will be discontinued. The delinquency and termination notice shall provide the customer of record with the following information: 
(1)  The amount due; 
(2)  The type of service and the date on which said service will be terminated if the amount due is not paid, to be ten calendar days after the date of the notice hereinbefore set out. 
Responsibility for payment of a bill. The City of Goodland will not threaten or refuse service to or threaten or disconnect the service of an individual for an outstanding debt on an account unless that individual either signed the service agreement on the account or agreed orally at the time the service was established to be responsible for the account. The only exception to this rule is when the individual and the customer who signed the service agreement or agreed orally at the time service was established to be responsible for the account lived together when the debt was incurred and continue to live together. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 1, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-104. - Overdue penalty. 
All electric, water, solid waste, sewer bills or any other bills for a city-operated utility due the City of Goodland, not paid by the 15th day of the month of billing, shall be subject to a one-time penalty of five percent of the unpaid balance of said monthly bill. Said penalty shall be added to the bill and shall be collected with and in the same manner as the original bill. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
DIVISION 3. - EXTENSION OF SERVICES 
 
Sec. 17-105. - Conditions of service. 
If the governing body of the city shall deem it in the best interest of the city and its inhabitants and economically feasible, utility service from the city may be furnished to any tract of real estate situated outside the city's corporate limits upon terms and conditions as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-106. - Application for service. 
(a)  Any person outside the city's corporate limits desiring to make connection with any municipal utility service shall first make application to the city clerk. Application shall include a plot plan, drawing and specifications completed by a licensed engineer within the State of Kansas. All plans and permits shall be in accordance with state and city specifications and be approved by the appropriate government entity. The completed application must be received by the city clerk at least 60 days prior to the start of any proposed utility extension. 
(b)  The appropriate department head shall prepare an estimated construction cost to include any service territory acquisition, and the applicant shall submit same with the application for utility extension. 
(c)  Within 30 days after receiving the completed application and required documentation, the city manager shall furnish to the governing body, for its review, the completed application for the proposed extension of utilities, along with the estimated construction cost. The city governing body may approve or disapprove any application for utility extensions. The governing body shall set the tap fee for any approved application. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-107. - Final payment of costs. 
The tap fee shall be paid to the city by applicant for the utility extension prior to the construction of such utility. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-108. - Location of utility; easements. 
(a)  Selection and approval of extension location. The city shall select or approve the location of any utility extension to be constructed, and the applicant for such extension shall secure and provide any and all easements in favor of the city and in a form approved by it that may be required for such extension. 
(b)  Water extension. 
(1)  Water meters shall be placed in accordance with city specifications and approval; 
(2)  Service line taps shall be located to the closest water main that will provide adequate service; 
(3)  No potable water supply line shall be installed from the city water supply to any structure outside the city limits without a cross-connection device equal to that of a reduced pressure principle backflow preventor being installed immediately after the water meter. No device shall be moved or removed without the approval of the director of public works and the building official; 
(4)  The water line extension shall not exceed a distance of one-half mile from the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Sewer extension. 
(1)  A sewer line extension shall be designed by a Kansas licensed engineer; 
(2)  A sewer extension shall extend from the nearest adequate sewer main within the corporate limits of the city; 
(3)  A sewer extension shall not exceed a distance of one-half mile from the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Electrical extension. 
(1)  All lots within a proposed development or subdivision shall have service drops installed; 
(2)  An electrical disconnect shall be placed on the outside of all structures before connecting to the city's electric utility; 
(3)  The electric line extension shall not exceed a distance of two miles from the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-109. - Connection. 
Prior to the connection of any utility extension to the city's utility service, all appropriate connection fees shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-110. - Rates, rules and regulations. 
Every person, company or corporation receiving an extension of the city's utilities shall be subject to all rates, rules and regulations governing any and all city utilities to which such extension has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 17-111. - Violations, penalties. 
Any person or persons, firms, partnership or corporation convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof be fined a sum of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or confinement for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this article occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons found in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-112. - Penalties for fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firms, partnership or corporation to commit a fraud against the City of Goodland by knowingly providing false information of any kind upon the application form required hereunder, and any person found guilty of furnishing false information upon said application shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and/or confinement for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Secs. 17-113—17-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC UTILITY 
 
Sec. 17-201. - Utility service fee and/or demand charge. 
All users in categories of small and large commercial, as defined in section 17-102 of this chapter, having electrical service shall be subject to a customer charge and/or demand charge assessed and billed as set by ordinance. The users in these categories shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  The maximum metered, 15 minutes demand per month, to be read each month and reset. 
(2)  Those customers having a three-phase service to provide for, but not limited to, heating and/or air conditioning and having a 2,000 KWH consumption for any single month shall be subject to demand metering. 
(3)  Accounts with a three-phase service, to provide lighting and/or heating and air conditioning, with a service voltage 120/208 pr 120/240, and having KWH usage of 2,000, and a KW demand of 40 for any month shall be subject to demand billing. 
(4)  After a demand meter has been installed, it shall govern all future demand charges and shall not be removed or its use discontinued without approval and consent by the city governing body, unless the criteria for demand metering is not in excess of the minimums established by ordinance. 
(5)  All users in those categories having 199 amp service or less shall be subject to an additional customer charge or a demand metering assessment and billed according to the rates established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-202. - Monthly residential rates. 
(a)  Customer charge in city: $15.00 per meter. 
(b)  Customer charge outside city: $30.00 per meter. 
(c)  Energy charge: $0.127 per KWH. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 2, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-203. - Monthly small commercial rate. 
(a)  Customer charge in city: $25.00 per meter. 
(b)  Customer charge outside city: $50.00 per meter. 
(c)  Energy charge: $0.11 per KWH. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 3, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-204. - Monthly large commercial rate. 
For those customers meeting the criteria as set forth in section 17-201 of the Code of the City of Goodland to be classified as a large commercial customer the rates for electrical service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Customer charge, in city: $15.00 per meter. 
(2)  Customer charge, outside city: $30.00 per meter. 
(3)  Energy charge: $0.09 per KWH 
(4)  Metered demand charge: $9.50 per KWH 
(5)  All users in this section shall be subject to a demand charge. The current monthly demand charge shall be established by the highest measured demand (corrected for power factor if required) during any 15-minute period occurring during the current billing cycle, reset monthly. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 4, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-205. - Operational cost adjustment. 
A monthly cost adjustment will be added to monthly electrical utility bills for all classes of electric customer of the City of Goodland, Kansas. Said adjustment shall be known as operational cost adjustment charge (OCA) and shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Calculate total monthly operating costs for electric utility. 
(2)  Multiply the total megawatts billed to customers for the month by the base rate of $110.00 to obtain the total base costs. Deduct total base costs from the total monthly operating costs for the electric utility. The difference in operating costs and base costs is divided by the total number of megawatts billed for the month. 
(3)  The operational cost adjustment (OCA) so determined shall be added to each customer's monthly utility billing and shall be identified as CA (cost adjustment). 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-206. - Connection fee. 
There shall be a utility connection fee assessed to all city electrical customers for the connection to the electric utility of the city. The connection fee shall be due and payable at the time the connection of the utilities is requested by the customer. 
There is hereby set a utility connection fee for the connection of electrical utility by the city in the amount of $10.00 plus any applicable state and local sales tax. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-207. - Tap charge. 
(a)  Electric tap fee - within the City of Goodland. The applicant for a new electrical service installation or the upgrade of an existing electrical service within the city's corporate limits shall pay to the City of Goodland, Kansas, for a standard electric service drop the following listed tap fee: 
(1)  Single phase: 0—100 amp: $25.00; 
(2)  Single phase: 101—200 amp: $200.00; 
(3)  Single phase: 201 amp and greater: $500.00. 
(b)  Electric tap fee - outside the City of Goodland. The applicant for a new electrical service installation or the upgrade of an existing electrical service outside the city's corporate limits shall pay to the City of Goodland, Kansas, for a standard electric service drop the following listed tap fee: 
(1)  Single phase: 0—100 amp: $50.00; 
(2)  Single phase: 101—200 amp: $400.00; 
(3)  Single phase: 201 amp and greater: $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 5, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-208. - Ownership of electrical service and equipment. 
The city retains the title to the ownership of the electrical service, electrical meters, city service line and all service equipment used in connection with the supply of electricity to any premises or building. All service lines from the point of connection to the city's service lines to any premises or building shall be installed and maintained by the user. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-209. - Shutting off electricity. 
The city may at any time shut off or require any consumer to shut off electricity for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Repair, install or extend electric lines and/or equipment; 
(2)  Make connections or disconnections from the city electric lines; 
(3)  For a violation of the rules and requirements governing the use of the city's electric power; 
(4)  For any major fire or other catastrophic incident. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-210. - Right of access. 
Authorized employees of the city may enter upon any premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of reading the electric meter or servicing or inspecting electric service and/or meters. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-211. - Measure of electric service to consumer. 
(a)  All electrical energy or current furnished by the city to any consumer shall be measured to said consumer thereof by a meter or meters as hereinbefore set out. 
(b)  Electrical meters shall be read once per month for billing purposes. If the consumer requests that the meter be read more than once per month, except as provided in section 17-217, then each additional reading shall cause a fee of $20.00 plus any applicable state and local tax to be assessed to said consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-212. - Service disconnection or reconnection. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who fails, neglects, or refuses to properly pay any electric utility charges when due, shall be deemed delinquent, and as such, service may be disconnected at the time and pursuant to the terms set forth in sections 17-103 and 17-104, as amended, and service shall be disconnected until such delinquent customers shall have paid all arrearages to the city, and if such customer then desires service he or she shall pay the city a sum as set by this article, plus any applicable state and local sales tax as a charge for reconnecting the service and he or she shall further deposit with the city an additional sum as set in this article as a guarantee that charges for electrical current or energy furnished by the city will be paid promptly when due. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect electrical service or cause the same to be reconnected on any premises where electrical service has been shut off for any reason authorized under this article without the authority of the city. 
There is hereby established a reconnection fee for reconnection of electrical utility for the city in the amount of $20.00 plus any applicable state and local sales tax and an additional $50.00 deposit for residential customers, or additional commercial deposit of twice the previous month's utility bill or $200.00, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-213. - Meter deposit. 
All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, contractors, subcontractors, tenants or lessees desiring or proposing to use electrical current or energy shall make a deposit in an amount as set forth in this article. Said deposit will be required by the city as guarantee for charges for electrical current or energy furnished to the customer by the city and will be paid promptly when due. Such deposits are to be made prior to service by the city and are to be returned when electrical service ceases, less any sum due for electrical currents so furnished. Customers establishing good credit with the city will have their deposit returned at the customer's request. If said customers who have established good credit, discontinue service and then subsequently request a reconnection to electrical service within 24 months of previous disconnection, then that customer shall not be charged a deposit. If said customer's account has been delinquent, or in arrears, more than two times in the prior 24 months then the refund of the deposit shall not be returned until two years after the last date the account has been delinquent, and if a customer's account becomes delinquent after deposit has been returned for good credit or no deposit has been collected, subsequent to reconnection as hereinbefore set out, then a new deposit in an amount as set forth in the article will be required in order to reestablish service. The customer will receive interest annually on the deposit using the State of Kansas rules as a guideline. 
Deposits: 
(1)  Residential: $ 50.00. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial: 
a.  Initial meter: $200.00. 
b.  Second meter: $150.00. 
c.  Third and subsequent meters: $100.00 per meter. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-214. - Meter testing. 
Any customer of electrical energy or current who believes that his or her meter is incorrect and desires the same tested shall make application to the city clerk for the inspection of the meter. It shall be the duty of the electrical department to test such meter, and if such meter is found to be more than two percent fast, the customer shall have adjustment of electric utility charges covering the period of the preceding three months and if the meter is found to be running less rapidly than is proper, the customer shall pay the proper adjustment to the city for the preceding three months; provided that before any meter shall be tested as provided in this section, the party desiring the test shall deposit with the city $100.00 and if the meter is shown by the test to be correct within two percent the deposit shall be forfeited to the city for the cost of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-215. - Placing meters. 
All meters to be used for the purpose of measuring electric current or energy, shall except by special permission of the electrical department be placed between five and seven feet from the floor or ground, and in the nearest readily accessible place outside where the wires enter the building and/or any other point of attachment. The location of all meters must be approved by the electrical department before the meter is set. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-216. - Licensed electricians to do work. 
No person except a licensed electrician shall be permitted to install or repair electrical service connections from the city service line to the individuals main breaker box and/or disconnect. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-217. - [Mutilation of electric service.] 
No person shall remove, obstruct, alter, injure, damage or attempt to remove, obstruct, alter injure, or damage any electric meter, transformer, conduit, wire, pole or any other appurtenances belonging to the electric system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-218. - Security lights. 
The city will not install security lights on private property except in commercial applications. The property owner of a commercial property may request the city to install a security light or lights on the owner's property through application to the city and payment of fees as required herein. 
Upon approval of the application and payment of fees, the city will install and maintain the security light. At any time fees are not paid when due, the city may remove or disconnect any security lights. 
The city reserves the right to remove any security light for any reason it deems necessary and shall give property owner written notice of its intent and reason for doing so. 
Fees for security lights shall be as follows: 
100 watt light, per month or any part thereof ..... $10.00 
250 watt light, per month or any part thereof ..... 20.00 
400 watt light, per month or any part thereof ..... 35.00 
1,000 watt light, per month or any part thereof ..... 52.00 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-219. - After-hours reconnection fee. 
There is hereby established an after-hours reconnection fee for reconnection of electrical utility outside of normal business hours for the city in the amount of $50.00 plus any applicable state and local sales tax. This fee is in addition to existing reconnection fees and deposits. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Secs. 17-220—17-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER UTILITY 
 
Sec. 17-301. - Month water rates. 
(a)  The following monthly rates are hereby established and fixed for the consumption of water from the city's water system within the city's corporate limits: 
(1)  Customer charge. 
1" ..... $20.00 
1½" ..... 40.00 
2" ..... 80.00 
3" ..... 100.00 
4" ..... 140.00 
(2)  Rates. 
Residential: 	$1.35 per 100 cubic feet up to 4,000 cubic feet. 
	$1.50 for each 100 cubic feet over 4,000 cubic feet. 
Commercial: 	$1.20 per 100 cubic feet of treated water. 
	Untreated water, will be 50% less than that of treated water 
	(Example: $0.60 per 100 cubic feet) 
 
(b)  The following monthly rates are hereby established and fixed for the consumption of water from the City's water system outside the City's corporate limits: 
(1)  Customer charge. 
1" ..... $30.00 
1½" ..... 60.00 
2" ..... 120.00 
3" ..... 150.00 
4" ..... 210.00 
(2)  Rates. The customers of water consumed outside the corporate limits of the city from the city's water system shall be the same for the consumers of water from the system within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The following rate is hereby established for bulk sale of water from the dispensing site established by the city: 
Each 100 gallons or part thereof ..... $0.50 
(This rate includes all applicable state and local sales tax) 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 6, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-302. - Connection fee. 
There shall be a utility connection fee assessed to all consumers of water from the city's water system for connection to the water utility of the city. The connection fee shall be due and payable at the time connection of the utilities is requested by the consumer. 
There is hereby set a utility connection fee for the connection of water utility by the city in the amount of $10.00 plus applicable sales taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-303. - Deposit guarantee. 
(a)  All persons, firms, partnerships, corporations, contractors, subcontractors, tenants or lessees desiring or proposing to use water shall make a deposit in an amount as set forth in this article. Said deposit will be required by the city as guarantee for charges for water furnished to the customer by the city and will be paid promptly when due. Such deposits are to be made prior to service by the city and are to be returned when utility service ceases, less any sum due for water so furnished. Customers establishing good credit with the city will have deposit returned at customer's request. If said customers who have established good credit discontinue service and then subsequently request a reconnection to water service, then that customer shall not be charged a deposit. If said customer's account has been delinquent, or in arrears, more than two times in the prior 24 months, then the refund of the deposit shall not be returned until two years after the last date the account has been delinquent, and if a customer's account becomes delinquent after deposit has been returned for good credit or no deposit has been collected, subsequent to reconnection as hereinbefore set out, then a new deposit in an amount as set forth in the ordinance will be required in order to reestablish service. The customer will receive interest annually on the deposit using the State of Kansas rules as a guideline. 
Deposits: 
Meters one inch or smaller: $50.00 per meter. 
Meters larger than one inch: $100.00 per meter. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-304. - Water tap charge. 
Applicants for new water service within the city's corporate limits shall pay the following tap fees for each particular service. The fee shall include the tapping of the water main, service installation (not to exceed 100 feet), shut-off, meter box and meter. Such fees shall not include the service from the meter to the customer's or developer's building 
(1)  All services and meters shall be actual cost excluding labor. 
(2)  In addition to the above schedule of fees for tapping the main, service and meter installation, the applicant for the new water service shall pay $0.022 per square foot of property up to six acres (261,360 square feet) to defray the cost of water main installation. For property in excess of six acres, the city will figure the cost to the developer of extending the water main and will set the fee based upon the actual cost of construction; however, the minimum fee shall be the fee for six acres. 
(3)  The minimum fee based upon square feet of property shall be $137.50. 
(4)  If the water main and complete service installation are constructed under an assessment district, the property within that district will not be subject to the fees under subsections (a) through (c). The phrase "complete service installation" as used in this subsection includes installation of the water meters. 
(5)  All water main installation and all service materials installed shall be owned by and maintained by the City of Goodland, Kansas. This shall include the meter and meter box but not the service from the meter location to customer's building. 
(6)  The city may require an amount equal to the estimated cost for the main or service installation be paid by the customer or developer prior to the main or service work being started. 
(7)  The cost of service installation exceeding 100 feet shall be paid by the customer or developer. 
Applicants for new water service outside the city's corporate limits shall pay a water tap charge 50 percent greater than the fee charged within the city's corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15; Ord. No. 1686 , § 7, 2-1-16)  
Sec. 17-305. - Water service under control of the city. 
(a)  The city shall have charge of the water lines in the streets and up to and including the water meter wheresoever located, and all valves shall be under direct control of the director of public works and utilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to manipulate any valve in the city's water lines without orders from the director of public works and utilities. 
(b)  The city shall tap the water main and supply all materials and labor for the installation of the standard water service connection, and shall run a service line to the property line, furnish and set water meter and enclose and cover the same. The city expressly retains the title to the ownership of the water service connection, the water meter, and all service equipment used in connection with the supply of water to any premises or buildings within the city. All such consumers and all other property owners whose premises are connected to the city water mains shall at their own expense repair, replace, remove all water service lines owned by them or located on their own premises as may be required by the city in order to prevent loss or damage to the public at large. 
(c)  It is expressly stipulated by the city governing body that no claims shall be made against them, the city, or any agent, or employee of the city by reason of any break of any service line or other apparatus connected with the city water works, or if from any cause the supply of water should fail, or be disconnected, or shut off. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-306. - Measure of water service to consumer. 
(a)  All water furnished by the city to any consumer shall be measured to said consumer thereof by a meter or meters as hereinbefore set out. 
(b)  Water meters shall be read once per month for billing purposes. If the consumer requests that the meter be read more than once per month, except as provided herein, then each additional reading shall cause a fee of $20.00 to be assessed to said consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-307. - Shutting off water. 
The city may, at any time, shut off or require any consumer to shut off water for any of, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Repair, install or extend water lines; 
(2)  Make connections or disconnections from the city water lines; 
(3)  For a violation of the rules and requirements governing the use of the city's water; 
(4)  For any major fire or other catastrophic incident; 
(5)  Failure to repair a water leak due to defective plumbing. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-308. - Separate water service. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect more than one structure used as a dwelling unit or place of business to the same water line of the city without having each structure properly metered by a separate meter. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-309. - Meter access. 
Authorized employees of the city may enter upon any premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of reading the water meter or servicing or inspecting water meters or utility service. No person shall cover, block, hide, conceal, or any other manner hinder access to any water meter. Each individual water meter reading will be the basis of charge regardless of the number of meters. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-310. - Character of water pipes. 
All water pipes or lines connected with the water mains of the city for the purpose of conducting water from the mains, through or across any street, lot or alley, or for the purpose of connecting with any hydrant, or for any other purpose shall be of a type approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-311. - Negligence. 
Any consumer or person who through his or her negligence or careless disregard allows the damage of his or her water meter shall be liable for the same and shall pay to the city the cost of labor, materials and repairs for the damage plus any applicable state and local sales tax. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-312. - Wasting water. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation that shall allow or cause any unreasonable waste or diversion of water of whatsoever sort or kind shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-313. - Taking of water from fire hydrants and other sources. 
(a)  No person or persons, except the city fire department for firefighting purposes, shall take away from any public watering place, fountain, hose pipe or fire hydrant, or in any way use or take away water for any use without the authorization of the director of public works. 
(b)  If the director of public works authorizes the taking of water, as outlined herein, the person or persons desiring to use water shall make application to the city clerk for a hydrant meter to measure the amount of water used. A deposit of $750.00 will be required before the hydrant meter may be obtained. 
(c)  After the application has been approved by the city clerk, the director of public works, or his or her designee, shall supply the hydrant needed to the applicant and record the beginning meter reading. When the person or persons have completed the use of the hydrant meter, the director of public works, or his or her designee, shall be contacted to take charge of the hydrant meter and record the final reading. The release of the deposit shall be done by the city clerk only after all charges for water usage, billed at the current water rate, and any damage to the hydrant meter have been paid in full to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-314. - Alterations. 
No addition, alteration, or change whatsoever in or about any water lines, except on the owner's premises and after the water shall have passed the water meter, shall be made or caused to be made by any consumer without notice or a permit from the director of public works, and any and all additions, alterations or changes shall in all cases be made under the supervision, direction and control of the director of public works and in accordance with the ordinances of the city. No person, except the duly authorized employee of the city water department shall tamper with any meter or break the seal of any meter. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-315. - Mutilation of water property. 
No person shall remove, obstruct, alter, injure, damage or attempt to remove, obstruct, alter, injure, damage any fire hydrant, valve, valve box, valve cover, water meter, water meter box, water meter cover, or in any manner injure any building, machinery, or other appurtenances belonging to the water works system of the city, or carry off, or injure any pipe, tools, fixtures, apparatus, or property pertaining to the water works system of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-316. - Service disconnection or reconnection. 
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who fails, neglects or refuses to properly pay any water charge, when due, shall be deemed delinquent and as such service may be disconnected at the time and pursuant to the terms set forth in sections 17-103 and 17-104, and service may be disconnected until such delinquent customer shall have paid all arrearage to the city and, if such customer then desires service, he or she shall pay the city a sum, as set by this article, as a charge for reconnecting the service, and he or she shall further deposit with the city an additional sum as set in this article as a guarantee that charges for water furnished by the city will be paid promptly when due. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect water service or cause the same to be reconnected on any premises where water service has been shut off for any reason authorized under this article without the authority of the city. 
The city reserves the right, in lieu of disconnecting the water utility, to disconnect the electric utility and such shall remain disconnected until all fees, as specified herein, and arrearages have been paid. 
There is hereby established a reconnection fee for reconnection of water utility for the city in the amount of $20.00 plus applicable sales taxes and an additional deposit of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-317. - Meter testing. 
Any customer of the city's water utility who believes his or her meter is incorrect and desires the same to be tested shall make application to the city clerk for the inspection of the meter. It shall be the duty of the water department to test such meter and, if such meter is found to be more than two percent fast, the customer shall have adjustment of water charges covering the period of the preceding three months and, if the meter is found to be running less rapidly than is proper, the customer shall pay the proper adjustment to the city for the preceding three months; provided, that before any meter shall be tested, as provided in this section, the party desiring the test shall deposit, with the city, $100.00 and if the meter is shown by the test to be correct within two percent, the deposit shall be forfeited to the city for the cost of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-318. - Excavations. 
No person or persons shall be permitted to make any excavation in any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city for purpose of laying any pipes for water service without having first procured a permit in writing to do so from the building official of the city, nor make excavation in any street or alley within the city within six feet of any water pipe, while the ground is frozen, or to dig up, or uncover so as to expose to frost any water pipe or sewer of the city, except under the direction of the director of public works. No person or persons shall leave any excavation made in any street or alley, within the city, opened at any time without barricades and during nights warning lights must be maintained at such excavations during all the time when the same are open or partially opened and when any excavations are made in the streets or alleys, within the city, the streets, sidewalks and pavements must be restored to as good condition as they were previous to the making of the excavation by the parties making or causing the same to be made, and should any person or persons leave any street, alley, sidewalk or pavement in a condition not as good as before such excavation was made, or should the work be improperly done, or the rubbish caused thereby not properly cleared away, the director of public works and utilities shall have the right to finish or correct the work and the expense shall be charged to the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-319. - Contract. 
The rates, rules and regulations herein set forth shall constitute and shall be considered part of the contract with every person, company or corporation who is supplied with water from the water works system of the city and every such person, company or corporation who accepts and uses water shall be held to and consent to be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-320. - After-hours reconnection fee. 
There is hereby established an after-hours reconnection fee for reconnection of water utility outside of normal business hours for the city in the amount of $50.00 plus any applicable state and local sales tax. This fee is in addition to existing reconnection fees and deposits. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Secs. 17-321—17-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS 
 
Sec. 17-401. - Low income electric utility rate. 
Any household whose total annual income is $18,000.00 or less shall be eligible for a monthly low-income electric rate which shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Energy charge: $0.110 per KWH. 
(2)  Customer charge: None. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-402. - Low income water utility. 
Any household whose total annual income is $18,000.00 or less shall be eligible for a monthly low income water rate. The monthly low income water utility rate shall be 15 percent lower than the monthly water rates currently set out in the Code of the City of Goodland, Kansas. There shall be no meter charge for low income customers. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Sec. 17-403. - Application. 
Any member of a household which qualifies hereunder may make an application with the city clerk to be approved for low income electric and water rates. Said application shall be on a form prepared by the city clerk and the city clerk shall be authorized to solicit such information on said form as may be necessary to properly evaluate said application. The annual gross income is defined to mean the full 12 calendar months immediately prior to the filing of an application with the city clerk. Said application form shall contain an authorization, to be signed by said applicant, authorizing the city clerk to verify the information set forth in said application. Said application shall be duly subscribed and sworn to by the applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application, the city clerk shall have 15 days in which to approve or disapprove an application. In the event of a disagreement between the applicant and the city clerk, the applicant shall be entitled to appeal the decision of the city clerk to the city manager, then to the city commission, which shall make a final determination upon said application. 
Approval of an application shall be for a 12-month period. However, if during said 12-month period the total annual gross income from all members of a household shall exceed the sum of $18,000.00, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to so notify the city clerk so that said household will revert to the regular electrical and water rates. At the end of the 12-month period after approval of an application, said approval shall automatically terminate, unless the applicant shall, at least 15 days prior to the end of said 12-month period, file an application for an additional 12-month period of reduced electrical and water rates, as provided herein. Upon receipt of a reapplication, the city clerk shall have 15 days in which to approve or disapprove such reapplication. 
(Ord. No. 1671 , 4-6-15)  
Secs. 17-404—17-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 12 of Ord. No. 1386, adopted Sept. 2, 1997, repealed Ch. 17, Art. V in its entirety and sections 1—11 adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Former Art. V was comprised of §§ 17-501—17-509 and derived from the 1989 Code. 
 
Sec. 17-501. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the declaration of a water supply watch, warning or emergency and the implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the city in the event such a watch, warning or emergency is declared. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 1, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-502. - Definitions. 
(a)  Water as the term is used in this article, shall mean water available to the City of Goodland for treatment by virtue of its water rights or any treated water introduced by the city into its water distribution system, including water offered for sale at any coin-operated site. 
(b)  Customer as the term is used in this article, shall mean the customer of record using water for any purpose from the city's water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is made or, in the case of coin sales, a cash charge is made at the site of delivery. 
(c)  Waste of water as the term is used in this article, includes, but is not limited to: (1) permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain; or (2) failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing. 
(d)  The following classes of uses of water are established: 
(1)  Class 1. Water used for outdoor watering; either public or private, for gardens, lawns, trees, shrubs, plants, parks, golf courses, playing fields, swimming pools or other recreational areas; or the washing of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, or the exterior of any building or structure. 
(2)  Class 2. Water used for any commercial or industrial, including agricultural, purposes: Except water actually necessary to maintain the health and personal hygiene of bona fide employees while such employees are engaged in the performance of their duties at their place of employment. 
(3)  Class 3. Domestic usage, other than that which would be included in either classes 1 or 2. 
(4)  Class 4. Water necessary only to sustain human life and the lives of domestic pets and maintain standards of hygiene and sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 2, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-503. - Declaration of water watch. 
Whenever the governing body of the city finds that conditions indicate that the probability of a drought or some other condition causing a major water supply shortage is rising, it shall be empowered to declare, by resolution, that a water watch exists and that it shall take steps to inform the public and ask for voluntary reductions in water use. Such a watch shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water watch shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 3, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-504. - Declaration of water warning. 
Whenever the governing body of the city finds that drought conditions or some other condition causing a major water supply shortage are present and supplies are starting to decline, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water warning exists and that it will recommend restrictions on nonessential uses during the period of warning. Such a warning shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the beginning and ending of the water warning shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 4, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-505. - Declaration of water emergency. 
Whenever the governing body of the city finds that an emergency exists by reason of a shortage of water supply needed for essential uses, it shall be empowered to declare by resolution that a water supply emergency exists and that it will impose mandatory restrictions on water use during the period of emergency. Such an emergency shall be deemed to continue until it is declared by resolution of the governing body to have ended. The resolutions declaring the existence and end of a water supply emergency shall be effective upon their publication in the official city newspaper. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 5, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-506. - Voluntary conservation measures. 
Upon the declaration of a water watch or water warning as provided in sections 17-503 and 17-504, the city manager is authorized to call on all water consumers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to limit or eliminate nonessential water uses including, but not limited to, limitations on the following uses: 
(a)  Sprinkling of water on lawns, shrubs or trees (including golf courses). 
(b)  Washing of automobiles. 
(c)  Use of water in swimming pools, fountains and evaporative air conditioning systems. 
(d)  Waste of water. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 6, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-507. - Mandatory conservation measures. 
Upon the declaration of a water supply emergency as provided in section 17-505, the city manager is also authorized to implement certain mandatory water conservation measures, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Suspension of new connections to the city's water distribution systems, except connections of fire hydrants and those made pursuant to agreements entered into by the city prior to the effective date of the declaration of the emergency; 
(b)  Restrictions on the uses of water in one or more classes of water use, wholly or in part; 
(c)  Restrictions on the sales of water at coin-operated facilities or sites; 
(d)  The imposition of water rationing based on any reasonable formula including, but not limited to, the percentage of normal use and per capita or per consumer restrictions; 
(e)  Complete or partial bans on the waste of water; and 
(f)  Any combination of the foregoing measures. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 7, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-508. - Emergency water rates. 
In addition to any other conservation action enacted during a water supply emergency as provided in section 17-505 of the Code of the City of Goodland, the governing body may enact an excess water use surcharge designed to conserve water supplies and shall be in addition to the established water rates adopted by the city. Any excess water use surcharge shall be based upon cubic feet of water consumption as metered and in accordance with the following: 
Phase I excess water use surcharge. 
Residential customer (per 100 cubic feet or any part thereof): 
5,001 to 10,000 cubic feet ..... $0.55 
10,001 to 15,000 cubic feet ..... 1.55 
15,001 and greater ..... 2.55 
Phase II excess water use surcharge. 
Residential customer (per 100 cubic feet or any part thereof): 
2,501 to 5,000 cubic feet ..... $0.55 
5,001 to 7,500 cubic feet ..... 1.55 
7,501 and greater ..... 2.55 
Commercial and industrial customer (per 100 cubic feet or any part thereof): 
30,001 to 60,000 cubic feet ..... $0.55 
60,001 and greater ..... 1.55 
In case of extreme emergency, the governing body of the City of Goodland shall have the power to adopt by ordinance an additional excess water use surcharge on water consumption designed to conserve water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 8, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 1499, § 5, 5-5-03)  
Sec. 17-509. - Regulations. 
During the effective period of any water supply emergency as provided for in section 17-505, the city manager is empowered to promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, any water supply emergency resolution, or emergency water rate ordinance. Such regulations shall be subjected to the approval of the governing body at its next regular or special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 9, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-510. - Violations, disconnections and penalties. 
(a)  If the governing body, city manager, water superintendent, or other city official or officials charged with implementation and enforcement of this ordinance or a water supply emergency resolution learn of any violation of any water use restrictions imposed pursuant to sections 17-507 or 17-509 of this article, a written notice of the violation shall be affixed to the property where the violation occurred and the customer of record or any other person known to the city who is responsible for the violation or its correction shall be provided with either actual or mailed notice. Said notice shall describe the violation and order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or within such specified time as cured or abated immediately or within such specified time as the city determines is reasonable under the circumstances. If the order is not complied with, the city may terminate water service to the customer subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  The city shall give the customer notice by mail or actual notice that water service will be discontinued within a specified time due to the violation and that the customer will have the opportunity to appeal the termination by requesting a hearing scheduled before the city governing body or a city official designated as a hearing officer by the governing body; 
(2)  If such a hearing is requested by the customer charged with the violation, he or she shall be given a full opportunity to be heard before termination is ordered; and 
(3)  The governing body or hearing officer shall make findings of fact and order whether service should continue or be terminated. 
(b)  A fee of $50.00 shall be paid for the reconnection of any water service terminated pursuant to subsection (a). In the event of subsequent violations, the reconnection fee shall be $200.00 for the second reconnection and $300.00 for any additional reconnections. 
(c)  Violations of this article shall be a municipal offense and may be prosecuted in municipal court. Any person so charged and found guilty in municipal court of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for an initial violation shall be a mandatory fine of $100.00. In addition, such customer may be required by the court to serve a definite term of confinement in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed 30 days. The penalty for a second or subsequent conviction shall be mandatory fine of $200.00. In addition, such customer shall serve a definite term of confinement in the city or county jail which shall be fixed by the court and which shall not exceed 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 10, 9-2-97)  
Sec. 17-511. - Emergency termination. 
Nothing in this article shall limit the ability of any properly authorized city official from terminating the supply of water to any or all customers upon the determination of such city official that emergency termination of water service is required to protect the health and safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1386, § 11, 9-2-97)  
Secs. 17-512—17-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RENEWABLE PARALLEL GENERATION POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, adopted November 5, 2018, repealed the former art. VI, §§ 17-601—17-613, and enacted a new art. VI as set out herein. The former art. VI pertained to net metering policy procedures for customer-owned renewable energy resources and derived from Ord. No. 1631, adopted June 4, 2012. 
 
Sec. 17-601. - Introduction. 
There is hereby adopted the Interconnection Standards for Installation and Parallel Operation of Customer-Owned Renewable Electric Generation Facilities 25 kWAC or less for Residential Customers and 200 kWAC or less for Commercial Customers ("interconnection standards"). 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-602. - Available. 
Service is available on the city's ("utility") existing electric distribution system for customers operating renewable energy resources. The service is available to customer-generators on a first-come, first-served basis until the total rated generating capability of all interconnections served under parallel generation equals or exceeds four percent of the city's peak load for the previous calendar year. Upon reaching this limit, no additional service shall be available under this policy. This policy shall not be available for any electric service schedule allowing for resale. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-603. - Application. 
(a)  Service under this policy is available to utility customers in good standing with a customer-owned renewable electric generation facility as defined in the interconnection standards that wish to receive a billing credit for surplus renewable energy supplied to the utility subject to the terms and conditions of this policy. Customer-owned renewable generation and associated equipment are collectively referred to as a generation facility. 
(b)  Utility may refuse interconnection of any generating facility with a rated generating capacity greater than customer's annual peak electric load. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-604. - Character of service. 
Single phase, 60 Hertz, alternating current will be supplied at standard voltages as available through one transformer. A qualifying customer is a customer in good standing, connected to the utility electric distribution system for the purpose of receiving retail electric service that also owns and operates a generation facility as defined in the Interconnection Standards for Installation and Parallel Operation of Customer-Owned Renewable Electric Generation Facilities. The generation facility shall be installed and operated in accordance with the requirements of said interconnection standards. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-605. - Rates. 
In addition to the rates set in chapter 17, article II of the Code of the City of Goodland for commercial and residential customers, all interconnected parallel generation shall be billed monthly a capacity charge based off of the system nameplate capacity rating. The capacity charge shall be calculated using the following formula: 
System nameplate capacity rating (kW) x $2.00 = Capacity charge 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-606. - Minimum bill. 
The minimum monthly charge set forth in chapter 17, article II of the Code of the City of Goodland plus the capacity charge shall be the minimum bill. Any credits ($) applied to the bill will not result in a total bill less than the minimum bill. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-607. - Metering. 
Metering shall be accomplished by use of a utility-approved electric meter or meters capable of registering the flow of electricity in each direction. The utility may, at its own expense and with written consent of the customer, install one or more additional meters to monitor the flow of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-608. - Customer billing. 
The measurement of net electricity supplied by the electric utility and delivered to the electric utility shall be calculated in the following manner. Electric utility shall measure the amount of electricity delivered by electric utility to customer and the amount of electricity generated by the customer and delivered to electric utility during the billing period, in accordance with normal metering practices. The kWh delivered by electric utility to the customer shall be billed to the customer at the rates contained in chapter 17, article II of the Code of the City of Goodland. The kWh generated by the customer and delivered to the electric utility shall be credited as described in customer billing credit below. The calculated credit ($) applied to the bill will not result in a total bill less than the minimum bill. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-609. - Customer billing credit. 
The billing credit for surplus energy generated by the generation facility and delivered to the electric distribution system that exceeds the customer's instantaneous load but is not in excess of the appropriate generator size, the city shall credit 150 percent of the city's actual cost of purchased energy ($/kWh) for the periods in which energy was delivered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Sec. 17-610. - Terms and conditions. 
(a)  The utility shall offer this renewable parallel generation rate schedule to customers that wish to receive billing credit for surplus renewable energy supplied to the utility from eligible customer-owned solar generation facilities. 
(b)  The utility may limit the number and size of renewable generators to be connected to the utility's system due to the capacity of the distribution line to which such renewable generator would be connected, and in no case, shall the utility be obligated to purchase an amount greater than four percent of utility's peak power requirements. 
(c)  This schedule shall only be available to customers in good standing. All agreements hereunder shall be between the customer and the city and will not include third parties. 
(d)  This schedule is subject to the provisions of the Interconnection Standards for Installation and Parallel Operation of Customer-Owned Renewable Electric Generation Facilities. 
(e)  The interconnection agreement between the utility and customer must remain in effect and the customer-owned generation facility must be in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the interconnection standards. 
(f)  Any required insurance coverage is specifically addressed in the interconnection standards. 
(g)  Nothing in this schedule shall abrogate any customer's obligation to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1719 , § 1, 11-5-18)  
Chapter 18 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1467, § 2, adopted Dec. 3, 2001, repealed Ord. No. 1385, which adopted the 1997 Subdivision Regulations. Section 1 of Ord. No. 1467 enacted the 2002 Edition of the Subdivision Regulations to read as set out herein. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Title. 
These regulations, including all appendices made a part hereof, shall be known and may be cited as the "Goodland Subdivision Regulations", and shall hereinafter be referred to as "these regulations". 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-102. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall apply to all land located within the incorporated area of Goodland, Kansas and the area included in the extraterritorial jurisdiction territory lying outside the City forming the total community of which Goodland is a part. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.02), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-103. - Authority. 
A.  Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Goodland, Kansas is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve and disapprove applications for the subdivision of land per these regulations. The Planning Commission may grant variances from these regulations pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.11. 
B.  Governing Body. The Governing Body of the City of Goodland, Kansas is vested with the authority to accept or refuse the dedication of land for public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.03), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-104. - Enactment. 
In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, these regulations are hereby adopted and made effective as of January 1, 2002. All applications for subdivision approval, including Final Plats, pending on the effective date of these regulations shall be reviewed under these regulations except that these regulations will not apply if Preliminary Plat approval was obtained prior to the effective date of these regulations, unless the Planning Commission determines that application of these regulations is necessary to avoid a substantial risk of injury to public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.04), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-105. - Reservations and repeals. 
Upon the adoption of these regulations according to law, the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Goodland, Kansas, 1998 Edition as adopted as Ordinance No. 1385 as amended, are hereby repealed, except as to those sections expressly retained in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.05), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-106. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of these regulations is to provide for the harmonious development of the community and the surrounding area; to provide for the proper location and width of streets, building lines, open spaces, safety and recreation facilities, utilities, drainage, and for the avoidance of congestion of population through application of minimum lot width, depth and area and the compatibility of design requirements; to require and fix the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded and improved, and water, sewer, drainage, and other utility mains and piping or connections or other physical improvements shall be installed; and to provide for and secure the actual construction of such physical improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.06), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-107. - Applicability. 
The owner or owners of any land located within the jurisdiction of these regulations subdividing said land into two or more lots and blocks or tracts or parcels, for the purpose of laying out any subdivisions, suburban lots, building lots, tracts or parcels or any owner of any land establishing any street, alley, park or other property intended for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, shall cause a plat to be made in accordance with these regulations, unless exempted under Section 18-108. In addition, these regulations shall apply to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.07), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-108. - Exemptions. 
These regulations shall not apply in the following instances: 
A.  A change in the boundary between adjoining lands which does not create an additional or substandard lot. 
B.  Land used for street or railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement or other public utilities subject to local, state or federal regulations, where no new street or easement of access is involved. 
C.  Any transfer by operation of law. 
D.  Lots that have been previously platted and zoned for industrial purposes may be divided into two or more tracts without replatting or resubdividing such lots in conformance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.08), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-109. - Interpretation and conflict. 
A.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purpose for which they are adopted. 
1.  Public Provisions. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, repeal, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except as provided in these regulations. Where any provision of these regulations imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provisions of these regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision that is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control. 
2.  Private Provisions. These regulations are not intended to repeal any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations that such an easement, covenant or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose duties or obligations more restrictive or standards that are higher than the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the Planning Commission or the Governing Body in approving a subdivision or in enforcing these regulations, and the private provisions are not inconsistent with these regulations, then the private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and the determinations made under the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.09), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-110. - Severability and savings clause. 
A.  Each section and each subsection of these regulations are hereby declared to be independent of every other section or subsection so far as the passage of these regulations are concerned and the invalidity of any section or subsection of these regulations shall not invalidate any other section or subsection thereof. 
B.  These regulations shall in no manner affect pending actions either civil or criminal founded on or growing out of any ordinance or part of any ordinance hereby repealed, and these regulations shall in no manner affect rights or causes of action either civil or criminal not in suit that may have already occurred or grown out of any ordinance or part of any ordinance hereby repealed. 
C.  If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of these regulations are for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.10), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-111. - Variances, exceptions and waiver of conditions. 
A.  General. Whenever the Planning Commission deems that extraordinary hardship or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purpose of these regulations may be better served by an alternative proposal, it may authorize a variance, exception or waiver of the conditions of these regulations. In authorizing such variance, exception or waiver, the Planning Commission shall consider the following: 
1.  The conditions that the request is based upon constitute special circumstances or conditions affecting the property for which the relief is sought and are not generally applicable to other property. 
2.  The variance, exception or waiver is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question, and involve a particular hardship to the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out. 
3.  The granting of the variance, exception or waiver will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which the property is situated. 
4.  The granting of the variance, exception or waiver will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, except that those documents may be amended in the manner specified by law. 
B.  Conditions. In approving variances, exception or waiver of conditions, the Planning Commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the purpose described in Section 18-106 of these regulations. 
C.  Procedure. A petition for a variance, exception, or waiver of conditions shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time when the Preliminary or Final Plat is filed for the consideration of the Planning Commission. The petition shall state fully the condition from which the petitioner is seeking relief, the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner, including the ability to meet the conditions of Section 18-111.A. above. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.11), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-112. - Amendments. 
For the purpose of protecting the public, health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning Commission may from time to time propose amendments to these regulations. Such proposed amendments shall be heard as part of a public hearing following public notice as require by law. Following recommendation by the Planning Commission, the Governing Body shall make action by approving or disapproving the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.12), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-113. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
A.  General. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the City Officers and Officials to enforce these requirements and to bring the attention of the City Commission and City Attorney any violations of these regulations. 
2.  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of the land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel before a Final Plat of the subdivision has been approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of the regulations and filed with the applicable public and quasi-public departments, offices or agencies of the City and County. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the municipality have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
B.  Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation violating the provisions of these regulations is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), plus costs, for each offense and shall stand committed to jail until such fine and costs be paid or otherwise discharged according to law. The City of Goodland, Kansas shall further have the authority to maintain suits or action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing any provisions of these regulations and to abate nuisances maintained in violation thereof; and in addition to other remedies, institutions injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.13), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-114. - Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats. 
All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of the lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, shall be submitted to the Goodland Regional Planning Commission and City Commission for their official review and action as applicable per these regulations. The Register of Deeds shall not record any plat, as required by law, until such plat is approved by the Planning Commission and Governing Body and is signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Commission, by the Mayor, City Clerk, and City Engineer/Consultant of the City of Goodland, Kansas, and the Fire Chief or other authorized personnel of the applicable Fire Protection District. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.14), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-115. - Plat preparation. 
All Final Plats shall be prepared and stamped by a professional surveyor licensed in the State of Kansas. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(1.15), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-116—18-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 18-201. - Duties of the building official pertaining to this chapter. 
A.  Maintain permanent and current records with respect to these regulations including amendments thereto. Keep on file minutes and agendas of all meeting and hearings. 
B.  Review all applications for Sketch, Preliminary and Final Plats and notify applicants of acceptability for review. 
C.  Process and distribute all Sketch, Preliminary and Final Plats, together with applications and filing fees. 
D.  Transmit Sketch, Preliminary and Final Plats to the Planning Commission, along with written comments. 
E.  Transmit Planning Commission recommendations regarding acceptance of plats to the Governing Body for its action. 
F.  Transmit Final Plats to Register of Deeds for filing. 
G.  Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove lot splits per Article V. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(2.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-202. - Duties of the city engineer/consultant pertaining to this chapter. 
A.  Determine the need for a detailed Drainage Study or stormwater improvements based upon the submittal of the Sketch Plat per Section 18-402. 
B.  Review all applications for Sketch, Preliminary and Final Plats and notify applicants of acceptability for review. 
C.  Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove Drainage Studies per Section 18-405. 
D.  Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove Construction Documents per Section 18-406. 
E.  Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove lot splits per Article V. 
F.  Review or inspect all required improvements and as-built drawings and recommend acceptance, acceptance conditionally or rejection per Section 18-703. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(2.02), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-203. - Duties of the planning commission pertaining to this chapter. 
A.  Review and approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove Preliminary Plats per Section 18-403.F., G., within sixty (60) days after the first meeting of the Planning Commission constituting the official submission date as defined in Section 18-401.C. 
B.  Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove Final Plats within sixty (60) days after the first meeting of the Planning Commission following the submission of the Final Plat per Section 18-404.F., G. Transmit approved Final Plats, together with appropriate recommendations to the Governing Body for its acceptance of dedications of public improvements. 
C.  Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove Lot Splits where an applicant has appealed Staff's decision per Section 18-501.E. 
D.  Review and approve, approve conditionally or disapprove variances, exceptions and waivers of conditions the regulations herein per Section 18-111. 
E.  Make other determinations and decisions including making recommendations of amendments to these regulations as may be required of the Planning Commission from time to time per Section 18-112. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(2.03), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-204. - Duties of the governing body pertaining to this chapter. 
A.  Consider Planning Commission recommendations on Final Plats and accept or reject dedications of public improvements within thirty (30) days after the first meeting of the Governing Body following action by the Planning Commission per Section 18-404.H. 
B.  Accept or reject financial guarantees from subdividers in lieu of immediate completion or installation of improvements required by the regulation per Section 18-701. 
C.  Accept, accept conditionally or reject dedication of required improvements following completion and inspection per Section 18-703. 
D.  Take other action as required from time to time including the consideration of amendments to these regulations per Section 18-112. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(2.04), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-205—18-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 18-301. - Usage. 
A.  For the purpose of these regulations, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in Section 18-302. 
B.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(3.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-302. - Definitions. 
A.  Alley. A public or private right-of-way designed to serve as primary vehicular access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
B.  Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. See also Developer, Owner, and Subdivider. 
C.  Block. A tract of land entirely surrounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public rights-of-way, or as otherwise determined by the planning commission or its authorized representative. 
D.  Board of Zoning Appeals. Is a legally appointed municipal board empowered to hear and decide appeals from, and to provide interpretations of, the terms of the zoning ordinance and official map as defined within this chapter and in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas. 
E.  Bond. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All bonds shall be approved by the governing body wherever a bond is required by these regulations. 
F.  Building. See Structure. 
G.  Building Inspector. The person or persons authorized and empowered by the City Commission to administer and enforce the permitting and inspecting process within the City. 
H.  Building Official. The person or persons authorized and empowered by the City Commission to administer the requirements of these zoning regulations. 
I.  Cash in Lieu of Land. Payment of money into fund earmarked by the City of Goodland to provide for acquisition of facilities off-site in place of dedicating land or providing such facility on site. 
J.  Certificate of Occupancy. An official certification indicating that a use or building (as built) conforms to the provisions of these regulations and may be used or occupied. 
K.  Certify. Whenever these regulations require that an agency or official certify the existence of some fact or circumstance, the City of Goodland by administrative rule may require that such certification be made in any manner, oral or written, which provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification. 
L.  City. The City of Goodland, Kansas. 
M.  City Commission. See Governing Body. 
N.  City Engineer/Consultant. The licensed engineer designated by the Governing Body to furnish engineering assistance for the administration these regulations. 
O.  Common Ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockbroker, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
P.  Construction Documents. The maps or drawings showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in a subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a condition of the approval of the plat. 
Q.  Cul-de-Sac. A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular turnaround and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
R.  Dedication. The transfer of private to public or common ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be in fee simple title or less than fee simple interest including easements. Dedication requires the acceptance of the interest to be complete. 
S.  Developer. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review and/or approval under these regulations. See also Owner and Subdivider. 
T.  Easement. A permanent or temporary grant of right by a property owner to the public, a corporation or other persons, of the use of a portion of a lot or tract of land for specified purposes where title to said portion of the lot or tract of land remains with the landowner. 
U.  Escrow. A deposit of cash with the local government or escrow agent to secure the promise to perform some act. 
V.  Escrow Agent. A title company, bank, savings and loan association, trust company, attorney or any other person or agency approved by the City to act as an escrow agent. 
W.  Fair Market Value. The fair market value of a designated unit at the time such value is approved by the Governing Body. 
X.  Frontage. The length of the property abutting on one side of a street measured along the dividing line between the property and the street. 
Y.  Governing Body. The duly elected Mayor and City Commission of the City of Goodland. 
Z.  Homeowners Association. See Property Owners Association. 
AA.  Improvement. Any roadway, drainage ditch, sidewalk, pedestrianway, parkway, tree, lawn, off street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the City of Goodland may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which the City of Goodland responsibility is established. 
BB.  Lot. A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or possession, or for building development. 
CC.  Lot Split. The division of a single lot into not more than two (2) tracts, per these regulations, with out having to resubdivided said lot, providing that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without replatting. 
DD.  Off-Site. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
EE.  Owner. The record owners of the fee or a vendee in possession, including any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under the definition of Same Ownership. 
FF.  Person. Any individual or group of individuals, or any corporation, general or limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or governmental or quasi-governmental entity. 
GG.  Plat, Final. A drawing of a permanent nature showing the precise location and dimension of such features as streets, lots, easements and other elements pertinent to transfer of ownership and prepared to be recorded after approval by the Planning Commission and including any accompanying material as described in these regulations. 
HH.  Plat, Preliminary. A drawing described in these regulations, showing the proposed general patterns of streets, lots and land uses within a tract to be subdivided, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
II.  Plat, Sketch. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the Building Official as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations. 
JJ.  Planning Area. The City of Goodland, Kansas and all land in Sherman County lying outside said City, but within three (3) miles of the nearest point of the City Limits. 
KK.  Planning Commission. The Goodland City Planning Commission. 
LL.  Plot. One or more contiguous parcels of land under single ownership or control, designated by its owner, at the time of filing an application for a building permit, as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. It may or may not coincide with the deed description thereof or the boundaries of the same as shown on a map thereof filed for record or otherwise, and it may subsequently subdivided into two (2) or more plots, provided all such plots conform to all the regulations of the district. The boundaries of any plot for which a building permit or certificate of occupancy is requested, shall be accurately drawn on the application therefor. 
MM.  Professional Surveyor. A practicing surveyor licensed in the State of Kansas. 
NN.  Property Owners Association. An association or organization, whether or not incorporated, which operates under and pursuant to recorded covenants or deed restrictions, through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision-be it a lot, parcel site, unit plot, condominium, or any other interest-is automatically a member as a condition of ownership and each such member is subject to a charge or assessment for a pro-rated share of expense of the association which may become a lien against the lot, parcel, unit, condominium, or other interest of the member. 
OO.  Public Utilities. Publicly owned or regulated utilities including, water, sewer, telephone, gas, and electric. 
PP.  Resubdivision. The act of amending or changing an approved Final Plat, including any change in any street layout or other public improvement, any lot line, the amount of land reserved for public use or the common use of lot owners, or any easements shown on the approved plat. 
QQ.  Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, are not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
RR.  Sale or Lease. Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, or other transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof, whether by metes and bounds or lot and block description. 
SS.  Sanitary Sewer System. A totally enclosed system consisting of an underground collection system and a treatment system so installed that when the treatment is completed, the affluent discharge meets the standard of the jurisdictional health agency. 
TT.  Setback. The required minimum horizontal distance between the structure line and the related front, side, or rear property line. 
UU.  Street. A way set aside for vehicular traffic, regardless of size or designation, but excluding private driveways serving only one (1) parcel of land. 
VV.  Street, Arterial. A streets or highways designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic. 
WW.  Street, Collector. A street that carries or will carry intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets. 
XX.  Street, Dead-End. A street or a portion of a street with only one (1) vehicular-traffic outlet. See also Cul-de-Sac. 
YY.  Street, Local. A street that is used or will be used primarily for access to abutting properties and which carry or will carry limited volumes of traffic. 
ZZ.  Street, Marginal Access. A street that is parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and that serves to reduce the number of access points to the arterial streets and thereby increase traffic safety. 
AAA.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, but not including fences or public items such as utility poles, street light fixtures, and street signs. 
BBB.  Subdivider. Any person who (I) having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who; (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases or develops or offers to sell, lease or develop, or advertises for sale, lease or development, any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plot in a subdivision, or who; (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel, site, unit or plot in a subdivision, and who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. 
CCC.  Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or interests for the purposed of offer, sale, lease or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms and conditions, including resubdivision. Subdivision includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bound description, map, plat or other recorded instrument. 
DDD.  Subdivision Improvement Agreement. A contract entered into by the applicant and the Governing Body by which the applicant promises to complete the required public improvements, as specified within these regulations, within the subdivision within a specified time period following final subdivision plat approval. 
EEE.  Subdivision, Major. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions. 
FFF.  Subdivision, Minor. Any subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road, or the extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, Zoning Regulations, or these regulations. 
GGG.  Subdivision, Staged. Any subdivision within a drainage sub-basin in which public sewer is projected to be developed in the future, but for which it is not feasible to provide public sewer at the time of development, and meeting the requirements of these regulations. 
HHH.  Subdivision Regulations. The term "Subdivision Regulations" or "these regulations" shall mean the requirements stipulated in the regulations herewith attached, and shall mean the lawfully adopted Subdivision Regulations of the City of Goodland. 
III.  Tract. A lot. The term "tract" is used interchangeably with the term "lot," particularly in the context or subdivision, where a "tract" is subdivided into several lots, parcels, sites, plots, tracts, or interests. See also Lot and Plot. 
JJJ.  Vested Rights. Right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use which will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect prior to or following completion of the project associated with the use. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(3.02), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-303—18-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION—PROCEDURES, SPECIFICATIONS AND APPROVAL PROCESS 
 
Sec. 18-401. - General procedure. 
A.  Classification of Subdivisions. Land proposed to be subdivided shall be classified according to one of the following: 
1.  Minor Subdivision. Any residential subdivision that meets all the following criteria: 
a.  The subdivision will not result in the creation of more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing street built to City standards and will not require the construction of any new street or road; 
b.  The subdivision will not require the extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any public improvements; 
c.  The subdivision is consistent with the applicable provisions and portions of the Comprehensive Plan; 
d.  The City Engineer/Consultant has determined, following review of the applicant's preliminary drainage information, that no detailed drainage plan or improvements are needed; and 
e.  The proposed subdivision does not have any topography, access, sewage disposal or design concerns that would warrant review and consideration within the requirements of the Major Subdivision classification designation. 
2.  Major Subdivision. Any subdivision not classified as a minor or staged subdivision, including but not limited to any sized subdivision requiring any new street, extension of municipal facilities or the creation of public improvements and which will be served with public sewer upon development. 
3.  Staged Subdivision. Any subdivision within a drainage sub-basin in which public sewer is projected to be developed in the future, but for which it is not feasible to provide public sewer at the time of development. In addition to the requirements of Article IV, staged subdivisions shall meet all the following criteria: 
a.  No parcel in existence on the effective date of this chapter shall be subdivided more than once according to the staged subdivision process regardless of change in ownership. No further subdivision of a lot created by the staged subdivision process shall be permitted unless it meets the requirements of Section 18-407. 
b.  Direct access to collector and arterial streets is prohibited unless meeting the minimum design requirements for access separation. 
c.  Each lot proposed shall demonstrate the ability to be resubdivided into future lots with areas no greater than 7,500 square feet. Each lot must show the ability to resubdivide without the cooperation of other lot owners in the subdivision by indicating future lot lines. 
d.  Primary structures shall be located on no more than one (1) future lot, unless made necessary by site features and permitted by the Building Official. Prior to permitting a primary structure to span two (2) lots, a written request must be submitted explaining necessity. In no case shall the building pad span more than two (2) lots. 
e.  Accessory structures may be located on more than one future lot, but shall be oriented to the development of such future lots. Individual accessory structures shall not be located on more than one (1) lot. 
f.  The stormwater drainage and sanitary sewer system shall be designed to accommodate full development based on the proposed ability to resubdivide. Surface drainage meeting requirements of this chapter shall be handled in a development-wide facility located on a separate lot to be maintained by a subdivision association or dedicated to the City so all resubdivided lots need only install on-site drainage improvements. Sanitary sewer improvements meeting requirements of this chapter are required. 
B.  Procedure by Classification. Before any land is subdivided, the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  Minor Subdivision. 
a.  Sketch Plat, 
b.  Final Plat. 
2.  Major Subdivision. 
a.  Sketch Plat; 
b.  Preliminary Plat; 
c.  Final Plat. 
3.  Staged Subdivision. 
a.  Sketch Plat; 
b.  Preliminary Plat; 
c.  Final Plat. 
C.  Official Submission Dates. For the purpose of these regulations, for major, minor and staged subdivisions, the date of the Planning Commission meeting at which the application is first considered, shall constitute the official submission date of the plat on which the statutory period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the Preliminary or Final Plat shall begin. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-402. - Sketch plat. 
A.  Intent. The Sketch Plat gives general guidance in preparing a Preliminary or Final Plat. This plat is a conceptual representation of the applicant's desire and ability to meet the standards of these regulations. The Sketch Plat is expected to be modified as more detailed planning and engineering is completed. Dimensions, measurements, and calculations shown on the Sketch Plat are assumed to be illustrative. Detailed planning and engineering following Sketch Plat review are expected to result in changes in detail, but not the overall concept. 
B.  General. Before preparing and submitting a Preliminary Plat for Major or Staged subdivisions or Final Plat for Minor subdivisions, the applicant shall schedule a meeting with the Building Official to discuss the proposed subdivision and existing conditions, projected conditions, and the regulations and ordinances that will impact the development, including: 
1.  The subdivision classification; 
2.  the procedure for approval of plats; 
3.  the availability of existing services, including sewer, water, emergency services, schools, etc.; 
4.  the Comprehensive Plan requirements for major streets, land use, parks, schools and public open spaces; 
5.  the zoning requirements for the property in question and adjacent properties; 
6.  the required improvements and design criteria; and 
7.  the applicable fees. 
In addition, staff shall direct the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those staff or officials who must eventually approve specific aspects of the subdivision plat falling within their jurisdiction or responsibility. 
C.  Application Procedure and Requirements. At the time of the Sketch Plat meeting, the land owner or his authorized agent shall submit: 
1.  A completed application as available in the adopted City of Goodland Procedures Manual or at the Building Official; 
2.  Identification of all contiguous holdings of the owner including land in "common ownership" as defined in these regulations, with an indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with the book and page where each conveyance to the present owner is recorded in the County Register of Deeds. The affidavit shall identify the legal owner of the property, the contract owner of the property, the date the contract of sale was executed, and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers, and stockholders of each corporation owning more than five percent of any class of stock; and 
3.  Copies of the Sketch Plat in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule. 
D.  Submittal Requirements. Sketch Plats shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than 1? = 100' and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Proposed or existing name of subdivision; 
2.  Graphic scale, north arrow and date; 
3.  Existing conditions, including: 
a.  Location of property lines, existing easements, rights-of-way, watercourses, major vegetation and location width and name of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within 200 feet; 
b.  Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other utilities within the tract and immediately adjacent to the tract; 
c.  Existing buildings; 
d.  Existing topography (at the same scale as the Sketch Plat); 
e.  Existing floodplain; 
f.  Soil types and general location for all subdivisions proposed to be developed without access to public sanitary sewer; and 
g.  A vicinity map and/or aerial photography showing streets, street names and other general development of the surrounding area. 
4.  Proposed layout, including: 
a.  The approximate location of proposed streets; 
b.  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing utilities, or alternative means of providing services; 
c.  Preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage; 
d.  The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all land to be dedicated for public use including rights-of-way and park land. 
E.  Classification and Notice to Proceed. Within five (5) working days of the date that the Sketch Plat meeting was held, the Building Official shall determine whether the Sketch Plat constitutes a minor, major or staged subdivision and notify the applicant of the classification and any issues to be addressed or conditions to be met prior to proceeding. Upon verification that any issues have been addressed and conditions met, staff shall issue a "notice to proceed" with the plat as required for the specified classification. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.02), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-403. - Preliminary plat. 
A.  Intent. The Preliminary Plat contains accurate preliminary planning and engineering. Although not a survey, the accuracy and design is such that only minor changes are to be expected in the Final Plat. Only minor revisions warranted by final engineering, surveying or other required changes are expected following approval of the Preliminary Plat. Unless part of a Planned Development district zoning or otherwise specified, the Preliminary Plat is not recorded. Rather it serves as a benchmark for reviewing and approving the Final Plat. A revised Preliminary Plat may be required for any subdivision that proposes a major deviation from a previously approved Preliminary Plat at the time of Final Plat application. 
B.  General. 
1.  Preliminary plat submittal is required for all Major and Staged Subdivisions. 
2.  In order to proceed, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat within 180 days of the Notice to Proceed. If the Preliminary Plat application is not filed within the 180-day period, the applicant must resubmit a Sketch Plat and meet with the Building Official per the requirements of Section 4.02, unless a reasonable extension is granted by staff. 
3.  The Preliminary Plat shall generally conform to the Sketch Plat that formed the basis for the Notice to Proceed. 
C.  Application Procedure and Requirements. 
1.  Application: Preliminary Plat Application shall be made on forms available at City Hall or in the City of Goodland Procedures Manual. All applications shall be filled out in their entirety. Applications shall be reviewed for completeness within five (5) working days of filing. If the City determines that the application is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the City determines that it is incomplete, the City shall, within such five- day period, notify the applicant of the specific ways in which the application is deficient. Incomplete applications will not be accepted, or placed on an agenda for review and consideration. As such, applicants are encouraged to submit applications earlier than the deadlines specified in the adopted City of Goodland Application and Review Schedule. 
2.  Fees: A filing fee and deposit shall be charged and collected from the applicant in an amount as established by the Governing Body by ordinance or resolution. A separate filing fee and deposit shall be required for each Preliminary Plat application. The Preliminary Plat shall not be accepted for filing until the filing fee and deposit has been paid by the subdivider. 
3.  Submittal Materials: The subdivider shall submit one original and five (5) folded prints or copies of the Preliminary Plat, and a vicinity map (if not on the Preliminary Plat) showing the location of the proposed subdivision. These plans shall be filed with the Building Official according to the adopted City of Goodland Application and Review Schedule. 
4.  Notification: Within the City Limits the City shall notify all owners of record of all unplatted land within 300 feet of property being proposed for subdividing or resubdividing or the intent to subdivide or resubdivide the subject property. Within the extraterritorial jurisdiction the City shall notify all owners of record of all unplatted land within 1,000 feet of property being proposed for subdividing or resubdividing or the intent to subdivide or resubdivide the subject property. Notification shall be mailed and a copy of a letter of notification shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat. The subdivider shall also submit a complete list of the names and mailing addresses of, as prepared by the County Clerk or a title company. 
D.  Preliminary Plat Features. All Preliminary Plats shall contain: 
1.  Scale of the plat, 1? = 100' or larger. 
2.  A vicinity map at a scale of 1? = 1,000' or larger, showing streets and street names within 500 feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision. 
3.  The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or too closely resemble the name or names of an existing subdivision(s). 
4.  The location of the boundary lines of the subdivision and reference to the section or quarter section lines. 
5.  The names and addresses of the subdivider, developer, owner, and the engineer or land surveyor who prepared the plat. 
6.  Date of preparation and north point. 
7.  Existing conditions: 
a.  Current zoning classification, existing, projected and proposed land use. 
b.  Location, width and name of platted streets or other public ways, railroads and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces and permanent buildings within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
c.  All existing sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts, or other underground installations, within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, with pipe size and manholes, grades and location. 
d.  Names of adjacent subdivisions together with arrangement of streets and lots, and owners of adjacent parcels of unsubdivided land. 
e.  Topography with contour intervals of not more than two feet, referred to City or U.S.G.S. datum; where the ground is too flat for contours, spot elevations shall be provided. 
f.  Location of watercourses, bridges, wooded areas, lakes, ravines, floodplain, and such other features as may be pertinent to the subdivision. 
g.  Soil types and location for all subdivisions proposed to be developed without access to public sanitary sewer. 
8.  Proposed improvements: 
a.  The general arrangements of lots and their approximate size. Staged subdivisions shall indicate lots to be developed initially as well as future lots. Additional sheets may be warranted based upon the size of the proposed development or to show staged development plans. 
b.  Location and width of proposed streets, alleys, and pedestrian ways and easements, including easements required for staged subdivision as applicable. 
c.  The general plan of sewage disposal, water supply and drainage, including a map showing the drainage area of each major drainage way. 
d.  Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, school sites or other special uses of land to be considered for reservation or dedication for public use. Including calculations for required open space dedication. 
e.  General street layout of adjacent property within 200 feet to show how streets and other public facilities in the proposed subdivision relate to the adjacent property. 
f.  Approximate gradient of streets. 
g.  Relation to adjacent unsubdivided land. 
h.  A table showing gross acreage of the subdivision; acreage of each applicable zoning district; acreage dedicated to streets and other public uses; total number of buildable lots for each use proposed; maximum, minimum and average lot sizes for each use proposed; and overall density. 
E.  Supplemental Data: The following additional information shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat at the time of application: 
1.  Review by Public Utilities: The subdivider shall have the proposed plat reviewed by all affected utility companies or agencies to ensure that adequate easements are provided and shall submit a letter from each utility or agency regarding their review and comments on the plat. 
2.  Preliminary Grading Plan: The subdivider shall submit a preliminary grading plan including, existing and proposed land elevations, contours, and slopes. This plan shall be forwarded to the City Engineer/Consultant. These plans are not intended to be detailed suitable for construction. 
3.  Preliminary Landscaping Plan: The subdivider shall submit a preliminary landscaping plan, showing at a minimum landscaping easements required per the City of Goodland Zoning Regulation requirements for landscaping and buffering. This plan is not intended to be detailed suitable for construction. 
4.  Drainage Study: The subdivider shall submit a drainage study for the proposed site. The content of said drawings is set out in Section 18-405. 
F.  Preliminary Plat Action: After the Planning Commission has reviewed the Preliminary Plat, applicable reports submitted, and any additional materials submitted, the Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Preliminary Plat within sixty (60) days from the Official Submission date. If the Preliminary Plat is approved conditionally or tabled for further consideration, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions necessary for approval. 
G.  [Action by Planning Commission:] Action by the Planning Commission shall be conveyed to the subdivider in writing within seven (7) working days after the meeting at which the plat was considered. One (1) copy of the Preliminary Plat shall be returned to the developer with the date of approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. The approval of the Preliminary Plat does not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision, but is deemed to be an authorization to proceed with the platting process. 
H.  Standards for Approval of a Preliminary Plat: No Preliminary Plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the Planning Commission unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that: 
1.  Provisions have been made for adequate public facilities. The water supply system shall be sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed. If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal and state laws and regulations in addition to the requirements of these regulations; 
2.  All areas of the proposed subdivision that may involve soil or topographic conditions presenting hazards or special precautions have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions; 
3.  The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking urban services between developed parcels; and 
4.  The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the public health, safety and welfare. 
The Planning Commission is authorized to disapprove the Preliminary Plat even though the land proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to which the proposed subdivision will be put and the proposed use is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
I.  Effective Date: The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months from the date that the Preliminary Plat is approved by the Planning Commission. At the end of this period the applicant must have submitted a Final Plat for approval or the Planning Commission must have granted an extension to the validity of the Preliminary Plat at the request of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.03), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-404. - Final plat. 
A.  Intent. The Final Plat should be in substantial conformance with the Preliminary Plat or Sketch Plat and should reflect a final subdivision layout based upon completed Construction Documents. The Final Plat is the document to be recorded. All construction shall be in accordance with the Final Plat and Construction Documents. 
B.  General. 
1.  Final plat submittal is required for all subdivision classifications. 
2.  In order to proceed, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of a Final Plat within 180 days of the Notice to Proceed, or twelve (12) months of the approval of a Preliminary Plat. If the Final Plat application is not filed within the 180-day or twelve (12) month period, the applicant must resubmit a Sketch Plat and/or a Preliminary Plat as required for the subdivision classification, unless an extension is granted by staff. 
3.  The Final Plat shall conform substantially to the Sketch Plat or Preliminary Plat as applicable. 
4.  The Final Plat may constitute only a portion of the Preliminary Plat that the subdivider proposes to record and develop. 
C.  Application Procedure and Requirements. 
1.  Application: Final Plat Application shall be made on forms available at City Hall or in the City of Goodland Procedures Manual. All applications shall be filled out in their entirety. Applications shall be reviewed for completeness within five (5) working days of filing. If the City determines that the application is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the City determines that it is incomplete, the City shall, within such five-day period, notify the applicant of the specific ways in which the application is deficient. Incomplete applications will not be accepted, or placed on an agenda for review and consideration. As such, applicants are encouraged to submit applications earlier than the deadlines specified in the adopted City of Goodland Application and Review Schedule. 
2.  Fees: A filing fee and deposit shall be charged and collected from the applicant in an amount as established by the Governing Body by ordinance. A separate filing fee and deposit shall be required for each Final Plat application. The Final Plat shall not be accepted for filing until the subdivider has paid all applicable filing fees and deposits. 
3.  Submittal Materials: The subdivider shall submit one original on mylar, the required number of folded prints or copies, and an electronic copy of the Final Plat. Electronic copies shall be in a format compatible with the City's designated software. These materials shall be filed with the Building Official according to the adopted City of Goodland Application/Review Schedule. 
D.  Final Plat Features. All Final Plats shall contain: 
1.  Scale of plat, 1? = 100' or larger, on 24? × 36? sheets. If more than one sheet is required to cover the entire development, an index map of the same dimensions shall be filed showing the entire development at a smaller scale. The dimensions indicated are standard for all Final Plats and shall be complied with. 
2.  The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate or too closely resemble the name or names of any existing subdivision(s). 
3.  Location of the proposed subdivision in relation to section, township, range, county and state, including the description boundaries of the subdivision based on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions that must be mathematically correct. The allowable error of closing on any portion of the plat shall be one foot in five thousand (1': 5,000'). 
4.  The location of existing monuments or bench marks shall be shown and described on the Final Plat. Location of such monuments shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments or the nearest established street lines, including the true angles and distances to such reference points or monuments. 
5.  The location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet with the length of radii on all curves, and other information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. 
6.  Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks shall be numbered or lettered clearly in the center of the block. 
7.  The exact locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys to be dedicated. 
8.  Boundary lines and description of the boundary lines of any area other than streets and alleys that are to be dedicated or reserved for public use. 
9.  All Building setback lines with dimensions. 
10.  The location of any floodplain located within the proposed subdivision and a statement regarding compliance with the City's adopted floodplain regulations. 
11.  Name, signature and seal of the licensed land surveyor preparing the plat. 
12.  Scale of the plat (scale to be shown graphically and in feet per plat scale inch), date of preparation and north point. 
13.  Statement dedicating all easements, streets, alleys, and all other public areas not previously dedicated. 
14.  Additional information required for Preliminary Plats deemed necessary by staff to determine the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision (Minor Plats only). 
15.  The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate (see appendix for specific language): 
a.  Certificate of Ownership, Consent and Dedication; 
b.  Certificate of Accuracy; 
c.  Certificate of Approval of Fire Protection Measures; 
d.  Certificate of the Approval of Public Improvements; 
e.  Certificate of the Approval of the Final Plat. 
E.  Supplemental Data. The following additional information shall be submitted with the Final Plat at the time of application: 
1.  Restrictive Covenants: A copy of any restrictive covenants applicable to the subdivision. 
2.  Proof of Ownership: A title report by an abstract or a title insurance company, or an attorney's opinion of title, showing the name of the owner of the land and all other persons who have an interest in, or an encumbrance on the plat and any easements or other constraints. 
3.  Review by the County Surveyor: The subdivider shall submit the Final Plat to the Sherman County Surveyor to ensure the accuracy and acceptance of the survey/legal description of the proposed subdivision. 
4.  A certificate showing that all taxes and special assessments due and payable have been paid in full; or if such taxes have been protested as provided by law, monies or other sufficient escrows guaranteeing such payment of taxes in the event the protest is not upheld, may be placed on deposit with such official or governing bodies to meet this requirement. 
5.  Owner's Acknowledgment: The names and signatures of the owner or owners of the property duly acknowledged and notarized shall appear on the original and copies or prints submitted. 
6.  Final Landscaping Plan: The subdivider shall submit a final landscaping plan, per the City of Goodland Zoning Regulation requirements for landscaping and buffering. This plan is intended to be detailed suitable for construction. 
7.  Construction Documents: The subdivider shall submit a letter from the City Engineer/Consultant that Construction Documents and specifications for all required developer installed improvements have been approved. The content of said drawings is set out in Section 18-406. 
F.  Final Plat Action by the Planning Commission. After the Planning Commission has reviewed the Preliminary Plat, applicable reports submitted, and any additional materials submitted to determine conformance with the subdivision regulations and Preliminary Plat, the Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the Final Plat within sixty (60) days from the Official Submission date. If such determination is not made within sixty (60) days after the first meeting of the Planning Commission following the date of the submission of the plat to the Building Official, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued by the secretary of the Planning Commission upon demand. 
If the Planning Commission finds that the plat does not conform to the requirements of the subdivision regulations or the Preliminary Plat and is approved conditionally or tabled for further consideration, the applicant shall be advised of any required changes and/or additions the Building Official shall notify the owner or owners of such fact in writing within five (5) working days of the meeting in which the plat was considered. If the plat conforms to the requirements of the regulations and the Preliminary Plat, there shall be endorsed thereon the fact that the plat has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission. The action of the Planning Commission on final subdivision plats shall be taken by a majority vote of the entire membership of the Planning Commission. 
G.  Standards for Approval of a Final Plat. The Final Plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the Planning Commission if the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that: 
1.  The plat meets the requirements of these regulations; 
2.  The construction documents have been approved by the City Engineer/Consultant; and 
3.  The plat is in substantial compliance with the approved Preliminary Plat (Major and Staged Subdivisions) or Sketch Plat (Minor Subdivision). The Final Plat shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the approved Preliminary Plat provided any modification to the plat does not: 
a.  Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent (5%) or involve a substantial reduction in the area set aside for common open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area, nor 
b.  Substantially change the design of plat so as to significantly alter, as determined by the Planning Commission: 
(1)  Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow. 
(2)  The arrangement of the site. 
(3)  The relation of open space to residential development. 
(4)  The proposed phasing of construction. 
H.  The Governing Body shall accept or refuse the dedication of land for public purpose within thirty (30) days after the first meeting of the Governing Body following the date of the submission of the plat to the Building Official from the Planning Commission. The Governing Body may defer action for an additional thirty (30) days for the purpose of allowing for modifications to comply with the requirements established by the Governing Body. No additional filing fees shall be assessed during that period. If the Governing Body defers or refuses such dedication, it shall advise the Planning Commission of the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.04), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-405. - Drainage study. 
A.  General. 
1.  A Drainage Study shall be submitted for all Major and Staged Subdivisions at the time of Preliminary Plat application. 
B.  Submittal Procedure and Requirements. 
1.  Submittal: The Drainage Study is to be submitted with the Preliminary Plat application as specified in Section 18-403.E.4. 
2.  Submittal Materials: The subdivider shall submit copies of the Drainage Study in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule. These documents shall be submitted at the time of Preliminary Plat application. 
C.  Drainage Study Contents. 
1.  Existing Conditions: The existing conditions of the site must be evaluated to determine the impact of on and off-site drainage. As such, the following information shall be provided. Additional information may be required by the City Engineer/Consultant as deemed necessary to provide an accurate assessment of existing conditions. 
a.  Area of the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Area of pervious and impervious surfaces within the proposed subdivision. 
c.  Hydrologic soil types within the proposed subdivision. 
d.  Map of the proposed subdivision indicating existing drainage areas. 
e.  Map of the surrounding area indicating drainage areas contributing run-off to the proposed subdivision, with time of concentration, and run-off coefficient or SCS curve numbers and calculations for each area. 
f.  2-, 10- and 100-year flow from each on-site drainage area, across the proposed subdivision from off-site areas, and to each discharge point in the proposed subdivision. 
g.  Nature and size of any downstream conveyance system. 
h.  The identification and explanation of any downstream restrictions or limitations. 
i.  Any assumptions used in the examination of existing conditions. 
2.  Proposed Conditions: The proposed condition of the site must be evaluated to determine the extent and capacity of on-site storm sewer systems. As such, the following information shall be provided. Additional information may be required by the City Engineer/Consultant as deemed necessary. 
a.  Approximated area of the pervious and impervious surfaces within the proposed subdivision upon build out. 
b.  Hydrologic soil types within the proposed subdivision. 
c.  Map of the proposed subdivision indicating proposed drainage areas. 
d.  Map of the surrounding area indicating drainage areas contributing run-off to the proposed subdivision, with time of concentration, and run-off coefficient or SCS curve numbers and calculations for each area. 
e.  2-, 10- and 100-year flow from each on-site drainage area, across the proposed subdivision from off-site areas, and to each discharge point in the proposed subdivision. 
f.  The size, material, slope and capacity of the proposed storm sewer. 
g.  Location, area, depth and volume of detention area, and a drawing of such, including the discharge structure (required only if proposed). 
h.  Inflow, outflow and elevation curves for the proposed system. 
i.  The ability of the existing elements to convey proposed flows. 
j.  The identification and explanation of any additional improvements proposed. 
k.  Any assumptions used in the examination of existing conditions. 
l.  The comparison of the existing and proposed flows from the site. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.05), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-406. - Construction documents. 
A.  General. 
1.  Construction Documents must be submitted for all required improvements. 
2.  Upon the approval of the Preliminary Plat, the subdivider shall have prepared by a licensed professional engineer, Construction Documents for the required improvements. 
B.  Application Procedure and Requirements. 
1.  Application: Construction Documents are to be submitted with any Final Plat application as specified in Section 18-404.E.7. 
2.  Submittal Materials: The subdivider shall submit copies of the construction drawings in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule. These documents shall be submitted at the time of Final Plat application. 
C.  Construction Documents Contents. 
1.  Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates for roadway and sidewalk construction, including plans and profiles for each street with a typical cross section of the roadway. The profiles of grade lines shall be shown to a scale of 1? = 50' horizontal, and 1? = 5' vertical. The City Engineer/Consultant may require a larger format as necessary to show adequate detail. This information shall be shown on standard plan and profile sheets unless otherwise required. Where steep slopes exist, cross-sections of all proposed streets at one-hundred-foot stations may be required as follows: On a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each property line and points twenty-five (feet) inside each property line. 
2.  Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed storm drainage improvements. 
3.  Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of proposed water distribution systems and proposed water supply facilities and hydrants, if any. 
4.  Plans, profiles, details, specifications and cost estimates of sewerage systems and of any required sewage treatment facilities. 
5.  Grading plans for all lots and other sites in the subdivision. 
6.  Erosion control plan for the subdivision. 
7.  Copies of all State and Federal permits required to begin construction. 
8.  When unusual site conditions exist, staff may require such additional plans, specifications and drawings as may be necessary for an adequate review of the improvements to be installed. 
9.  All plans shall be based on City or U.S.G.S. datum for vertical control. 
D.  Review of Plans. The City Engineer/Consultant shall review all Construction Documents in order to determine that they comply with City design standards. The City Engineer/Consultant shall notify the subdivider and the planning staff, in the event that the drawings do not so conform or comply, and shall specify the specific manner in which such drawings do not so comply. The subdivider shall then correct any defective drawings and resubmit the corrected drawings. 
E.  Approval by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall approve a Final Plat only after consideration of the City Engineer/Consultant's opinion that the drawings are consistent with the approved Sketch Plat and/or Preliminary Plat and comply with their design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.06), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-407. - Resubdivision of land. 
A.  Procedure for Resubdivision. Whenever a developer desires to resubdivide an already approved final subdivision plat, the developer shall first obtain approval for the resubdivision by the same procedures prescribed for the subdivision of land. 
B.  Resubdivision. Resubdivision includes: 
1.  Any change in any street layout or other public improvement; 
2.  Any change in any lot line; 
3.  Any change in the amount of land reserved for public use or the common use of lot owners; or 
4.  Any change in any easements shown on the approved plat. 
C.  Procedure When Future Resubdivision is Indicated as Required for Staged Platting. Whenever land proposed for resubdivision includes land for which future resubdivision is indicated as required for staged platting per these regulations, such resubdivision shall conform to the criteria specified in Section 4.01.A.3. 
D.  Waiver. Whenever the Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, makes a finding on the record that the purposes of these regulations may be served by permitting resubdivision by the procedure established in this Section, the Planning Commission may waive the requirements of Section 18-706.A. 
The Planning Commission, after an express request for waiver, shall approve, approve conditionally or disapprove such request based upon staff recommendation, and other relevant considerations including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  The proposed changes to the Final Plat; 
2.  The extent of development completed within the subdivision and the impact the proposed changes on such development; 
3.  The impact of the proposed changes on surrounding development; and 
4.  Conformance with the regulations herein. 
E.  Request for Waiver Content. All requests for waiver shall include the following: 
1.  The number of copies of the Final Plat in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule, illustrating the proposed changes; 
2.  A written statement describing the proposed changes, the need for such and how the changes meet the matters to be considered from Section 18-407.C. above; 
3.  Any additional documents which may further explain the proposed changes; and 
4.  Any additional information needed to determine the appropriateness of the proposed changes. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(4.07), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-408—18-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LOT SPLITS 
 
Sec. 18-501. - General. 
A.  General. The intent of this section is to provide for the issuance of building permits for lots divided into not more than two (2) tracts without having to replat or resubdivide said lot, providing that the resulting lots shall not again be divided without resubdividing. The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove lot splits in accordance with these regulations. 
B.  Application Procedure. Requests for lot split approval shall be made by the owner of the land to the Building Official. A scale drawing of the lots involved if there are no structures thereon, or if structures are located on any part of the lot being split, a certified survey, signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor, of the lot(s) and the location of the structure(s) thereon together with the precise nature, location and dimensions of the proposed lot split shall accompany the application. Copies shall be submitted in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule. 
C.  Approval Guidelines. Approval or disapproval of lot splits shall be made based upon the following standards: 
1.  No lot split shall be approved if: 
a.  A new street or alley is needed or proposed. 
b.  A vacation of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control or easements is required or proposed. 
c.  If such action will result in significant increase in service requirements; i.e. utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.; or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels, e.g., additional curb cuts, repaving, etc. 
d.  There is less street right-of-way than required by these regulations or the Comprehensive Plan unless such dedication can be made by separate instrument. 
e.  All easement requirements have not been satisfied. 
f.  If such split will result in a tract without direct access to a street. 
g.  A substandard-sized lot or parcel will be created. 
h.  If the lot has been previously split in accordance with these regulations. 
2.  The Building Official and City Engineer/Consultant may require such additional requirements as deemed necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the existing land development regulations and City policy. 
D.  Action. The Building Official and City Engineer/Consultant shall, in writing either approve, with or without conditions, or disapprove the lot split within thirty (30) days of application. If approved, and after all conditions have been met, a certificate of approval shall be signed and furnished to the applicant. Such certificate of approval shall be affixed to the lot split survey. The applicant shall file a certified copy of the lot split and approval with the Sherman County Register of Deeds, and the official designated to issue building or occupancy permits. 
E.  Appeal. If disapproved by the Building Official and City Engineer/Consultant, applicants can appeal the decision to the Planning Commission. 
F.  Filing Fee and Costs. 
1.  A filing fee and deposit shall be charged and collected from the applicant in an amount as established by the Governing Body by ordinance. 
2.  The costs of recording documents, publications, writs, planning consultant fees, and engineering costs are payable in addition to filing fees. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(5.01), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-502—18-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - IMPROVEMENTS, DEDICATIONS AND DESIGN 
 
Sec. 18-601. - General improvements. 
A.  Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations. In addition to the requirements established in these regulations, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and regulations: 
1.  All applicable statutory provisions. 
2.  The zoning regulations, building codes, fire safety standards and all other applicable laws of the City of Goodland. 
3.  The Comprehensive Plan, Street Classification Map, and Capital Improvements Program of the City of Goodland, including all streets, utility systems, and parks indicated in the Comprehensive Plan as adopted. 
4.  The special requirements of these regulations and any rules of the Health Department and/or State of Kansas, Sherman County or other appropriate agencies. 
5.  The rules of the Kansas Department of Transportation if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
6.  The standards, regulations and policies adopted by all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of the City of Goodland. 
7.  All pertinent standards contained within any and all applicable overlay districts or development specific guidelines as adopted. 
8.  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above laws, regulations, guidelines, and policies as well as the purposes of these regulations established in Section 18-106 of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-602. - Adequate public facilities. 
A.  General. In order to ensure: that property is developed only with appropriate urban services and in accordance with the service plans set out in the Comprehensive Plan; that subdivision of land is not scattered or premature involving danger or injury to the public health, safety, welfare or prosperity by reason of lack of adequate water supply, wastewater disposal, stormwater disposal, roads, right-of-way, or other public services; or that would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of such services (such as undue maintenance costs for inadequate roads or stormwater drainage), no Preliminary Plat shall be approved unless the Planning Commission determines that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the Planning Commission, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. 
B.  Standards. 
1.  Water Supply. There will be an adequate public water supply available for the proposed occupancy. An adequate public water supply shall include potable water for consumption and other inside and outside uses and adequate water pressure for fire flow to meet established standards for fire protection. 
2.  Sanitary Sewer. There will be adequate connections to public wastewater disposal systems with adequate capacity to handle the type and volume of flow from the proposed occupancy with evidence that the existing system has capacity availability to accept the additional flows proposed. Limited, residential development may be served by a septic system subject to compliance with the regulations specified herein. 
3.  Storm Sewer. The proposed storm sewer system, both on-site and off-site, will be adequate to carry projected peak flows in a design storm without causing damage to downstream public or private property. The subdivider shall install culverts, storm sewers, rip-rap slopes, stabilized ditches, stormwater detention facilities and other improvements necessary to adequately handle stormwater. All improvements shall comply with the minimum standards of these regulations. 
4.  Stormwater Management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The City Engineer/Consultant and Planning Commission may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of offsite drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
5.  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation; shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
6.  Rights-of-Way. Right-of-way shall be provided as shown in the Comprehensive Plan and as required by these regulations. 
7.  Other Public Services. Other public services such as schools, police and fire protection, and emergency services, affected by the proposed development will be substantially adequate to serve the development at existing levels of service. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.02), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-603. - Lots. 
A.  Lot Orientation. All lots shall front on a public street. The lot line common to the street right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar line across the street. On corner lots, the side with the least distance in measurement shall constitute the front side. 
B.  Lot Width. The width of lots shall conform to those of the Zoning Regulations and shall be measured at the front setback line. 
C.  Lot Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning Regulations and Health Regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street. Lots shall contain a building site completely free from the danger of flooding. Except where unfeasible, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot. 
D.  Lot Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Zoning Regulations. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the Zoning Regulations. 
E.  Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots. 
1.  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
2.  Access from Arterial Streets. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from an arterial street. Where driveway access from an arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Planning Commission may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on an arterial street. 
F.  Soil Preservation and Final Grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed in accordance with the approved final subdivision plat and the lot covered with soil with an average depth of at least six (6) inches which shall contain no particles more than two (2) inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation has not been seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six (6) inches of cover on the lots and at least four (4) inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting per the Landscaping and Buffering requirements of the Zoning Regulations. 
G.  Lot Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. 
H.  Debris and Waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, rocks, stones, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind, or earth/soil containing such shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding sentence nor excess earth/soil shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
I.  Waterbodies and Watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a waterbody, watercourse or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the waterbody or watercourse among the ownership of adjacent lots. The Planning Commission may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the waterbody or watercourse is so placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the minimum area of a lot required under the Zoning Regulations may be satisfied by land that is under water or subject to periodic flooding. Such land(s) shall not be computed in determining the number of lots to be utilized for average density procedures. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, of design approved by the City Engineer/Consultant. 
J.  Subdivision Improvement Agreement and Security to Include Lot Improvement. The applicant shall enter into a separate subdivision improvement agreement per Section 18-701 to guarantee completion of all lot improvement requirements including, but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn coverage, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the Planning Commission. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, the City of Goodland may enforce the provisions of the subdivision improvement agreement where the provisions of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.03), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-604. - Blocks. 
A.  Connectivity: Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets in the neighborhood. 
B.  Width: In residential subdivisions, blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial or collector streets, railroads, or waterways. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be on such width as may be considered most suitable for the prospective use. 
C.  Length: In residential subdivisions, the lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet or twelve (12) times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, except that a greater length may be permitted where topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. Block length shall not be less than three hundred (300) feet in length. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be on such length as may be considered most suitable for the prospective use. 
D.  Easements: In long blocks, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. 
E.  Pedestrian Access: Pedestrianways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, may be required by the Planning Commission through the center of blocks more than eight hundred (800) feet long or where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.04), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-605. - Streets. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Relationship to Adjoining Street Systems. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation of the principal existing streets in adjoining additions (or their proper projection where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provision of utilities, or where the continuation is in accordance with the City of Goodland Major Thoroughfare Plan of the Comprehensive Plan. The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall be not less than the minimum street widths established herein. Alleys, when required, and street arrangement must cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be platted and dedicated as a public way. 
Where topographical conditions make such street continuance or conformity impracticable, the Planning Commission may approve an alternative layout. 
2.  Frontage on Improved Roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street as follows: 
a.  An existing street as shown on the city's current street map; or 
b.  An existing state, county, or township street or highway; or 
c.  A street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the Sherman County Register of Deeds' office. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications, or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under these subdivision regulations, with the width and right-of-way required by these subdivision regulations. Wherever the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, the road shall be suitably improved as provided above. 
3.  Grading and Improvement Plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the City of Goodland construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the City Engineer/Consultant, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to Final Plat approval. 
4.  Classification. All roads shall be classified as an arterial, collector or local street. In classifying roads, the Planning Commission shall consider the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the Comprehensive Plan and the projected traffic demands. 
5.  Arrangement. 
a.  Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades of the streets. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  Arterial and collector streets through subdivisions shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan of the Comprehensive Plan as adopted by the Planning Commission and Governing Body. All arterial and collector streets shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
c.  Local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
d.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Planning Commission such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracks. 
e.  In business and industrial developments, the streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
6.  Where the plat submitted covers only a portion of the contiguous land owned by the subdivider, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the entire ownership shall be submitted. 
7.  Access to Arterial Streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial, the Planning Commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
a.  The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
b.  A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the primary arterial. 
c.  A marginal access or service road (separated from the arterial by a planting or grass strip and having access at suitable points). 
8.  Road Names. All streets that are oriented in an east-west alignment shall be numbered streets. All streets that are oriented in a north-south alignment shall be named. Streets that are in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other street names in the municipality so as not to cause confusion. The Planning Commission shall approve street names upon recommendation of the Building Official at the time of preliminary approval. The Building Official shall consult the local emergency communications department (911) prior to rendering its recommendation to the Planning Commission. 
9.  Street Signs. The developer shall pay to the City the cost of purchasing and installation of street signs at all intersections within a subdivision. The term "street sign" as used herein shall include all traffic control signs street name signs and any other street signage that is to be owned and maintained by the City after installation. The City of Goodland shall install all street signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved. Street name signs are to placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the City. 
10.  Street Lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria of the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT). 
11.  Reserve Strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
12.  Dead-End Roads. 
a.  Dead-End Roads (Temporary). If the adjacent property is undeveloped and a street more than one lot deep or on which lots front must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way and road improvement shall be extended to the property line. A temporary dust-proof turnaround having a radius of at least fifty (50) feet shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets. When a temporary turnaround is required, a notation shall be added on the subdivision plat indicating that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued. The Planning Commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  Dead-End Roads (Permanent). Where a road does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the Planning Commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than fifty (50) feet. However, the Planning Commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street. An adequate turnaround of not less than a sixty (60) foot radius right-of-way shall be provided at the closed end of any dead-end street that is longer than one (1) lot in length and that is designed to permanently remain as a dead-end street. Cul-de-sacs shall provide a paved turnaround having a street radius, at the back of curb, of fifty (50) feet. Such street segment shall not exceed five-hundred (500) feet in length, measured from the centerline of an intersection of a cross street to the center of the cul-de-sac; except that, such streets designed to serve no more than twenty-five (25) residential lots may be permitted to extend up to one-thousand (1,000) feet in length in the "R-1" zoning district. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, parking shall not be permitted in the bulb of permanent dead-end streets. 
13.  Private Streets: No private streets shall be permitted in the City of Goodland, except as approved by the City Commission. Such streets shall meet the minimum standards herein, and maintenance assurances shall be provided. 
B.  Street Design Standards. 
1.  General. 
a.  In order to provide for streets of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, fire fighting, snow removal, sanitation, and road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for streets are hereby required. 
b.  Unless otherwise specified within these regulations, all streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards specified in the Standard Specifications and Design Criteria of the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT). 
2.  Street Alignment. 
a.  Reverse Curves: On streets with reverse curves, a reasonable tangent shall be provided between curves to permit a smooth flow of traffic. 
b.  Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten degrees (10) in the alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to insure safe sight distance shall be made. 
c.  Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford the minimum required site stopping distance in conformance with KDOT. Said site stopping distance being measured from a driver's eye level that is assumed to be three and one half (3½) feet above the pavement surface, to an object six (6) inches high on the pavement. 
3.  Street Grades and Elevations. 
a.  The minimum and maximum street grades for streets and alleys, dedicated and accepted, shall conform to the adopted requirements and guidelines of KDOT. 
4.  Excess Right-of-Way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards designated in these regulations shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of three-to-one. 
5.  Intersections. 
a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. Any street that does not approach an intersecting street at a right angle should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet from such intersection. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at anyone point unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission as recommended by the City Engineer/Consultant. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector streets, their alignment shall be continuous unless specifically approved by the Planning Commission as recommended by the City Engineer/Consultant. 
c.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practices to permit safe vehicular movement. Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such curb construction. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent (2%) grade at a distance of sixty (60) feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
e.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance as specified by the Sight Triangle standard of the Zoning Regulations. 
f.  No lot or other parcel of land that abuts on and has access to either a local or collector shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street within seventy-five (75) feet of the right-of-way of any street that intersects such arterial street on the side on which such lot or parcel is located. 
6.  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the applicant, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be constructed at the full expense of the applicant without reimbursement from the City of Goodland. 
7.  Road Dedications and Reservations. 
a.  New Perimeter Streets. 
(1)  The dedication of right-of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown on the City Comprehensive Plan and shall meet the following standards. 
Minimum Street Right-of-Way 
Street Type 	Minimum R.O.W. Width 
(Feet) 
Marginal Access 	50 
Local Street 	50 
Collector 	60-80 
Arterial 	80-120 
 
(2)  Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width within its own subdivision boundaries. 
b.  Widening and Realignment of Existing Streets. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan, Capital Improvement Plan, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at its expense those areas for widening or realignment of those roads in accordance with the minimum requirements of these regulations. Frontage roads and streets as described above shall be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own expense to the full width as required by these subdivision regulations when the applicant's development activities contribute to the need for the road expansion. Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning Regulations whether the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee simple title or an easement is granted to the City of Goodland. 
C.  Street Improvements. 
1.  Curbs and Gutters. The subdivider shall provide curbs and gutters on all streets. Curbs shall not be less than six (6) inches in depth and shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete. A rolled Portland cement concrete curb shall be used except where a vertical curb is specified by the City Engineer/Consultant. Backfill shall be higher than the curb in order to insure that surface water drains into the storm drainage system. 
2.  Street Surfacing. 
a.  After sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water utilities have been installed by the developer, the developer shall construct curbs and gutters as required in these regulations and shall surface or cause to be surfaced roadways to the following minimum widths as measured from back of curb to back of curb: 
Minimum Street Widths 
Street Type 	Minimum Width 
Marginal Access 	29' 
Local Street 	31' 
Collector 	41' 
Arterial 	51' 
 
b.  All streets must be hard surfaced. All paving must be provided with a stabilized sub-base and curb and gutter. Adequate provision shall be made for culverts, drains, and bridges. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall be incorporated into the construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat approval. 
3.  Grading. 
a.  All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that street pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Deviation from this standard due to special topographical conditions may be allowed by approval of the City Engineer/Consultant and Planning Commission. 
b.  Preparation of the Subgrade. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall first be cleared of all trees, stumps, roots, bushes, and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled, and uniformly compacted to conform with the accepted cross section and grades. 
(1)  Cuts. In cuts, all tree stumps, boulders, organic materials, soft clay, spongy material, and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the graded surface. Rock, when encountered, shall be removed to a depth of at least twelve (12) inches below the graded surface. 
(2)  Fill. In fill, all tree stumps, boulders, organic materials, soft clay, spongy material, and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the natural ground surface. 
(3)  Disposal of Objectionable Matter. The objectionable matter required to be removed from cuts and fills shall be removed from the right-of-way area and be disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in fills or hinder proper operation of the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.05), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-606. - Storm sewer. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  Unless otherwise specified within these regulations an adequate drainage system, including pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc. for proper drainage of all water shall be provided. The design and construction of facilities for the drainage of stormwater shall conform to the current standards established in the Design Criteria for Storm Sewers and Appurtenances from the Kansas Department of Transportation (KDOT). 
2.  The Planning Commission shall not recommend for approval any plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and floodwater runoff channels or basins. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as required by the City Engineer/Consultant, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow beyond that point, and basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
B.  Nature of Stormwater Facilities. 
1.  Location. The applicant may be required by the City Engineer/Consultant to construct facilities to convey any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements. 
2.  Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers. 
a.  If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the City Engineer/Consultant and the Planning Commission, the developer shall make arrangements for future stormwater disposal by a public utility system at the time the plat receives final approval. Provision for such connection shall be incorporated by inclusion in the subdivision improvement agreement required for the subdivision plat. 
3.  Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The applicant shall determine the necessary size of the facility, assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the Zoning Regulations. This determination shall be verified and approved by the City Engineer/Consultant. 
4.  Effect on Downstream Drainage Areas. The applicant shall determine the effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. This determination shall be verified by the City Engineer/Consultant. Drainage studies together with such other studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the Planning Commission may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the expansion of the existing downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or facility. 
5.  Areas of Poor Drainage. Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the Planning Commission may approve such subdivision provided that the applicant fills the affected area of the subdivision to an elevation sufficient to place the elevation of streets and lots at a minimum of twenty four (24) inches above the elevation of the one hundred (100) year floodplain. A copy of the required floodplain fill permit shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a building permit. The plat of the subdivision shall provide for an overflow zone along the bank of any stream or watercourse, in a width that shall be sufficient in times of high water to contain or move the water, and no fill shall be placed in the overflow zone nor shall any structure be erected or placed in the overflow zone. The boundaries of the overflow zone shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer/Consultant. The Planning Commission may deny subdivision approval for areas of extremely poor drainage. 
6.  Floodplain Areas. The Planning Commission may, when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the subdivision of any portion of the property that lies within the floodplain of any stream or drainage course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the Planning Commission. 
C.  Dedication of Drainage Easements. 
1.  General Requirements. When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction as will be adequate for the purpose. 
2.  Drainage Easements. 
a.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
b.  The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee simple title or by a drainage or conservation easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be determined by the City Engineer/Consultant and the Planning Commission. 
c.  Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.06), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-607. - Sanitary sewers. 
A.  General Requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities. All plans shall be designed, approved and constructed to the current standards established in the Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers from the Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE) and in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the City Engineer/Consultant, Kansas Department of Health and Environment, unless otherwise specified within these regulations. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a sanitary sewer district for the purpose of providing sewerage facilities to the subdivision when no district exists for the land to be subdivided. 
B.  High-Density Residential and Nonresidential Districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted. 
C.  Low- and Medium-Density Residential Districts. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  When a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible either by gravity flow or by other constructed means, the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision within one-quarter (¼) mile. 
2.  When public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed fifteen (15) years), the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives: 
a.  Central sewerage system with the maintenance cost to be assessed against each property benefited. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall design connections to the public system and dedicate easements to accommodate such. In addition a covenant of non-opposition to future improvements shall be submitted. Adequate soil conditions must exist to accommodate the system; or 
b.  Individual disposal systems. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall design connections to the public system and dedicate easements to accommodate such. In addition a covenant of non-opposition to future improvements shall be submitted. Adequate soil conditions must exist to accommodate each individual lot or subdivision as applicable. 
3.  When sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of fifteen (15) years, the applicant may install sewerage systems as follows: 
a.  Medium-Density Residential Districts. Only a central sewerage system may be constructed. No individual disposal system will be permitted. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall design connections to the public system and dedicate easements to accommodate such. In addition a covenant of non-opposition to future improvements shall be submitted. Adequate soil conditions must exist to accommodate the system. 
b.  Low-Density Residential District. Individual disposal systems or central sewerage systems may be used. Where plans for future public sanitary sewerage systems exist, the applicant shall design connections to the public system and dedicate easements to accommodate such. In addition a covenant of non-opposition to future improvements shall be submitted. Adequate soil conditions must exist to accommodate each individual lot or subdivision as applicable. 
D.  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations unless additional area is required to assure adequate soil conditions to serve each individual lot or subdivision as applicable. Percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the City Inspector. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment devise shall be approved by the Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.07), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-608. - Water supply. 
A.  The subdivider shall construct a complete water distribution system that shall adequately serve all lots. The system shall include fire hydrants spaced no more than five-hundred (500) feet apart and at high points in the line, or as otherwise necessary to ensure that all lots are within two hundred-fifty (250) feet or a hydrant, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer/Consultant and Fire Chief. This system shall be properly connected with the public water supply. The Planning Commission may deny subdivision approval for areas that can not be served by adequate water supply and pressure. 
B.  To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for water distribution system and fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on a plat. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.08), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-609. - Utilities. 
A.  Location. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables, may be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they may be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat. Service connections shall be installed at the sub-divider's expense and subject to the current utility ordinance. 
B.  Easements. 
1.  Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal) and such easements shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide (10 feet each side). Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties. 
2.  When topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet wide (7.5 feet each side) shall be provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines as needed. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.09), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-610. - Sidewalks. 
A.  Required Improvements. 
1.  Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated non-pavement right-of-way of all roads as follows: 
a.  Arterial Streets. Five (5) foot sidewalks on both sides of the street. 
b.  Collector Streets. Five (5) foot sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all collector streets. 
c.  Local and Marginal Access Streets. Five (5) foot sidewalks shall be required on one side of the street. Sidewalks on local and marginal access streets shall generally be located on the north and east sides of the streets. 
2.  Sidewalks shall be improved as required by these regulations. Sidewalks shall abut the curb. 
3.  Crosswalks shall be required to provide safe and convenient access across streets along existing and future sidewalk network. Curb cuts meeting the minimum standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be provided where sidewalks meet street curbs or connection to another sidewalk across a street is required. Crosswalks across collector or arterial streets shall be clearly marked with approved paint or other more permanent means such as use of unique paving patterns as approved by the City Engineer/Consultant. 
B.  Pedestrian Accesses. The Planning Commission may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten (10) feet in width with a paved walkway of five (5) to eight (8) feet. To minimize the impact of the impact on adjacent property, the walkway shall be adequately landscaped and screened as required by the Planning Commission. Pedestrian easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.10), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-611. - Open space. 
A.  Common Open Space. Common open space provided in a residential subdivision and conveyed to a property owners association (private open space) or to the City (public open space) shall remain permanently open for recreational and conservational purposes. 
Open space, whether such areas are or will be public or private, in any residential subdivision shall be laid out, to the maximum feasible extent, so as to connect with other open space, existing or proposed, in the vicinity. In the case of two or more adjacent subdivisions, developers may cooperatively allocate open space areas, if such areas are coordinated in design and location to an extent acceptable to the Planning Commission and City Commission. 
B.  Private Open Space. Private open space that is held in common shall be set aside for the benefit, use, and enjoyment of the subdivision lot owners, present and future. All private, common open space, including recreation areas, tree cover areas, scenic vistas, wildlife or plant preserves, nature study areas, and private walkways, whose acreage is used in determining the size and extent of common open space shall be included in restrictive covenants, easements, or other legal devices designated to assure that such space will remain permanently open. 
C.  In order to meet the recreational needs of the residents of Goodland, all subdivision developments are required to contribute either park land or fees in lieu of park land. Where a school, neighborhood park, recreation area, or public access to water frontage which is shown on the Future Land Use Plan of Comprehensive Plan, in whole or in part in the applicant's proposed subdivision, the City Commission may require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the proposed subdivision for school, park, recreation, or other public purpose. Private open space shall not be credited as public open space. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(6.11), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 18-612—18-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 18-701. - Improvement completion and improvement agreement. 
A.  Completion of Improvements. Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the City, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the approved construction drawings and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer/Consultant, all the street, sanitary and other public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in these regulations, specified in the Final Plat and as approved by the Planning Commission, and to dedicate those public improvements to the City of Goodland, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
B.  Subdivision Improvement Agreement and Guarantee. 
1.  Agreement. The Governing Body in its sole discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to the signing of the Final Plat and, as an alternative, permit the applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the subdivider covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than two (2) years following the date of the approval of the improvement agreement. The applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public improvement for a period of one (1) year following the acceptance by the Governing Body of the dedication of that completed public improvement. In addition, the covenant shall warrant that all required public improvements will be free from defect for a period of two (2) years following the acceptance by the Governing Body of the last completed public improvement. The subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions agreed to by the applicant and the Governing Body. 
2.  Covenants to Run. The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement will be adopted by the Governing Body and shall be recorded in the Office of the Sherman County Register of Deeds. 
3.  Security. Whenever the Governing Body permits an applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide a cash escrow as security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. The security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements, including lot improvements. The escrow agent shall be acceptable to the Governing Body. 
a.  Cash Escrow. The escrow instructions shall provide: (1) that the subdivider will have no right to a return of any of the funds except as provided in Section 18-703.E.2; and (2) that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the city whenever the City Attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the city's right to receive funds whether or not the subdivider protests that right. 
If and when the Governing Body accepts the offer of dedication for the last completed required public improvement, the Governing Body shall execute a waiver of its right to receive all but twenty-five percent (25%) of the funds represented by the cash escrow if the subdivider is not in breach of the subdivision improvement agreement. The residual funds shall be security for the subdivider's covenant to maintain the required public improvements and its warranty that the improvements are free from defect. 
C.  Temporary Improvement. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the Planning Commission and shall maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by these regulations. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the Governing Body a separate subdivision improvement agreement and cash escrow in an appropriate amount for temporary facilities, which agreement and escrow shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. 
D.  Costs of Improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the local government or any improvement district except that, as is allowed under state law, the developer may form or cause to be formed a benefit district or districts to construct and finance the construction of required public improvements excluding lot improvements on individual lots. If the subdivider does form or cause to be formed a benefit district for the purposes identified in this section, the Governing Body shall not release the subdivider from its obligations under any improvement agreement nor shall the Governing Body release any security, in whole or in part, until the benefit district has sold bonds or otherwise certifies to the Governing Body that it has an absolute right to raise revenues sufficient to construct, maintain, and warrant the quality of the required public improvements. 
E.  Governmental Agencies. Governmental agencies to which these contract and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and security, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this Article. 
F.  Failure to Complete Improvement. For subdivisions for which no subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the improvements are not completed within one year of the date of approval of the Final Plat, the Final Plat approval shall be deemed to have expired. In those cases where an improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the Governing Body may then: (1) declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; (2) suspend Final Plat approval until the improvements are completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; (3) obtain funds under the security and complete improvements itself or through a third party; (4) assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party , including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owner's promise to complete improvements in the subdivision; (5) exercise any other rights available under the law. 
G.  Acceptance of Dedication Offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by ordinance of the Governing Body. The approval of a subdivision plat by the Planning Commission, whether Preliminary or Final, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or park shown on plat. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.01), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-702. - Deferral of required improvements. 
A.  The Governing Body may defer public improvements, subject to appropriate conditions, when in its judgment, such improvements are not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or that are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or in existence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer the provision of any public improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for the deferral or waiver also shall be expressly made on the record. 
B.  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the Governing Body to defer the construction of any improvement required under these regulations because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the City prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the Mayor. As an alternative the Governing Body may accept a separate improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred improvements as specified by the Governing Body. 
C.  In addition to the providing financial assurance for the future completion of deferred improvements, the subdivider shall submit a covenant of non-opposition to the future construction of the deferred improvements. Such covenant shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.02), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-703. - Inspection and acceptance of improvements. 
A.  General Procedure and Fees. All improvements constructed or erected shall be subject to inspection by the City Engineer/Consultant or the Office of the Building Inspector. The cost attributable to all inspections shall be charged to and paid by the subdivider. Fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the City and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. The subdivider shall give at least forty-eight (48) hours written notification to the inspector prior to the performance of any work. 
B.  Inspection Procedure. After proper notice is received, the City Inspector shall conduct an on-site inspection to determine that the work complies with the approved construction drawings and specifications. If the said inspector determines that such work does not comply with the approved construction drawings and specifications, said inspector shall so notify the subdivider, and may require the subdivider to terminate all further work until necessary steps are taken to correct any defect, deficiency, or deviation to the satisfaction of said inspector. Upon the correction of such defect, deficiency, or deviation, the subdivider shall notify the inspector for a re-inspection. 
C.  Final Inspection. Upon completion of all improvements within the area covered by the Final Plat, the subdivider shall notify the City Inspector who shall thereupon conduct a final inspection of all improvements installed. 
D.  As-Built Drawings. Before acceptance of any public improvement project, the applicant shall provide the City Inspector with one original set on mylar, one copy of the original set, and an electronic copy of the as-built drawings. Electronic copies shall be in a format compatible with the City's designated software. 
The drawings must include results of a post-construction survey. The post-construction survey shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Elevation of all structures, including sanitary sewer manholes, storm sewer inlets, pipe inverts, and structure top elevations; 
2.  Final adjusted stationing of all structures, including but not limited to valves, hydrants, and blow-off assemblies; and 
3.  Final adjusted contours as featured in the grading and drainage plans. 
The as-built drawings must include a signed Engineer's Certification stating that the drawings are as-built and conform to construction records and post-construction survey information. 
E.  Formal Acceptance and Release or Reduction of Security. 
1.  Certificate of Satisfactory Completion. The Governing Body will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce the amount of any security posted by the subdivider until the City Engineer/Consultant has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until (1) the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the City Engineer/Consultant, through submission of a detailed "as-built" drawing as required by Section 18-703.D., that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction drawings for the subdivision, and (2) a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by City Attorney indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication to the local government, and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
Upon such approval and recommendation by the City Engineer/Consultant and City Attorney, the Governing Body shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication. The Governing Body shall so notify the subdivider in writing, the Final Plat shall be signed by the Mayor, and after payment of all fees required, the subdivider may file the subdivision with the Sherman County Register of Deeds. 
2.  Reduction of Escrowed Funds and Security. The amount of the escrow shall be reduced upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall a cash escrow be reduced below twenty-five per cent (25%) of the principal amount. Funds held in the escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider, in whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the Governing Body. At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods, all escrowed funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.03), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-704. - Maintenance of improvements. 
The developer shall be required to maintain all required public improvements on the individual subdivided lots and provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the improvements by the Governing Body. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the City, the City may on twelve (12) hours notice plow the street or effect emergency repairs and charge those costs to the developer. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement, the Governing Body may, in its sole discretion require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.04), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-705. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
A.  Building Permits. Unless the required improvements have been installed and accepted by the Governing Body or guaranteed according to Section 18-701 for a lot or tract, no building permits shall be issued for that lot or tract. 
B.  Occupancy Permits. No occupancy permit shall be issued until all improvements have been installed and accepted by the Governing Body. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.05), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 18-706. - Temporary occupancy/escrow deposits for improvements. 
A.  Acceptance of Escrow Funds. Whenever, by reason of a period of inclement weather or the season of the year, any improvements required by the subdivision regulations cannot be performed, the Building Inspector may issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety, or general welfare upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of completion of the lot improvements. The subdivision improvement agreement and security covering the lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
B.  Procedures on Escrow Fund. All required improvements for which escrow monies have been accepted by the Building Inspector at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the subdivider as soon as weather permits and in no case more than a period of nine (9) months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been properly installed at the end of the time period, the Building Inspector shall give two (2) weeks written notice to the developer requiring it to install the improvements, and if they are not then installed properly, the Building Inspector may request the Governing Body to proceed to contract out the work for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow monies are being deposited with the Building Inspector, the developer shall obtain and file with the Building Inspector prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the premises authorizing the Building Inspector to install the improvements at the end of the nine (9) month period if the improvements have not been duly installed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(7.06), 12-3-01)  
Chapter 19 - ZONING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1467, § 2, adopted Dec. 3, 2001, repealed Ord. No. 1385, which adopted the 1997 Uniform Zoning Code. Section 1 of Ord. No. 1467 enacted the 2002 Edition of the Zoning Regulations to read as set out herein. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND INTENT 
 
Sec. 19-101. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Zoning Regulations of the City of Goodland, Kansas and may be cited as "these regulations."  
Sec. 19-102. - Intent. 
These regulations, adopted pursuant to the provisions of K.S.A. 12-741 et seq., are intended to serve the following purposes: 
A.  To promote the health, safety, quality of life, comfort and general welfare of the City; 
B.  To preserve and protect property values throughout the City; 
C.  To restrict and regulate the height, number of stories, and size of structures; the percentage of lot coverage; the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; and the density of population; 
D.  To divide the City into zones and districts; and 
E.  To regulate and restrict the location and use of structures and land within each district or zone. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 1, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-103—19-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 19-201. - Rules of construction and interpretation. 
A.  Rules. 
(1)  In the construction of these regulations, the provisions and rules of this chapter shall be preserved and applied, except when the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future. 
(b)  Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number. 
(c)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
(d)  The word "shall" is mandatory. 
(e)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(f)  The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations, associations, governmental bodies and agencies, and all other legal entities. 
(g)  The word "Board" means the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(h)  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
(i)  The word "City" means City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(j)  The words "governing body" shall mean the City Commission of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(k)  The words "planning commission" shall mean the Goodland Planning Commission. 
(l)  The abbreviation N/A means not applicable. 
(2)  Any word or phrase which is defined in these regulations shall have the meaning as so defined whenever the word or phrase is used in these regulations, unless such definition is expressly limited in its meaning or scope. 
B.  Interpretation. 
(1)  Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provision of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, quality of life and welfare. 
(2)  Overlapping or Contradictory Regulations. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of these regulations upon the use of land or structures are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by other provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulations of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive shall govern. 
(3)  Private Agreement. These regulations are not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or any other private agreement of legal relationship; provided, however, that where the provisions of these regulations are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such easements, covenants or other private agreements or legal relationships, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
(4)  Unlawful Uses. No structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of these regulations; and to the extent that, and in any respect that, said unlawful structure or use is in conflict with the requirements of these regulations, said structure or use remains unlawful hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 2, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-202. - Definitions. 
Accessory building: A subordinate building having a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building, or a use customarily incident to the main use of the property. A building housing an accessory use is considered an integral part of the main building when it has any part of a wall in common with the main building, or is under an extension of the main roof and designed as an integral part of the main building. 
Accessory Living Quarters: An accessory building used solely as the temporary dwelling of guests of the occupants of the premises; such dwelling having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. 
Accessory use: A use of building or land that is customarily incident to and located on the same lot or premises as the main use of the premises. 
Acreage, Gross: The overall total area. 
Acreage, Net: The remaining area after all deductions are made; with deductions including streets, easements for access and street dedications. 
Adult: A person 18 years of age or older. 
Adult Entertainment Establishment: Any business, premises or establishment including, without limitation, adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult cabarets, adult live performance theaters which has any of the following: 
(1)  Thirty percent (30%) or more of its annual gross receipts derived from: (a) the offering of entertainment, performances, scenes, visual representations, or other presentations which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, or (b) the offering of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic materials which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, and instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined; or 
(2)  Thirty percent (30%) or more of its inventory on hand at any time consisting of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic materials which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined; or 
(3)  Thirty percent (30%) or more of its floor area at any time allocated to (a) entertainment, performances, scenes, visual representations, or other presentations which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, or (b) the offering, display and storage of stocks in trade of books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic materials which are characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or of "specified anatomical areas" as herein defined, and instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined, and instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" as herein defined. 
Agricultural Processing: The initial processing of crop-based agricultural products that is reasonably required to take place in close proximity to the site where such products are produced. Typical uses include grain mills. 
Agricultural Sales and Service: An establishment primarily engaged in the sale, purchase, or rental of farm tools and implements, feed and grain, tack, animal care products and farm supplies. This definition excludes the sale of large implements, such as tractors and combines, but includes food sales and farm machinery repair services that are accessory to the principal use. 
Agriculture, General: The use of land for the production of livestock, dairy products, poultry or poultry products. 
Agriculture, Limited: The use of land for the production of row crops, field crops, tree crops or timber. 
Agriculture: The planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants commonly grown in Sherman County. 
Airport or Airstrip: Any public or privately owned or operated ground facility designed to accommodate landing and take off operations of aircraft, including all taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces. 
Alley: A minor way that is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Alteration: Any addition, removal, extension, or change in the location of any wall of a main building or accessory building. 
Animal Care, General: A use providing animal care, veterinary services or boarding. See "Animal Care, Limited" and "Kennel." 
Animal Care, Limited: A use providing animal care, boarding and veterinary services for household pets, with no outside animal runs. See "Animal Care, General" and "Kennel." 
Apartment: A room or a suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged, intended or designed for a place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Applicant: The owner or duly designated representative of land proposed to be subdivided, or for which a conditional permit, amendment, variance, construction permit, or certificate of occupancy has been requested. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises. 
Asphalt or Concrete Plant: An establishment engaged in the manufacture, mixing, batching or recycling of asphalt, asphaltic cement, cement or concrete products. 
Assisted Living: Multifamily dwelling units used or designed to be used by older persons, persons with disabilities or other persons needing or desiring assistance with day-to-day living matters, but not including group homes, group housing, hospitals or convalescent care facilities. Typical uses include retirement communities in which housekeeping services, common dining facilities and recreational and social activities are offered to residents. 
Auditorium or Stadium: An open, partially enclosed or fully enclosed facility used or intended to be used primarily for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions and other public gatherings. Typical uses include convention and exhibition halls, sports arenas and amphitheaters. 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM): A mechanized consumer banking device operated by a financial institution for the convenience of its customers, whether outside or in an access-controlled facility. Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) located within a building shall be considered accessory to the principal use unless the ATM is likely to be an independent traffic generator. 
Bank or Financial Institution: Establishments engaged in deposit banking. Typical uses include commercial banks, savings institutions and credit unions. "Banks and Financial Institutions" also include automated teller machines. 
Bar or Tavern: An establishment in which the primary function is the sale and serving of alcoholic and cereal malt beverages for consumption on the premises, including establishments commonly known as cocktail lounges and night clubs. 
Basement: A story below the first story as defined under "Story," counted as a story for height regulations if subdivided and used for dwelling purposes other than by a janitor or watchman employed on the premises. 
Basic Industry: An establishment engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials. Typical uses include distilleries, pulp processing and paper products manufacturing; glass manufacturing; brick manufacturing; steel works; tanneries; acid manufacturing; cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing; fertilizer or chemical manufacturing; and petroleum refineries. 
Bed and Breakfast: A family home, occupied as a permanent dwelling by the proprietor, in which lodging and meals are provided for time-limited duration's to not more than four groups of patrons in a 24-hour period. 
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Building Official shall determine the outline of the block. 
Boarding House: A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than 10 guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals, for compensation for more than one week. 
Board of Zoning Appeals: That Board which has been created by the Governing Body having jurisdiction and which has the statutory authority to hear and determine appeals, exceptions and variances to the zoning regulation. 
Boarding house or lodging house: A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit, where lodging or meals are provided for three or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements, but not for the public or transients. 
Building: Any structure which is built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land; including structures designed and constructed in sections expressly for assembly and placement on a permanent perimeter foundation, with any transport equipment being readily detachable and designed for delivery purposes only, if said structure is placed on such foundation with all transport equipment permanently removed. A trailer as herein defined shall not be classified as a building. 
Building Code: The various codes of the City that regulate construction and require building permits, electrical permits, mechanical permits, plumbing permits, and other permits to do work regulated by Chapter 4 of City Code pertaining to building and building regulations. 
Building Line: The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure nearest a property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the walls of the building or structure. 
Building Line (established): Where a structure is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing structure on both sides, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average of the measurements from the edge of pavement of the street on which the structures front to the closest front corners of each adjacent structure. If the structure to be erected is within 100 feet of an existing structure on one side only, such structure may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent structure. 
Building Official: Is the person or persons designated by the governing body to administer this zoning ordinance, whether such person or persons be entitled Building Official, Building Inspector, Administrative Official, City Engineer, City Clerk or Zoning Official. 
Building, Temporary: A building used temporarily for the storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site permitted construction of utilities, or other community facilities, or used temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under construction. 
Canopy: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy placed so as to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings. 
Carport: A roofed structure open on a least two sides and used for the storage of private or pleasure-type vehicle. 
Car Wash: An establishment primarily engaged in cleaning or detailing motor vehicles, whether self-service, automatic or by hand. 
Catering: An establishment engaged in the preparation of food and beverages for consumption at another location. Catering shall not include the manufacturing of food as defined in "Food/Bakery Product Manufacturing." 
Cellar: A structure having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade and which is not designed or intended for human habitation. 
Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum: Land used or intended to be used for burial or cremation of the dead, whether human or animal, including a mausoleum or columbarium. 
Churches, Chapels, Temples and Synagogues: See the definition of "Religious Assembly." 
City Commission: The elected Governing Body of the City of Goodland. 
Cluster development: The arrangement of buildings or structures in groups around common courts, driveways, parks or other unique features of the land permitting more latitude and flexibility in placement and design. The lots, buildings or structures in a cluster development must meet the requirements of the appropriate planned districts. 
College or University: An institution of higher education offering undergraduate or graduate degrees. 
Commission: The Planning Commission of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Common open space: An area of land or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active recreation, but does not include areas utilized for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading areas. However, the area of recreational activities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, etc., may be included as common open space. 
Communication Tower: Commercial AM/FM radio, television, microwave and cellular telephone transmission towers and accessory equipment and buildings. 
Composting Facility: A facility that is designed and used for transforming food, yard wastes and other organic material into soil or fertilizer by biological decomposition. 
Comprehensive Plan: The duly adopted comprehensive plan for the development of the community which includes maps, charts, illustrations and texts for the following: 
a.  Land use studies; 
b.  Goals and objectives; 
c.  Population study and forecasts; 
d.  Economic base study; 
e.  Housing study; 
f.  Major Street plan; 
g.  Future Land Use Development. 
Concentrated Feeding Operation: A lot, yard, corral, or other area in which livestock are confined, primarily for the purpose of feeding and growth prior to slaughter. 
Conditional Use: A Conditional Use permit is a written permit issued by the Building Official with the written authorization of the City Commission, after recommendation from the Planning Commission. This Conditional Use permit provides permission under special conditions to make certain Conditional uses of land in certain zoning districts as stipulated in each of the district zoning regulations. 
Condominium: A single dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property. 
Congregate Residence: Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation as required by this code, and may include facilities for eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses. 
Construction Sales and Service: An establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, and the outdoor storage of construction equipment or materials on lots other than construction sites. Typical uses include lumberyards, home improvement centers, lawn and garden supply stores, electrical, plumbing, air conditioning, and heating supply stores, swimming pool sales, construction contractors' storage yards and construction equipment rental establishments. 
Convalescent Care: An establishment providing bed care and inpatient services for persons needing regular medical attention, but excluding facilities for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, narcotics addiction, emergency medical services or communicable disease. Typical uses include nursing homes. 
Correctional Facility: A facility providing housing and care for individuals confined for violations of law. 
Court: An open, unoccupied space, other than yard, bounded on three or more sides by exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls of a building and lot lines on which walls are allowable. 
Cultural Service: A facility providing cultural and educational services to the public. Typical uses include museums, art museums, observatories, planetariums, botanical gardens, arboretums, zoos and aquariums. 
Curb level: The mean level of the curb in front of the lot or in case of a corner lot, along that abutting street where the mean curb level is the highest. 
Day Care, Commercial: A day care conducted in a structure other than a private residence for seven or more children. 
Day Care, Limited: A day care establishment conducted in a private residence that provides care, protection and supervision of twelve or less individuals at any one time, excluding those persons related to and residing in the home of the day care provider. A use that provides care, protection and supervision for individuals on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day. 
Dedication: Intentional transfer by the developer to the public of ownership of, or an interest in, land for public purpose. Dedication may be affected by compliance with statutes relating to dedication of land, by formal deed by conveyance or by any other method recognized by the laws of the State of Kansas. 
Density: The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an area of land, which area of land may include dedicated streets contained within the development. 
Department of Health and Environment: The Kansas Department of Health and Environment (KDHE). 
District: A section or sections of the zoning area for which uniform regulations governing the use of land, open space, the height of buildings, the size of yards and the intensity of use are herein established. 
Driveway: A private access road, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is located. 
Duplex: A single lot used for two dwelling units within a single building, other than a manufactured home. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, apartment houses and townhouses, but not hotels or motels. 
Single-family: A detached building arranged, intended, or designed for occupancy by one family. 
Two-Family or Duplex: A single building arranged, intended, or designed for occupancy by two families. 
Multifamily: A building or portion thereof, arranged, intended or designed for occupancy by three or more families on a rental or lease basis and commonly referred to as a triplex, four-plex or apartment building. 
Dwelling Unit: A building or portion of a building that contains living facilities for not more than one family and that includes provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Easement: A grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation, or a person(s) of the use of a recorded strip of land for certain specified purposes. 
Exception: Shall mean the allowance of a use within a given district by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Exceptions shall be limited to only those specifically authorized and listed in this zoning ordinance. 
Exterior Setback: A required setback that fronts on a public street. 
Family: One (1) or more persons who are related by blood or marriage, living together and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, or a group of not more than six (6) unrelated individuals living together by joint agreement and occupying a single housekeeping unit with single kitchen facilities, on a non-profit cost-sharing basis. However, this shall not include group homes as regulated by K.S.A. 12-736. Additionally, family shall under no circumstances be construed as a boarding house, fraternity or sorority house, club, lodging house, hotel or motel. 
Fence: An enclosure or barrier such as wooden posts, wire, iron, etc., used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening or confinement, but not including hedges, shrubs, trees or other natural growth. 
Fence Height: The vertical distance measured from the side of the fence that is exterior to the property or from the lowest adjacent ground level to the top of the fence material. In the case of wire fencing, height shall be measured by the width of the material used, providing that when installed, the material is directly adjacent to the ground level. 
Final Development Plan: A plan submitted for site plan review as required by these regulations for single-family, two-family, multifamily, commercial, and industrial development proposals. 
Floor Area (For computing off-street parking requirements): Shall mean the gross floor area of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings and shall include the following areas: 
• The basement floor area. 
• The area of each floor of the structure. 
• Attic space having headroom of 7' 10? or more. 
Floodplain Administrator: Is the person or persons designated by the governing body or City Administrator to administer the Floodplain regulations, whether such person or persons be entitled Building Official, Building Inspector, Administrative Official, City Engineer, City Clerk or Zoning Official. 
Floodway Fringe: Are those portions of a floodplain outside of the boundaries of a regulating floodway and within stream reaches where such a floodway has been established. 
Food Store: An establishment where food and prepackaged beverages are sold on-site for consumption off-site. A limited amount of food preparation on-site may also be allowed, such as a delicatessen or bakery. 
Food/Bakery Product Manufacturing: A use engaged in the manufacture of food and food products, including non-retail bakeries, canning facilities and creameries. 
Freight Terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by truck, rail or air is processed for continued shipment by truck, rail or air. 
Frontage: The length of the property abutting on one side of a street measured along the dividing line between the property and the street. 
Funeral Home: An establishment engaged in preparing the human deceased for burial or cremation and arranging and managing funerals. 
Garage: 
Public: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or repair garage, providing storage for motor vehicles, but no other services. 
Private: An accessory building or portion of a main building used for storage only of automobiles. 
Repair: A building or portion thereof, designed or used for the storage, sale, hiring, care or repair of motor vehicles and which is operated for commercial purposes. 
Storage: A building or portion thereof, except those defined as a private, a repair or a community garage providing storage for motor vehicles, with facilities for washing but no other services. 
Gas and Fuel Sales/Storage: The use of a site for bulk storage and distribution and sales of flammable liquid, gas or solid fuel, excluding below-ground storage that is clearly ancillary to an allowed principal use on the site. 
General Plan: The declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the development of the jurisdiction. Also called the Comprehensive Plan. 
Golf Course: A facility providing private or public golf recreation services and support facilities. This definition shall exclude miniature golf courses and golf driving ranges except those that are clearly accessory uses. See "Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor." 
Golf Course, Miniature: A theme-oriented recreational facility, typically comprised of nine or eighteen (18) putting greens. Accessory use may include batting cages and video arcades. See "Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor." 
Governing Body: The Mayor and City Commission of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Government Service: Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a government entity and providing services for the public, excluding utilities and park and recreation services. Typical uses include administrative offices of government agencies, and utility billing offices. 
Grade, (Adjacent Ground Elevation) is the lowest point of elevation of the existing surface of the ground, within the area between the building and a line five (5) feet from building. 
Grain Elevator: A tall building for storing grain. 
Greenhouse, Nursery: An establishment where flowers, trees, and other products that are commonly used as landscaping in and around buildings are grown and sold. 
Gross leasable floor area: The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from the exterior surface of outside walls. 
Group home, general: A residential home providing 24-hour care in a protected living environment for more than eight persons with physical or mental disabilities and any number of care givers. 
Group home, limited : A residential home providing 24-hour care in a protected environment for eight (8) or less unrelated persons with mental or physical disabilities; further, and pursuant to KSA 12-736, such home may include two (2) additional persons acting as house parents or guardians who need not be related to each other or to any of the mentally or physically handicapped persons residing in the home. 
Group Residential: The use of a site for occupancy by groups of more than five persons, not defined as a family, on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls, and boarding or lodging houses. The term "group residential" does not include "group homes." 
Hard Surfaced Road: An all-weather surface improved with asphalt, concrete, asphaltic concrete or similar material designed to City of Goodland street standards. 
Hazardous Operation: Activities that present the potential for serious hazards to human life and health. Typical uses include arsenals, atomic reactors, explosives and fireworks manufacture, hazardous waste disposal, medical waste disposal and radioactive waste handling. 
Hazardous Substances: Any substances or materials that, by reason of their toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or harmful to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. 
Health Club: A facility where members or nonmembers use equipment or space for the purpose of physical exercise. 
Height of buildings and structures: The vertical distance from the average ground level abutting a building or structure to the highest point of a building or highest point of any permanent part of a structure other than a building. Height, where not regulated by feet, shall be regulated by stories and a story shall be equal to twelve (12) feet for purposes of measuring structures other than buildings. 
Heliport or Helipad: An area, either on the ground or on a building, used as a landing pad for helicopters to pick up or discharge passengers or cargo. 
Home Occupation: A business, profession or trade conducted for gain or support entirely within a residential building or detached accessory structure on the same lot; except that, they may conduct recreation activities outdoors. (Note: standards are removed from the definition and placed in the regulations.) 
Hospital: An institution that: (1) offers service more intensive than those required for room, board, personal services and general nursing care; (2) offers facilities and beds for use beyond 24 hours by individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment, or care for illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, abnormality, disease, or pregnancy; and (3) regularly makes available at least clinical laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, and treatment facilities for surgery or obstetrical care, or other definitive medical treatment of similar extent. Hospitals may include offices for medical and dental personnel, central service facilities such as pharmacies, medical laboratories and other related uses. 
Hotel, Motel, or Tourist Court: A structure which contains rooms furnished for the purposes of providing lodging, which may or may not also provide meals, entertainment or various other personal services to transient guests, and which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping accommodations are sought for pay or compensation by transient guests for periods of not more than 28 consecutive days; and having more than two bedrooms furnished for the accommodation of such guests. 
Household Pets: Are dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, for family use only (noncommercial) with cages, pens, etc. 
Institution: A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment for public use. 
Interior Setback: A required setback that does not front on a public street. 
Jurisdiction: As used in this code, is any political subdivision, which adopts this code for administrative regulations within its sphere of authority. 
Kennel: Any establishment used for keeping more than four (4) domesticated animals, commonly considered to be household pets, more than three (3) months old. 
Landfill: A disposal facility employing an engineered method of disposing of solid waste, including demolition and construction debris. 
Landscaping: The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials and treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs and flowers. This treatment may also include the use of logs, rocks, fountains, water features and contouring of the earth. 
Laundry: An establishment where commercial laundry and dry cleaning work is undertaken. 
Laundry (self-service): An establishment equipped with individual coin-operated washing, drying or dry cleaning machines. 
Library: A publicly-operated establishment housing a collection of books, magazines, audio and video tapes and other material for borrowing and use by the public. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by one main building, or unit group of buildings, and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental thereto, including such open spaces as are required under these Regulations, and having its principal frontage upon a public street. A lot as used herein may consist of one or more platted lots, or tract or tracts as conveyed or parts thereof. 
Lot of Record: A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds prior to the adoption of this Regulation. 
Corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the Building Official, except that a lot as herein defined, when made up of more than one platted lot, shall be deemed to front on the street upon which said platted lots front. 
Interior: A lot whose side lines do not abut upon any street. 
Through: An interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
Lot line: The line bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Front: The boundary between a lot and the street on which it fronts. (For clarification of the front lot line location, see the definition of "corner" above.) 
Rear: The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the Building Official shall determine the rear line. 
Side: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof, a side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line. 
 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side boundary lines of a property measured at the front building line. 
Lot, Zoning: A parcel or tract of land used, developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Said parcel of tract may consist of one or more lots of record, one or more portions of a lot or lots of record or any combination thereof. 
Manufactured Home: A structure which bears a seal indicating compliance with the federal manufactured home construction and safety standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 5401, and constructed on or after June 15, 1976. 
Manufactured Home Park: Any area, piece, parcel, tract, or plot of ground equipped as required for support of manufactured homes and offered for use by the owner or representative for manufactured home park purposes and/or ground upon which twenty or more manufactured homes are parked, whether for compensation or not, including all accessory uses thereof. The term "manufactured home park" does not include sales lots of which unoccupied manufactured homes are parked for the purpose of inspection and sale. 
Manufactured Home (Factory Built Home) Residential-Design: A manufactured home which is designed with the same appearance of an on- site, conventionally built, single-family dwelling and satisfies the criteria established in Article V Use Regulations. 
 
Residential Character: 	Architectural Details: 	Manufacturing Home Features: 
  Covered Entry 	Window Elements 	Horizontal Lap Siding 
  Front Porch 		Permanent Masonry foundation 
  Landscaping 		double-wide Manufactured Home 
  Pitched Roof 		
 
Manufactured Home Sales: An establishment primarily engaged in the display and sale of manufactured housing units. 
Manufacturing and Assembly: Establishments engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding "Basic Industry." 
Massage Shop, Professional: An establishment which has a fixed place of business having a source of income or compensation 60% or more of which is derived from the practice of any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulation of external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical electric apparatus or appliances with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. Under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or give any other consideration or gratuity; provided that this term shall not include any establishment operated or supervised by a medical or chiropractic practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the State of Kansas. 
Materials Recovery Facility: A facility in which source separated co-mingled recyclable materials, such as newspapers, glass, metals and plastic containers, are stored, flattened, crushed and/or bundled prior to shipment to others who will use those materials to manufacture new products. 
Medical Service: An establishment providing therapeutic, preventive, or corrective personal treatment services on an outpatient basis by physicians, dentists, and other practitioners of the medical or healing arts, and the provision of medical testing and analysis services. Typical uses include clinics and offices for doctors of medicine, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists, blood banks and medical laboratories. 
Military Service: A facility used or intended to be used by a branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, including military reserves. 
Mining or Quarrying: The extraction of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, excluding oil or natural gas. Typical uses include sand and gravel pit operations, quarries and mines. 
Mobile Home: A transportable, factory-built structure designed to be used as a single dwelling unit that was manufactured prior to June 15, 1976 and that does not bear a seal as provided by the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401). 
Mobile Home, Special Care: A mobile home used as a temporary dwelling for a family member who is in need of special, frequent and routine care by reason of advanced age or ill health. 
 
Residential Character: 	Architectural Details: 	Modular Features: 	Permanent Features: 
Pitched Roof 	Eave Projection 	Modules for on-site construction 	Walkway ad Stairs 
Covered Entry 	Varying Depths 		Formal Landscaping 
Enclosed Garage 	Ornamental Windows 		
 
Modular Home: A manufactured residential structure built to a nationally-recognized and accepted construction standard published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA) or the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO) and the unit is inspected and certified at the factory that it meets said standard. A modular home shall have exterior structure materials and appearance similar to the customary single-family structures, as required of a manufactured home—residential design, and shall be permanently situated on a concrete foundation. 
Multifamily Residential: The use of a site for three or more dwelling units within a single building. Typical uses include triplexes, four-plexes, apartments and residential condominiums. 
Natural Waterways: Are those areas, varying in width along streams, creeks, spring, gullies or washers, which are natural drainage channels as determined and identified by the jurisdiction. 
Non-conforming use, building or yard: A use, building or yard which does not, by reason of design, use, or dimensions, conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated and existed as such on the date of the adoption of Ordinance # 1467 or any amendment thereto. 
Office, General: An establishment providing executive, management, administrative or professional services, but not medical or dental services or the sale of merchandise, except as incidental to a permitted use. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar offices. 
Oil or Gas Drilling/Refining: The subsurface extraction or refining of oil or natural gas. 
Parcel: A lot or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or under single control, usually considered a unit for purposes of development. 
Park or Parking: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers. 
Parking Lot, Commercial: Area used or intended to be used for off-street parking of operable motor vehicles on a temporary basis, other than as accessory parking to a principal use. 
Parking Area, Off-Street: A permanently surfaced, dust-free area (concrete, asphaltic concrete, or other comparable surface), enclosed or unenclosed for the short-term storage of automobiles. 
Parking Area, On-Street: Parking provided in the public right-of-way. 
Parking Space: An area surfaced for all weather for the purpose of storing one parked automobile. 
Parks and Recreation: A park, playground or community facility, owned by or under the control of a public agency or homeowners' association, that provides opportunities for active or passive recreational activities. 
Permanent Foundation: A foundation of formed and poured-in place concrete, masonry or all-weather wood units laid up with such reinforcing materials as may be required for quality construction. 
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A residential or commercial development guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than use regulations, may be waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and location, in accordance with general guidelines. 
Planning Commission: The Planning Commission for the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Post Office: A facility used for the collection, sorting and distribution of U.S. mail among several zip code areas and having limited retail services for the public, such as the sale of stamps, postcards and postal insurance. 
Preliminary Development Plan: A preliminary site plan that may be submitted at the option of the developer to the Building Official prior to submission of the final site plan. 
Printing and Publishing: The production of books, magazines, newspapers and other printed matter, and record pressing and publishing, engraving and photoengraving, but excluding businesses involved solely in retail photocopying, reproduction, photo developing or blueprinting services. 
Property Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the contiguous street. 
Recreation and Entertainment, Indoor: An establishment offering recreation, entertainment or games of skill to the public for a fee or charge and that is wholly enclosed in a building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, indoor theaters, bingo parlors, pool halls, billiard parlors and video game arcades. Does not include those uses considered as parks and recreation. 
Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor: An establishment offering recreation, entertainment or games of skill to the public for a fee or charge, wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open. Typical uses include archery ranges, batting cages, golf driving ranges, drive-in theaters and miniature golf courses. Does not include those uses considered as parks and recreation. 
Recreational Vehicle: Any of the following vehicles which are licensed for travel on the highway: travel trailer (a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation or vacation, or one permanently identified as a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer); pick-up coach (a structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation); motor-home (as a portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle); and camping trailer (as a canvas, material or metal folding structure, mounted on wheels, and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use). 
Recreational Vehicle Park: Land used or intended to be used for occupancy by recreational vehicles for transient living purposes, including the use of camping spaces for tents. 
Recycling collection center: A facility which is not larger than 1,000 square feet in size and is designed for the collection of aluminum and steel cans, glass, plastic containers, papers and other usable materials for their redistribution for sale or reutilization. This definition does not include processing equipment or storage. 
Recycling processing center: A facility designed for the purpose of collecting, redistributing and processing recyclable materials. Activities may include the receipt, separation, storage, conversion, bailing and/or processing of paper, iron, metal, glass, newspaper, and other non-biodegradable materials. Hazardous and biodegradable materials, as determined by the Kansas Department of Health and Environment, including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, and other similar materials, shall not be brought into or handled by a recycling processing center. 
Religious Assembly: A site used by a bona fide religious group primarily or exclusively for religious worship and related religious services, including a place of worship, retreat site or religious camp. 
Repair Service: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households, but excluding "Vehicle Repair" services. Typical uses include appliance repair shops. 
Research Service: An establishment engaged in conducting basic and applied research, including production of prototype products when limited to the minimum scale necessary for full investigation of the merits of a product, excluding production of products used primarily or customarily for sale or for use in non-prototype production operations. 
Restaurant, Fast Food: A use primarily engaged in the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages in a ready-to-consume state and where the design or principal method of operation is that of a fast-food or drive-in restaurant offering quick food service, where orders are generally not taken at the customer's table, where food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers, and where food and beverages may be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle. 
Restaurant, General: A building wherein food is prepared and served in ready to eat form to the public for human consumption. The term restaurant shall include cafe, cafeteria, grill, pizza or chili parlor, diner, snack shop, hamburger shop and steak house. 
Retail: Refers to the sale of commodities and services directly to customers, when such commodities and services are used or consumed by the customer and not purchased primarily for the purpose of resale. 
Retail Sales and Service: An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of goods and services, including, but not limited to, antique shops, apparel and accessory stores, art and supply stores, bicycle shops, book and stationary stores, barber and beauty shops, candy and ice cream stores, cigar and tobacco stores, dressmakers and tailors, flower and gift shops, hobby shops, interior decorators, jewelry stores, key shops, leather goods and luggage stores, music instrument sales and repair, photocopying services, shoe repair and shoe shine stores, sporting and athletic goods, toy stores and department stores; excluding uses more specifically defined. 
Safety Service: A facility for conduct of public safety and emergency services, including fire and police protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
Salvage Yard: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery or vehicles that are not in operating condition; or for the sale of parts thereof. Typical uses include automobile salvage yards and junk yards. 
School, Elementary, Middle or High: The use of a site for instructional purposes on an elementary or secondary level. 
Service floor area: The total floor area of a building exclusive of stairways, restrooms, storage rooms, hallways, or other areas which are not regularly used by visitors, clients, customers, patients, or patrons in their normal everyday use of the building. 
Setback: The distance that is required by this zoning regulations to be maintained in an unobstructed state between a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is located. (Note: The term "setback" refers to a required minimum area, while the term "yard" refers to the actual open area.) 
Service Station, Automotive: A use primarily engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other motor fuels primarily to automobiles and passenger vehicles, along with accessory activities such as the sale of lubricants, accessories, or supplies, the lubrication of motor vehicles, and the minor adjustment or repair of passenger motor vehicles. Uses involved primarily in the sale of diesel fuel, gasoline or other fuels to tractor trucks and uses that feature parking, storage or servicing of tractor trucks or semi-trailers shall be classified as "Truck Stop Service Stations." 
Service Station, Truck Stop: A use primarily engaged in the sale of diesel fuel, gasoline or other fuels to tractor trucks, along with accessory activities such as the sale of lubricants, accessories or supplies, or the servicing of tractor trucks or semi-trailers. A truck stop service station may include, as an accessory use, the parking and storage of tractor trucks and semi-trailers. 
Shooting Range: A facility used or intended to be used for the discharge of firearms at targets. 
Sight Triangle: A triangular area at a street intersection in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of 2½ feet and 8 feet above the grades of the outside edges of the street surface or the edge of the maintained surface of the road of the intersecting streets, measured from the point of intersection of the back side of the curb or maintained surface, thirty feet in each direction. 
 
Sign: Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which information is made known to the public outside a building. 
Single-Family Residential, Detached: The use of a lot for only one principal dwelling unit that is not connected to any other dwelling unit. This definition shall include, as defined by these regulations, "manufactured homes-residential design" and "modular homes" but shall exclude "manufactured homes". 
Single-Family Residential, Attached: The use of a site for two or more dwelling units that are constructed with common or abutting walls and with each dwelling unit located on its own separate lot. Typical uses include townhouses and twinhomes. 
Solid Waste Collection/Processing: Recycling collection centers, incinerators, processing facilities, materials recovery facilities, solid waste transfer stations or any facility where municipal solid wastes are salvaged, sorted, processed or treated. 
Solid Waste Transfer Station: A facility where solid waste or recyclable material is transferred from collection vehicles (some sorting may occur) to long distance hauling vehicles for transportation to a central solid waste management facility for processing, disposal, incineration or resource recovery. 
Specified Sexual Activities: (1) Sexual conduct, being acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, her breast; (2) Sexual excitement, being the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or (3) Sadomasochistic abuse, being flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained. 
Stockyard : A non-farm-based facility used or intended to be used for selling or holding livestock. 
Story: That part of a building included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that part of the building which is between the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above. A top story attic is a half story when the main line of the eave is not above the middle of the interior height of such story. The first story is a half story when between fifty and seventy-five percent of the area of its exterior walls are exposed to outside light and air entirely above grade and which exterior walls contain windows or doors permitting the entrance of daylight and outside air. 
Street: A right-of-way which affords principal means of vehicular access to property abutting thereon. 
Street line: The dividing line between the street and the abutting property, also commonly known as the front property line. 
Street Network: 
Expressway: A street which provides fast and efficient movement of large volumes of traffic between areas and does not provide a land service function. 
Arterial: A street which provides for through traffic movement between and around areas with direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curb uses. 
Collector: A street which provides for traffic movement between arterials and local streets, with direct access to abutting property. 
Local: A street which provides direct access to abutting land and local traffic movement whether in business, industrial, or residential areas. 
Structure: That which is built or constructed, to meet the City Building Codes, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Structural Alterations: Any change or rearrangements of the supporting members or a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. 
Studio, Radio, Television, Film or Music: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of recording or broadcasting services accomplished through the use of electronic mechanisms. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract of land into three (3) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term subdivision includes resubdivision and the term "resubdivision, " as used herein, shall include any further subdivision of a lot or parcel of land previously subdivided, for sale, use, or other purposes, which varies from the latest, approved subdivision of the same. See the land subdivision regulations. 
Swimming Pool: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
Temporary Uses: A use which is only allowed for a specified period of time. Typical temporary uses include, but are not limited to Christmas tree sales, garage sales, road stands, etc. 
Total floor area: The square foot area of a building, including accessory buildings, measured from outside wall surfaces, and including garages, porches, utility rooms, stairways, recreation rooms, storage rooms, but excluding unroofed balconies and patios. 
Tourist Cabin: See definition of "hotel / motel" . 
Townhouse: A dwelling unit located in a group of three or more attached townhouse dwelling units with no other dwelling unit located above or below another and with each dwelling unit having at least one interior common wall and a private exterior entrance. 
Townhouse Structure: A grouping of three or more townhouses. 
Townhouse Site: A townhouse, the total land area beneath the townhouse and the facilities associated with the townhouse. 
Transit Facility: A facility used or intended to be used as an area for loading, unloading and interchange of transit passengers. Typical uses include bus terminals, rail stations and passenger related mass transit facilities. 
Transitional Living Facility: A state licensed group-care home for juvenile delinquents, halfway houses providing residence, rehabilitation and counseling to persons on release from a more restrictive custodial confinement, and residential rehabilitation treatment centers which also may provide outpatient rehabilitation for alcohol and other drug abuse. 
Twinhome: The use of a site for two dwelling units that are constructed with common or abutting walls and with each dwelling unit located on its own separate lot. Twinhomes are often created by subdividing a single duplex into two separate lots each of which contains one dwelling unit. 
Utility, Major: Generating plants; electrical switching facilities and primary substations; water and wastewater treatment plants; water tanks; and radio, television and microwave transmission towers; and similar facilities of agencies that are under public franchise or ownership to provide the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar service. The term "utility" shall not be construed to include corporate or general offices; gas or oil processing; manufacturing facilities; postal facilities or other uses defined in this section. 
Utility, Minor: Services and facilities of agencies that are under public franchise or ownership to provide services that are essential to support development and that involve only minor structures, such as poles and lines. 
Variance: An authorization, by the board of Zoning Appeals, of a variance from the specific terms of this zoning ordinance. Variances are limited to those authorized in the powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals as defined in this chapter. 
Vehicle and Equipment Sales: An establishment engaged in the retail or wholesale sale or rental, from the premises, of motorized vehicles or equipment, along with incidental service or maintenance activities. Typical uses include new and used automobile and truck sales, automobile rental, boat sales, motorcycle sales, moving trailer rental, and farm equipment and machinery sales and rental. 
Vehicle/Equipment Storage Yard: An outdoor area used or intended to be used for long-term storage of vehicles and equipment, other than a "Commercial Parking Lot" or accessory parking to a principal use. 
Vehicle Repair, General: An establishment primarily engaged in painting of or bodywork to motor vehicles or heavy equipment. Typical uses include paint and body shops. 
Vehicle Repair, Limited: A use providing automobile repair or maintenance services within completely enclosed buildings, but not including "General Vehicle Repair" services. 
Vocational School: A use providing education or training in business, commercial trades, language, arts or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a "College or University" or "School." 
Warehouse, Residential Storage: An enclosed storage facility containing independent, fully enclosed bays that are leased to individuals exclusively for dead storage of their household goods or personal property. 
Warehousing and Wholesale: An establishment primarily engaged in the storage or sale of materials, equipment, or products or sale to wholesalers or retailers. Typical uses include cold storage, warehousing and dead storage facilities, but exclude "Residential Storage Warehouses" ?and sale of goods to the general public. 
Welding or Machine Shop: A workshop where machines, machine parts, or other metal products are fabricated. Typical uses include machine shops, welding shops and sheet metal shops. 
Wind Turbine: A machine by which mechanical energy supplied by the wind is changed to electric energy. 
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the building shall be used. 
Front: A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot. 
Side: A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending entirely from a front yard to the rear lot line. 
Rear: A yard between the rear lot line and the rear line of the main building and the side lot lines. 
Zone or District: A section of the Zoning Area for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size, and intensity of use of structures, land, and open space are herein established. 
Zoning Area: The area to be zoned as set out on the official Zoning Map filed of record. 
Zoning Regulations: The term "zoning regulations" or "these regulations" shall mean the requirements stipulated in the regulations herewith attached, and shall mean the lawfully adopted zoning regulations of the City of Goodland. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 2, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-203—19-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 19-301. - Jurisdictional area. 
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all structures and land in the incorporated area of the City of Goodland, Kansas. The jurisdictional area within the corporate limits of the City shall be shown on the Official Zoning District Map. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-302. - Establishment of districts. 
The jurisdictional area is hereby divided into zoning districts as provided in Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-303. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown on the Official Zoning District Map of the City of Goodland, which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Each said zoning map, with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, is as much a part of these zoning regulations as if such notations, references, and other information were specifically set forth herein. Such map shall be marked, "Official Copy of Zoning District Map of the City of Goodland, Kansas Incorporated into these Zoning Regulations by adoption of an Ordinance by the Governing Body of the City on the 3rd day of December 2001." 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-304. - Rules where uncertainty may arise. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Maps, incorporated herein, the following rules apply: 
A.  The district boundaries are the centerlines of streets, alleys, waterways, and railroad rights-of-way, unless otherwise indicated; and where the designation of a boundary line on the zoning map coincides with the location of a street, alley, waterway, or railroad right-of-way, the centerline of such street, alley, waterway or railroad right-of-way shall be construed to be the boundary line of such district. 
B.  Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, waterways, or railroad rights-of-way but do coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such district. 
C.  Where none of the above rules apply, the district boundaries shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-305. - Exemptions. 
The following structures and uses shall be exempt from the provisions of these regulations: 
A.  Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or other similar equipment for the distribution to consumers of telephone or other communications, electricity, gas, or water, or the collection of sewage or surface water operated or maintained by a public utility but not including substations located on or above the surface of the ground. 
B.  Railroad tracks, signals, bridges, and similar facilities and equipment located on a railroad right-of-way, and maintenance and repair work on such facilities and equipment. 
C.  Agriculture as defined by these regulations. In the event that any structure or land ceases to be used only for agriculture, then such structure or land shall be subject to the applicable regulations of these regulations. 
D.  Retaining walls on public property. 
E.  Public signs. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-306. - Application of regulations. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-307. - Separability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City that several provisions of these regulations are separable, in accordance with the following rules: 
A.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of these regulations to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of these regulations. 
B.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of these regulations to a particular property or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provisions to any other property or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-308. - Repeal clause. 
Upon the adoption of these zoning regulations, the Goodland Zoning Regulations, adopted on the 19th day of August, 1997, Ordinance 1385, is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 8), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-309. - Lots platted prior to regulatory amendments. 
Any legal lot of record established prior to the effective date of these regulations on January 1, 2002, shall be required to meet the lesser lot area requirements as provided in the previous regulations of Ordinance 1385. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 9), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-310. - Vested rights. 
A.  For the purpose of single-family residential development in the R-1, R-2 districts, development rights for land shall vest upon recording of the final plat for such land. If construction has not begun within five years of recording the plat, the development rights shall expire unless an extension is granted. 
B.  For all non-single-family development, development rights for land shall vest upon the recording of a final plat or approval of the site plan or specific construction documents for such land. If all permits required for such development have not been issued and the start of construction and the completion of substantial amounts of work under the validly issued permits has not begun within one year of approval of the site plan, the development rights shall expire unless an extension is granted. 
C.  The Planning Commission may for good cause as presented by the applicant grant a single extension of vested rights. Vested rights for single-family development shall not be extended for more than one year. For all non-single-family development, an extension of not more than 6 months may be granted. Applicants seeking an extension shall submit a statement in writing, justifying the extension. In considering an extension, the Planning Commission shall consider the following factors, as well as other relevant considerations: 
(1)  Undue or unnecessary hardship placed upon the property owner; 
(2)  The extent to which the current regulations would hinder to complete development; 
(3)  Extent to which the property can be made to conform with current regulations; and 
(4)  Conformance with the general spirit and intent of the zoning and subdivision regulations. 
D.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to exempt development from the provisions of Zoning and Subdivision Regulations except to the extent that the construction or development is expressly shown on the approved final plat or site plan. For example, the right to complete a building in accordance with previously-approved site plans shall not include the right to erect signs or make other site improvements in accordance with such plan unless such signs or improvements were expressly shown on the plans and cannot, as shown, be revised to conform to the provisions of the Zoning Regulations as amended. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 3, § 10), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-311—19-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-401. - Establishment of districts. 
The jurisdictional area is hereby divided into eleven zoning districts which are designated as follows: 
"F-P" Floodplain District—Article X; 
"A-P" Airport District; 
"R-1" Residential—Single-family District; 
"R-2" Residential—Multifamily District; 
"M-P" Manufactured Home Park Residential District; 
"C-1" General Business District; 
"C-2" Central Business District; 
"I-1" Light Industrial District; 
"I-2" Heavy Industrial District; 
"P-D" Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-402. - Zoning district map. 
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the Official Zoning District Map, which is filed in the office of the City Clerk. Each of the said zoning maps, with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon, is as much a part of these zoning regulations as if such notations, references, and other information were specifically set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-403. - Annexed land. 
All land which may hereinafter be annexed to the City of Goodland shall be classified "R-1" Residential—Single-family District, and shall be re-classified only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission and recommendation to the Governing Body as provided in these regulations for zoning district amendments. The public hearing by the Planning Commission to adopt a recommendation may be held prior to annexation of the subject parcel of land to the City. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-404—19-450. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 19-451. - "A-P" airport district. 
1.  Intent. It is the intent of the "A-P" Airport District to protect the appearance of physical facilities and promoting the safety and function of the airport for current and future air operations. 
2.  Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
A.  Airport: Goodland Municipal Airport operated by the Fixed Base Operator as contracted with the City of Goodland. 
B.  City: City of Goodland, Kansas 
C.  Fixed Base Commercial User: Any individual or firm who operates any business on the Goodland Municipal Airport and who has a written lease agreement entered into with the City of Goodland. 
D.  Transient Commercial User: Any individual or firm who operates any business at any time, or for any length of time from, to or at the Municipal Airport and who has not entered into a written lease agreement with the City of Goodland. 
3.  Permitted Uses. Generally, the storage of aircraft and accessory items, and other structures, materials and facilities associated with the launching and landing of aircraft and helicopters. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses, see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
4.  Conditional uses. For a specific listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
5.  Height Regulations: All buildings shall meet FAA height regulations. 
6.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI, minimum yard depths shall be approved by the City of Goodland: 
7.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
8.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
9.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
10.  Site Plan Review: Development in the A-P District shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures. 
11.  Exterior Lighting: All exterior light shall meet all FAA regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-452. - "R-1" Residential—Single-family and two-family district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of this district is to provide for low-density residential development, including those uses which reinforce residential neighborhoods, and to allow certain public facilities. 
2.  Permitted Uses. Generally, single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, churches and community centers, governmental office buildings, golf courses, limited agricultural and nursery uses, and related accessory uses are permitted. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses, see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional uses: For a specific listing of Conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI: 
A. Minimum lot area: 	8,400 square feet for single-family dwellings. 
	4,500 square feet per dwelling unit for two-family dwellings, with a minimum lot size of 9,000 square feet. 
	Lots platted prior to the adoption of these regulations shall have an area of not less than 7,000 square feet. 
B. Minimum lot width: 	seventy-five (75) feet. 
C. Lot coverage: 	The combined area of the main building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the total area of the lot. 
 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum structure height: 35 feet. 
6.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI, minimum yard depths shall be as follows: 
A. Front Yard: 	60 feet from the center of the street or the established building line. 
B. Side Yard: 	Side yards shall not be less than 10 percent of the lot width, such setbacks shall be no less than 6 feet and need be no greater than 15 feet. However, for dwellings and accessory structures located on corner lots there shall be side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet, in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot and 25 feet in every other case. 
C. Rear Yard: 	12 feet. 
 
7.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
8.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
9.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-453. - "R-2" Residential—Multifamily district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of this district is to provide for moderate to high density residential development, including two-family, multifamily and higher density single-family dwellings, in a manner which will encourage a strong residential neighborhood. 
2.  Permitted Uses: Generally, two-family dwellings, multifamily, single-family dwellings, parks, educational and religious uses are permitted. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional uses: For a specific listing of Conditional uses, see Article VI. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article V: 
A. Minimum lot area: 	7,000 square feet for single-family dwellings 
	4,000 square feet per dwelling unit for two-family dwellings, with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet. 
	2,000 square feet per dwelling unit for multifamily, with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet. 
B. Minimum lot width: 	seventy-five (75) feet. 
C. Lot coverage: 	The combined area of the main building and accessory buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the total area of the lot. 
 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum structure height: 35 feet. 
6.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI, minimum yard depths shall be as follows: 
A. Front Yard: 	60 feet from the center of the street or the established building line. 
B. Side Yard: 	Side yards shall not be less than 10 percent of the lot width, such setbacks shall be no less than 6 feet and need be no greater than 10 feet. However, for dwellings and accessory structures located on corner lots there shall be side yard setback from the intersecting street of not less than 15 feet in case such lot is back to back with another corner lot and 25 feet in every other case. 
C. Rear Yard: 	12 feet. 
 
7.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
8.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
9.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-454. - "M-P" Manufactured home park residential district. 
1.  Intent: It is the intent of this district to provide low to medium density manufactured home park development which is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood in which it is located. Manufactured home parks are considered a residential use and should be located in areas where services and amenities are available such as those found in conventional residential areas. 
2.  Permitted Uses: For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional uses: For a specific listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: 
A. Minimum park area: 	5 acres 
B. Minimum park width: 	225 feet. 
 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum structure height: 20 feet. 
6.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
7.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
8.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
9.  General Regulations: 
A.  Minimum Design Standards: Each manufactured home park shall be designed in accordance with all city codes and to the following minimum design standards: 
(1)  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(2)  Manufactured home parks hereafter approved shall have a maximum density of eight (8) manufactured homes per gross acre, and a minimum area of 4,000 square feet shall be provided for each manufactured home space. 
(3)  Each manufactured home space shall be at least 40 feet wide and be clearly defined. 
(4)  All manufactured homes and additions thereto shall be so located to maintain a clearance of not less than 20 feet from another manufactured home; provided, however, that with respect to manufactured homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance shall not be less than 15 feet. In addition, all manufactured homes and additions thereto shall be so located to maintain a clearance of 25 feet from any permanent structure within the park. 
(5)  All manufactured home spaces shall front upon a private hard-surfaced roadway of not less than 25 feet in width, provided, however, that no on-street parking is permitted. If parallel parking is permitted on one side of the street, the width shall be increased to 30 feet, and if parallel parking is permitted on both sides of the street, the width shall be increased to 36 feet. All roadways shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
(6)  Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all manufactured home parks. Such off-street parking areas shall provide sufficient parking spaces for a minimum of two cars per manufactured home within the manufactured home park. Off-street parking areas may be provided on individual manufactured home spaces provided that the off-street parking area is improved as required in Article VII, and the off-street parking area surface is not less than 10 feet from the nearest adjacent manufactured home space. 
(7)  All roadways and sidewalks within the manufactured home park shall be hard surfaced and shall be adequately lighted at night. 
(8)  A community structure may be provided which may include recreation facilities, laundry facilities, and other similar uses. 
(9)  The perimeter of all manufactured homes shall be fully skirted. 
(10)  Sidewalks shall be required on one side of all streets. 
(11)  Landscaping shall be shown on the development plan. The perimeter of each manufactured home space shall be surrounded by a landscaped strip of open space 25 feet wide along all lot lines and streets or highways. 
(12)  All roadways shall meet the design standards as adopted by the City for private streets in manufactured home parks. 
(13)  Final approval for the park shall be obtained before moving a manufactured home into an M-P district. 
B.  Water Supply: 
(1)  Water shall be supplied to the park by a public water system. 
(2)  The size, location and installation of water lines shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City Codes. 
(3)  Individual water service connections shall be provided at each manufactured home space. 
C.  Required Recreation Areas: 
(1)  In all manufactured home parks accommodating or designed to accommodate 25 or more manufactured homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents. 
(2)  The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of 100 square feet for each lot within the manufactured home park. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than 2,500 square feet. 
(3)  Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the topography permits, be centrally located. 
(4)  The required recreational area(s) within the manufactured home park shall contain playground equipment or other recreational facilities as approved by the Planning Commission. The cost of purchasing and installing said recreational equipment shall be paid for by the developer of the manufactured home park. 
(5)  The maintenance of recreation area(s) and equipment within each manufactured home park shall be paid for by the owner of the manufactured home park. 
D.  Sewage Disposal: Each manufactured home park shall be connected to the City sanitary sewer system. Each manufactured home space within a manufactured home park shall be connected to and served by the sanitary sewer system serving the manufactured home park. 
E.  Tie-Downs and Ground Anchors: All manufactured homes shall be secured to the ground by tie-downs and ground anchors in accordance with the Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Code (K.S.A. 75-1211 et seq.). 
F.  Electrical: Each manufactured home space shall be provided with an individual electrical outlet supply which shall be installed in accordance with the Electric Code and requirements of the electric supplier. 
G.  Gas: Natural gas hookups, when provided, shall be installed in accordance with the Plumbing Code and the regulations of the gas supplier. 
H.  Refuse and Garbage Handling: Storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a park shall be in accordance with City code. 
I.  Blocking: All manufactured homes shall be blocked at a maximum of ten (10) foot centers around the perimeter of each manufactured home in accordance with the Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Code and in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines. 
J.  Pad Requirements: Shall be a flexible surface with a minimum of five (5) inch thick gravel, stone or compacted surface, treated to discourage plant growth, constructed to discharge water and edged to prohibit fraying or spreading of surfacing materials; or shall be of a hard surface of a minimum of two 18-inch wide concrete ribbons or slabs capable of carrying the weight and of sufficient length to support all blocking points of the manufactured home. 
7.  Application Requirements: 
A.  An applicant for "M-P" Manufactured Home Park District shall prepare or cause to be prepared a preliminary Manufactured Home Park Plan, drawn to a scale of not less than 1? = 100?, and three (3) copies of said plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations. Said plan shall be designed in accordance with the Minimum Design Standards herein and shall include the following: 
(1)  Contours shown at two (2) feet intervals. 
(2)  Elevation drawings of all permanent buildings proposed. 
B.  Upon approval of the preliminary Manufactured Home Park Plan by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall prepare and submit a final plan that shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested. The final plan and the Planning Commission recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Commission for their review and final action. 
C.  Any substantial deviation from the approved plan, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall constitute a violation of these regulations. Changes in plans shall be resubmitted for reconsideration and approval by the Planning Commission and City Commission prior to the occupancy of the Manufactured Home Park. 
D.  Construction of an approved Manufactured Home Park shall begin only after final approval has been granted by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-455. - "C-1" General business district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of this district is to provide a zone for those commercial uses which are intensive in nature and which require large lots and direct access to major streets. 
2.  Permitted Uses: Generally, automobile and implement sales, lumber yards, contractor's yards, offices, neighborhood retailing and similar uses are permitted. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional Uses: For a general listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 square feet. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet. 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum Structure Height: 45 feet. 
6.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
7.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
8.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
9.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI, minimum yard depths shall be as follows: 
A. Front Yard: 	25 feet. 
B. Side Yard: 	10 feet if abutting a residential district; otherwise, no side yard is required. 
C. Rear Yard: 	20 feet if abutting a residential district; otherwise, 5 feet. 
 
10.  Use Limitations: 
A.  Exterior Storage: Except as otherwise permitted by these regulations or during permitted construction on any tract, all exterior storage of equipment, raw materials or finished products shall be fully screened from the view of adjacent parcels and streets by a solid screen fence at least six (6) feet in height. 
Screening and enclosure required for permitted outdoor storage shall be by means of a fence, wall or berm, in combination with landscaping, designed to create a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent opacity. Crates, boxes, trailers, tanks or other temporary storage facilities shall not be considered appropriate screening materials. Outdoor storage shall not interfere with the required and/or approved operation of the site, including but not limited to traffic circulation, parking, open space or aesthetics. 
The permitted display of merchandise for sale to the public shall be permitted provided that the merchandise for sale shall be displayed in any required set back, or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access to parking. 
B.  Exterior Lighting: Off-street light fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street. 
11.  Site Plan Review: Development in the "C-1" District shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-456. - "C-2" Central business district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of this district is to provide a zone which will accommodate the broad range of retail shopping activities and office uses that are normally found in the core area of a city; and where development is allowed up to the property lot line, with no off-street parking facilities required of the private development. 
2.  Permitted Uses: Generally, retail uses with no outdoor storage are permitted. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional Uses: For a general listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: 
A. Minimum Lot Area: 	None. 
B. Minimum Lot Width: 	None. 
 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum structure height: 75 feet. 
6.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
7.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
8.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
9.  Yard Regulations: 
A. Minimum Front Yard: 	None. 
B. Minimum Side Yard: 	10 feet when adjacent to a residential district: otherwise, none. 
C. Minimum Rear Yard: 	20 feet when adjacent to a residential district: otherwise, none. 
 
10.  Use Limitations: 
A.  Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street. 
11.  Site Plan Review: Development in the "C-2" District shall be subject to site plan review requirements, procedures and design guidelines. 
12.  Downtown Design Guidelines: In the "Central Business District," no building shall be erected that does not meet the following minimum standards: 
A.  Careful consideration of durable materials, proportions, and shapes, emphasizing the importance of roofs as integral and embracing elements of the over-all design, is particularly important. Building roof tops shall have at least one of the following features: 
1.  Parapets concealing flat roofs and roof top equipment; 
2.  Overhanging eaves; 
B.  The form and proportion of new buildings or redevelopment shall be consistent or compatible with the scale, form and proportion of existing development in the area. 
C.  Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be an integral part of the overall design of each commercial development. The pedestrian access should provide not only safe and convenient access to and from off-street parking areas but should also connect with abutting properties and developments so as to create an alternative means of transportation for residents of the downtown: 
1.  Sidewalks at least four (4) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of a lot that abut a dedicated public or private street. A continuous internal pedestrian sidewalk shall be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance(s). 
2.  Sidewalks shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at the building facade to provide continuous edges; and shall incorporate planting areas for landscaping along the street. 
D.  Architectural design should create visual interest through the use of different textures, complementary colors, shadow lines and contrasting shapes indigenous to the downtown. The use of walls in a single color, with little detailing or completely blank, is strongly discouraged. 
E.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. 
F.  Loading docks, trash enclosures, outdoor storage and similar facilities and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are reduced to as great an extent as possible and are out of view from adjacent properties and public streets. 
G.  Building facades that are 100 feet or greater in length shall incorporate recesses and projections along at least 20 percent of the length of the building facade, reflecting the archetype of the downtown. Windows, awnings, and arcades must total at least 60 percent of the facade length abutting any public street. 
H.  When a building facade 100 feet or greater in length abuts a residential district, screening of at least six feet in height shall be installed between the building facade and the abutting residential district. Evergreens used as screening may be placed at intervals of 20 feet on center. 
I.  Minimum Exterior Building Material Standards: A minimum of 50% of each exterior wall shall consist of one or more of the following materials: 
1.  Masonry: Masonry construction shall include all masonry construction which is composed of solid cavity faced or veneered-wall construction, or similar materials. 
(a)  Stone material used for masonry construction may consist of granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, marble, or other hard and durable all-weather stone. Ashlar, cut stone, and dimensioned stone construction techniques are acceptable. 
(b)  Brick material used for masonry construction shall be composed of hard fired (kiln fired) all-weather common brick or other all-weather facing brick. 
(c)  Stucco or approved gypsum concrete/plaster materials. 
2.  Glass Walls: Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. A glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall that carries no floor or roof loads and which may consist of a combination of metal, glass, and other surfacing material supported in a metal framework. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-457. - "I-1" Light industrial district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of the district is to permit low-intensity industries which can be made to be generally compatible with residential districts, through buffers and screens, and with office and/or commercial activity. Certain intense uses will require conditional use permits to locate in this district. 
2.  Permitted Uses: Generally, light manufacturing, wholesaling, trucking and warehousing uses, as well as research, development, analysis or testing laboratories as a part of product development centers, testing facilities or research centers. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional Uses: For a general listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area: Subject to site plan review. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width: Subject to site plan review. 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum Height of Structure: 45 feet if within 150 feet of a residential district: 75 feet if more than 150 feet from a residential district. 
6.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
7.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
8.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
9.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article VI, minimum yard depths shall be as follows: 
A. Front Yard: 	25 feet. 
B. Side Yard: 	10 feet and no less than 40 feet when abutting a street or residential district. 
C. Rear Yard: 	25 feet or 20% of the lot depth, which ever is smaller, unless said rear yard abuts a residential district in which case the minimum rear yard setback shall not be less than 40 feet. 
 
10.  Use Limitations: 
A.  Storage may be maintained outside structures provided the view of said storage area is properly screened from adjacent residential areas and the public right-of-way. 
B.  A solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet high, but not more than eight feet and having a density of not less than 70 percent per square feet shall be provided adjacent to an adjoining residential district unless the adjacent residential district and the industrial district are separated by a street right-of-way. The owner or owners of the property shall maintain said fence or wall in good condition. 
C.  No structure shall be used for residential purposes except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
D.  Facilities Used for Agricultural Research, Testing and/or Analysis: In agriculture-related research facilities, the following use limitations shall apply: 
(1)  Operations required to be conducted outside a fully enclosed building shall be conducted in controlled outdoor areas. 
(2)  A private street network shall be allowed where comprehensive control of a large industrial site is required for safety or security reasons, and where no unsecured access to the site is afforded the public. 
(3)  Private roadways for certain agricultural-related research and development activities may be improved with an all-weather surface other than asphaltic concrete such as gravel or stone. They shall be designed to permit surface drainage without erosion of adjacent land. 
11.  Site Plan Review: Development in the "I-1" District shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures. 
12.  Exterior lighting: Off-street light fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-458. - "I-2" Heavy industrial district. 
1.  Intent: The intent of the district is to permit basic or primary industries which are generally not compatible with residential and/or commercial activity. Certain obnoxious or hazardous uses will required special permission to locate in this district. 
2.  Permitted Uses: Generally, light manufacturing, salvage yards, quarrying, wholesaling, trucking and warehousing uses are permitted. For a general listing of permitted and conditional uses see Article V of these regulations. The permitted uses will be determined based on compatibility with other uses permitted in the district and with uses listed in Article V. 
3.  Conditional Uses: For a general listing of conditional uses, see Article V. 
4.  Intensity of Use Regulations: 
A.  Minimum Lot Area: Subject to site plan review. 
B.  Minimum Lot Width: Subject to site plan review. 
5.  Height Regulations: Maximum Height of Structure: 45 feet if within 150 feet of a residential district: 150 feet if more than 150 feet from a residential district. 
6.  Parking Regulations: See Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
7.  Sign Regulations: See Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
8.  Floodplain Regulations: See Article X, Floodplain Regulations. 
9.  Yard Regulations: Except as modified by the provisions of Article V, minimum yard depths shall be as follows: 
A. Front Yard: 	25 feet. 
B. Side Yard: 	20 feet and no less than 40 feet when abutting a street or residential district. 
C. Rear Yard: 	25 feet or 20% of lot depth, which ever is smaller, unless said rear yard abuts a residential district in which case the minimum rear yard setback shall not be less than 40 feet. 
 
10.  Use Limitations: 
A.  Storage may be maintained outside structures provided the view of said storage area is properly screened from adjacent residential areas and the public right-of-way. 
B.  A solid or semi-solid fence or wall at least six feet high, but not more than eight feet, and having a density of not less than 70 percent per square foot shall be provided adjacent to an adjoining residential district unless the adjacent residential district and the industrial district are separated by a street right-of-way. The owner or owners of the property shall maintain said fence or wall in good condition. 
C.  No structure shall be used for residential purposes except that a watchman may reside on the premises. 
11.  Site Plan Review: Development in the "I-2" District shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures. 
12.  Exterior lighting: Off-street light fixtures shall be shaded so that no direct light is cast upon any residential property and so that no glare is visible to any traffic on any public street. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-459. - "P-D" Planned development district. 
1.  Purpose: The purpose of the Planned Development District ("P-D") is to encourage innovation in residential, commercial and industrial development by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings; to encourage a more efficient use of land reflecting changes in the technology of land development; to encourage the expansion of urban areas incorporating the best features of modern design while conserving the value of land; and to provide a procedure which relates the type, design, and layout of development to the particular site and the particular demand at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established neighborhoods. 
Although the specific conditions within the "P-D" District shall be predetermined, the location of a proposed district must be carefully reviewed to assure that these conditions can be met. As such, each application for "P-D" zoning shall include a development plan in accordance with the provisions and conditions that follow. 
2.  Use of the "P-D" District: With the exception of standard single-family and two-family residential subdivisions, zoning proposals which are intended to be subdivided into multiple lots should seek the "P-D" zoning district classification. Planned developments are groupings of structures or sites that are planned as an integrated unit or cluster on property under unified control at the time of zoning. The sale, subdivision or other partition of the site after zoning approval does not exempt the project or portions thereof from complying with the development standards and other conditions that were committed to at the time of the rezoning. 
3.  Permitted Uses: All uses may be permitted in the Planned Development District subject to Plan approval; however, each use included in a particular "P-D" must be specified on the Plan. 
4.  Use Regulations: 
A.  The proposed development shall provide adequate access in such a way that the traffic generated by the development will not cause an unreasonably hazardous condition nor inconvenience in the area. 
B.  Structures and traffic shall be arranged so that all principal structures are accessible to emergency vehicles. 
C.  Parking shall be provided in a manner that reduces to a minimum its adverse physical impact in the area. Screening parking areas with landscaping or walls, breaking parking areas into smaller units by introducing landscaped areas or other physical separators are suggested approaches. The parking areas should be appropriately spaced to serve those units they represent. 
D.  The availability of services and location of public utilities shall have the approval of each agency involved. Evidence to this effect shall be presented with the Preliminary Development Plans. 
E.  A Planned Unit Development shall be consistent with the general standards for use of land, and the use, type, bulk, design, and location of buildings, the density or intensity of use, open space, public facilities and the development by geographic division of the site as set out in these regulations. 
F.  In the case of residential Planned Development, the Planning Commission may permit in each unit or phase deviations from the number of dwelling units per acre established for the entire planned development, provided such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of the development so that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planned development is not affected. 
G.  A minimum of 30% of the net area of that part of a Planned Unit Development reserved for residential development shall be provided for open space as defined by these regulations. At least one-half of this open space or 20% of the net area devoted to residential development shall be provided for common open space for the leisure and recreational use of all "P-D" residents and owned and maintained in common by them, generally through a homeowner's association. The common open space shall be developed for appropriate recreational facilities, and a minimum of 50% of the proposed recreational facilities shall be constructed prior to the development of one-half of the project, and all recreational facilities shall be constructed by the time the project is 75% developed. 
H.  The "P-D" shall include such provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open spaces as are reasonably necessary to insure its continuity, care, conservation and maintenance, and to insure that remedial measures will be available to the Governing Body if the common open space is permitted to deteriorate, or is not maintained in a condition consistent with the best interests of the planned development or of the entire community. 
I.  Any modifications of the zoning or other regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the site may be permitted, providing the design of the Planned Development and the amenities incorporated in it are not inconsistent with the interest of the public generally. 
J.  Sidewalks shall be built to City specifications along all public and private streets; however, an alternative pedestrian and sidewalk plan may be developed which provides pedestrian access between each use in the Planned Unit Development. 
K.  All signs must conform to the City Sign Ordinance. See Article IX. 
L.  Approval of the Final Development Plan may be conditioned by the Planning Commission to minimize any negative impact on the community. 
5.  Application for Rezoning: A petition to change to a "P-D" Planned District shall be filed with the City, along with the filing fee as set forth in the fee schedule. A Preliminary Development Plan shall be attached and shall include the elements set forth in these regulations. The public hearing and public notice requirements shall be the same as for any rezoning as provided by these regulations. 
6.  Preliminary Development Plan Approval Procedure: 
A.  Action by Planning Commission: After a Preliminary Development Plan per the requirements of this article is filed with the City and has been reviewed by staff and found to contain all of the required information as set out within these regulations, the Planning Commission shall, hold a public hearing on said development after giving public notice. Said public hearing may be adjourned from time to time and, within a reasonable period of time after the conclusion of said public hearing, the Planning Commission shall prepare and transmit to the Governing Body and the applicant a report with respect to the extent which the Preliminary Development Plan complies with these regulations, together with its recommendations in respect to the action to be taken on the Preliminary Development Plan. The Planning Commission may recommend disapproval, approval, or approval with amendments, conditions, or restrictions. 
B.  Action by Governing Body: The Governing Body shall either approve, disapprove, or approve with amendments, conditions or restrictions the Preliminary Development Plan and authorize the submitting of the Final Development Plan. If the Governing Body disagrees with the Planning Commission's initial recommendation, the application shall be returned to the Planning Commission with written comments for reconsideration. 
C.  Substantial or significant changes in the Preliminary Development Plan shall only be made after rehearing and reapproval as required for the initial approval of the Preliminary Development Plan. 
D.  For unplatted tracts or tracts being replatted, the approval of the Preliminary Development Plan shall be considered as the approval of a preliminary plat. To complete the platting process, the applicant need only submit a final plat. Said final plat shall be in accordance with the subdivision regulations and may be submitted with or incorporated with the Final Development Plan. The Planning Commission may review the Final Development Plan and the final plat concurrently. 
7.  Preliminary Development Plan: Copies of the Preliminary Development Plan shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule at a scale dimension of not more than 1?=100'. In addition to all data required for Preliminary Plats per the City of Goodland Subdivision Regulations, plans shall include: 
A.  Proposed land use patterns within the development; 
B.  Phases of final development; 
C.  Proposed schedule of construction; 
D.  General landscape information including landscaping easements, dedicated open space, pedestrian circulation, buffering and fencing, and general design concepts; 
E.  Conceptual exterior building elevations including materials and color palettes to be used; 
F.  A description of any limitations to be placed on the range of permitted uses, the hours of operation, the structure and landscape materials to be used and other similar development requirements and/or restrictions in the form of the conditions of the Planned Development zoning; and 
G.  A description of any deviations from any other provision of these regulations and the reason for such. 
H.  Surface water drainage plan. 
8.  Final Development Plan Approval Procedure: 
A.  After approval of a Preliminary Development Plan by the Governing Body, the landowner shall file with the Register of Deeds a statement that such a plan has been filed with the Governing Body and has been approved and that such Planned Development is applicable to certain specified legally-described land and that copies of said plan are on file with the City. Such statement recorded with the Register of Deeds shall also specify the nature of the plan, the proposed density or intensity of land uses and other pertinent information sufficient to notify any prospective purchasers or users of land of the existence of such a plan. The recorded statement shall specify that the Preliminary Development Plan shall become binding upon all successors and assigns unless amended in conformance with this act. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit or zoning certificate for construction on or use of the property the applicant shall submit an application for final approval. The final application may include the entire Planned Development or may be for a phase thereof as set forth in the approval of the Preliminary Development Plan. The application shall include copies of such drawings, specifications, covenants, easements, conditions and form of performance bond as set forth in the approval of the Preliminary Development Plan and in accordance with the conditions established in the zoning regulations for Planned Development. 
C.  The Planning Commission shall approve the Final Development Plan if such plan meets the requirements of this article and is in substantial compliance with the approved Preliminary Development Plan. Final Development Plans shall be deemed to be in substantial compliance with the approved Preliminary Development Plan provided any modification to the plan does not: 
(1)  Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of use by more than five percent (5%) or involve a reduction in the area set aside for common open space, nor the substantial relocation of such area; nor 
(2)  Substantially change the design of plan so as to significantly alter, as determined by the Planning Commission: 
(a)  Pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow. 
(b)  The juxtaposition of different land uses. 
(c)  The relation of open space to residential development. 
(d)  The proposed phasing of construction. 
(e)  The exterior appearance of buildings and/or structures. 
D.  In the event that the Final Development Plan submitted contains substantial changes from the approved Preliminary Development Plan, the applicant shall submit a revised Preliminary Development Plan for approval per the Preliminary Development Plan Approval Procedure requirements. This resubmittal shall require a new public hearing in the same manner prescribed in this article for original Preliminary Development Plan approval. 
9.  Final Development Plan: Following Preliminary Development Plan approval and platting, if necessary, copies of the Final Development Plan shall be submitted in accordance with the City's Application and Review Schedule and shall include the following information: 
A.  All residential development other than multifamily residential shall include the following: 
(1)  All requirements of the Preliminary Development Plan (updated to show final sizes, dimensions and arrangement); 
(2)  Contour lines showing finished grading only; 
(3)  A landscaping plan per Article VIII, Landscaping and Buffering, in addition to any additional requirements of the Preliminary Development Plan approval; and 
(4)  The location, height, size, materials and design of all proposed signage; and 
(5)  Conceptual exterior building elevations including materials and color palettes to be used. 
(6)  Surface water drainage plan. 
B.  All non-residential or multifamily development shall include all information required per Article XIII, Site Plan Review with the exception of any approved deviation. Approval of each phase of the Final Development Plan shall also constitute site plan approval for that phase. 
10.  Amendments: A Planned Development District ordinance or an approved preliminary or Final Development Plan may be amended in the same manner prescribed in this article for approval of a preliminary or Final Development Plan. Application for amendment may be made by the homeowner's association or 51% of the owners of property within the "PUD". 
11.  Building Permits: On final approval by the Planning Commission, the owner shall provide copies of the approved Final Development Plan to the City. Building permits shall be issued only in accordance with the approved Final Development Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 4), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-460—19-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - USE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-501. - Use table. 
The use table of this section provides a tabular summary of the land use types allowed within each base zoning district. The table is intended for reference and does not necessarily reflect all of the regulations that may apply to particular uses or districts. In the event of conflict between the use regulations of Article V and the zoning district regulations of Article IV, the text of the zoning district regulations shall prevail. 
A.  Permitted (by-Right): Uses identified in a zoning district column of the Use Table with a "P" are "permitted by-right" and shall be permitted in such zoning district, subject to such conditional use regulations as may be indicated in the "conditions" column and all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
B.  Conditional Uses: Uses identified in a zoning district column of the Use Table with a "C" are "conditional uses" and shall be permitted in such zoning district if reviewed and approved in accordance with the standards of Article XII. Conditional uses shall be subject to such conditional use regulations as may be indicated in the "use standards" column and all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Not Permitted: Uses not identified in a zoning district column of the Use Table as permitted by-right or by conditional use are not allowed in such zoning district unless otherwise expressly permitted by other regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. 
D.  Use Standards: A letter in the final "use standards" column of the Use Table refers to conditional use standards applicable to a particular use in one or more of the districts in which such use is allowed. The referenced regulations appear in Section 19-502 of this Article. 
USE REGULATIONS 	ZONING DISTRICTS 	
	RESIDENTIAL 	NON- 
RESIDENTIAL 	
	R-1 	R-2 	M-P 	A-P 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 	Use 
Standards 
Accessory Uses 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 
Home Occupations 	P 	P 	P 						L 
Temporary Uses 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	Y 
AGRICULTURAL USES 
Agricultural Processing 							C 	P 	
Agriculture, General 	P 								B, BB 
Agriculture, Limited 							C 		
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Apartments 		P 				P 			A 
Assisted Living 	C 	P 			C 				
Boarding House 	C 	P 							
Duplex 	P 	P 							
Group Home, Limited (1—8) 	P 	P 	P 						K 
Group Home, General (9+) 	C 	C 			C 				K 
Group Residential 		P 			C 				
Manufactured Home - Residential 
 Design 	P 	P 	P 						P 
Manufactured Home 			P 						Q 
Modular Home 			P 						
Manufactured Home Park 			P 						Q 
Multifamily 		P 							R 
Single-Family, Attached 	P 	P 	P 						W 
Single-Family, Detached 	P 	P 	P 						
Transitional Living Facility 					P 				
COMMERCIAL USES 
Adult Entertainment Facility 									C 
Agricultural Sales and Service 					P 	P 	P 	P 	
Animal Care, General 					C 		P 	P 	N 
Animal Care, Limited 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Bank or Financial Institution 					P 	P 			
Bar or Tavern 					P 	P 			
Bed and Breakfast 	C 	C 	C 						D 
Car Wash 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Construction Sales and Service 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Day Care, Limited (1—12 
 individuals) 	P 	P 	C 						I 
Day Care, Commercial 	C 	C 			P 	P 			I 
Catering 					P 	P 			
Food Store 					P 	P 			
Greenhouses, Nurseries 	C 	C 			P 	C 	P 	P 	
Health Club 					P 	P 			
Hotel, Motel or Tourist Court 					P 	P 			
Manufactured Home Sales 					P 		P 	P 	
Massage Shop, Professional 	P 				P 	P 			L 
Office, General 				P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parking Lot, Commercial 					P 	P 	P 	P 	
Print Shop 					P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recreation and Entertainment, 
 Indoor 					P 	P 			
Recreation and Entertainment, 
 Outdoor 					P 	P 			S 
Repair Service 					P 	P 	P 	P 	
Research Service 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Restaurant, Fast Food 				P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	Z 
Restaurant, General 				P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	
Retail Sales and Service 					P 	P 	P 	P 	
Safety Service 	C 	C 	C 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Service Station, Automotive 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Service Station, Truck Stop 					P 		P 	P 	
Studio, Television, Film, Radio, 
 Music 					P 	P 	C 	C 	
Vehicle and Equipment Sales 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Vehicle/Equipment Storage Yard 							P 	P 	
Vehicle Repair, General 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Vehicle Repair, Limited 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Warehouse, Residential Storage 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Wind Turbine 	P 	P 					P 	P 	AA 
PUBLIC, QUASI-PUBLIC, AND RECREATION 
Airport or Airstrip 				P 			C 	C 	
Auditorium or Stadium 					P 	C 	C 	C 	U 
Cemetery, Crematory, Mausoleum 	C 	C 			C 	C 	C 	C 	E 
Churches, Chapels, Temples, 
 Synagogues 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	
College or University 		P 			P 				A 
Communication Tower 					C 		P 	P 	F 
Convalescent Care 	C 	P 			C 				H 
Correctional Facility 							C 	C 	
Cultural Service 					P 	P 	C 	C 	
Funeral Home 					C 	C 			
Golf Course 	C 	C 	C 						J 
Government Service 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 		P 	
Heliport or Helipad 	C 	C 		P 		P 	P 	P 	
Hospital 	P 	P 			P 	P 			M 
Library 	C 	C 			P 	P 			
Medical Service 					P 	P 			
Military Service 				P 	P 		P 	P 	
Parks and Recreation 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	
Post Office 					P 	P 			
Recreational Vehicle Park 					P 		C 	C 	T 
Religious Assembly 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	
School, Elementary, Middle or High 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			
Shooting Range 					P 		C 	C 	
Vocational School 					P 				
MANUFACTURING, INDUSTRIAL AND EXTRACTIVE USES 
Asphalt or Concrete Plant 							C 	P 	
Basic Industry 							C 	P 	
Composting Facility 							C 	C 	G 
Food/Bakery Product Manufacturing 					C 		P 	P 	
Freight Terminal 					P 		P 	P 	
Gas and Fuel Sales/Storage 							P 	P 	
Grain Elevator 							P 	P 	
Hazardous Operation 							C 	C 	
Landfill 							C 	C 	O 
Laundry Plant 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Manufacturing and Assembly 					C 	C 	P 	P 	
USE REGULATIONS 	ZONING DISTRICTS 	
	RESIDENTIAL 	NON- 
RESIDENTIAL 	
	R-1 	R-2 	M-P 	A-P 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 	Use 
Standards 
Mining or Quarrying 							C 	C 	O 
Oil or Gas Drilling/Refining 							C 	C 	
Printing and Publishing 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Salvage Yard 							C 	C 	V 
Solid Waste Collection/Processing 							C 	C 	X 
Solid Waste Transfer Station 							P 	P 	
Stockyard 							C 	C 	
Transit Facility 					P 	C 	P 	P 	
Utility, Major 							P 	P 	
Utility, Minor 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	
Warehousing and Wholesale 					P 		P 	P 	
Welding or Machine Shop 					P 		P 	P 	
 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 5, § 1), 12-3-01; Ord. No. 1705 , § 1, 6-19-17)  
Sec. 19-502. - Use standards. 
The conditional use standards of this section shall apply to permitted, conditional uses and accessory uses as noted. 
A.  Accessory Uses. Permitted uses and approved conditional uses shall be deemed to include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with, and appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to the principal uses allowed in zoning districts. Accessory uses and activities shall be subject to the same regulations as apply to principal uses in each district, unless otherwise stated in this zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Residential Accessory Uses. Residential uses shall include, but not be limited to, the following accessory uses, activities and structures: 
(A)  Dormitory style residences, when associated with a college or medical facility; 
(B)  Fences and walls; 
(C)  Garages, carports and off-street parking and loading areas, provided that a detached garage or carport shall not cover more than twelve (12) percent of the total lot area, with a maximum of 1,200 square feet; and no more than twenty (20) feet to the peak of the roof or structure; 
(D)  Gardens, provided that they meet the required setbacks of the district in which they are located; 
(E)  Gates and guard houses; 
(F)  Guest house or guest rooms, neither of which may include kitchen facilities, provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the principal building and not as rental units for permanent occupancy as housekeeping units; 
(G)  Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos and incidental household storage buildings, provided that such buildings shall not cover more than five (5) percent of the total lot area; 
(H)  Radio and television receiving antennas and support structures; 
(I)  Recreational and play facilities for residents; 
(J)  Storage and parking of recreational equipment such as boats, boat trailers, camping trailers, converted buses or trucks, house trailers, provided that storage and parking shall be limited to private garages, side or rear yards of private homes, and in the driveways of private homes. Stored or parked vehicles or equipment shall not protrude onto public property or obstruct any sidewalks. Recreational vehicles or equipment shall not be stored or parked within required off-street parking spaces. 
(K)  Storm shelters and fallout shelters; and 
(L)  Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Building Official to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal use on the lot, subject to compliance with any development and performance standards imposed by the Building Official to ensure land use compatibility. 
(M)  Swimming pools subject to a setback of no less than four (4) feet from a protective fence no less than six (6) feet in height around the perimeter of the pool. 
(2)  Nonresidential Accessory Uses. Nonresidential uses shall include, but not be limited to, the following accessory uses, activities and structures: 
(A)  Cafeterias, dining halls and similar food services when operated primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, or visitors to the principal use; 
(B)  Construction trailers, which will be removed within 30 days of the completion of or abandonment of construction; 
(C)  Dwelling units, other than manufactured homes, when used or intended to be used for security or maintenance personnel; 
(D)  Dwelling Units, when located on the second story of a commercial structure located in the "C-2" district; 
(E)  Fences and walls; 
(F)  Gates and guard houses; 
(G)  Offices for allowed business and industrial uses when the office is located on the same site as the principal use; 
(H)  Parking garages and off-street parking areas; 
(I)  Radio and television receiving antennas and support structures; 
(J)  Restaurants, news stands, gift shops, swimming pools, tennis courts, clubs and lounges when in a permitted hotel, motel or office building; 
(K)  Sales of goods produced as a part of allowed industrial activities when on the same site as the principal industrial use; 
(L)  Stands offering for sale agricultural products or commodities raised on the premises; 
(M)  Recycling Collection Stations, subject to the provisions of sub-section 19-502.A.(4)(E) of this Article; 
(N)  The storage of merchandise when located within the same building as the principal business; and 
(O)  Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Building Official to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate to the principal use on the lot, subject to compliance with any development and performance standard imposed by the Building Official to ensure land use compatibility. 
(3)  Accessory Use Development and Operational Standards. The following standards shall apply to all accessory uses and structures unless otherwise specifically provided: 
(A)  Exterior Setback: No accessory structure shall be located within a required exterior setback. 
(B)  Interior (Rear) Setback: Accessory structures shall not be required to comply with the interior rear setback standard that applies to principal uses. Accessory structures shall, however, be set back at least ten feet from rear lot lines and shall not be closer to the side lot line than the applicable minimum interior side setback. Garages with entrances to an alley shall be set off a minimum of ten feet from the alley, garages with out direct access to the alley may be setback three feet from the alley. Accessory structures of less than 150 square feet are exempt from side yard requirements. 
(C)  Interior (Side) Setbacks: No accessory structure shall be located within a required interior side setback. 
(D)  Setbacks from Easements: No accessory structure, other than a fence or wall, shall be located within any platted or recorded easement , or over any known utility. 
(E)  Height: No accessory structure shall exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
(F)  Building Separation: Unless attached to the principal structure with a common roof line, accessory structures shall be located at least six (6) feet from any other structure. 
(G)  Building Coverage: No detached accessory structure shall cover more than fifty (50) percent of the total lot area and not to exceed 1,200 square feet. Accessory buildings and structures shall be included in the calculation of total building coverage. 
(H)  Accessory structures shall not be larger than the principal use. 
(4)  Recycling Collection Stations. Recycling Collection Stations shall be allowed as an accessory use in accordance with the following standards: 
(A)  Maximum Size and Approval Required: Recycling collection stations shall be allowed as an accessory use only if it does not exceed 1,000 square feet in area and only if shown on a Site Plan that has been reviewed and approved in accordance with Article XIII. 
(B)  Screening: All collection stations shall be screened from public view of adjoining properties or any street right-of-way with a six (6) foot tall, 100 percent opaque, solid screen or be wholly contained within a structure. 
(C)  Separation from Residential: Recycling collection station structures shall be located at least 150 feet from adjacent property zoned R-1, R-2, or M-P. 
(D)  Reverse Vending Machines: Reverse vending machines shall be located or soundproofed such that the noise of operation is imperceptible from the property line of property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(E)  Maintenance: An employee, business owner or property owner shall be responsible for keeping the recycling sites in a clean and safe condition and shall pick up any recycled materials that have blown around the site or adjacent area. All materials shall be stacked properly within a recycling bin and be monitored on a frequent basis. 
(F)  Hours of Operation: A sign shall be posted on the recycling enclosure stating the hours when collection of materials may be conducted. Collection hours of recyclables shall be determined by the Zoning Administration. 
(G)  Signs: A sign shall be posted on the recycling enclosure stating the hours when collection of materials may be conducted. Collection hours of recyclables shall be determined by the Zoning Administration. 
B.  Concentrated Feeding Operation. The site plan review procedures should be used to assure compliance with all KDHE requirements to protect against water contamination from feedlots. All proposed Concentrated Feeding Operations that are designed to accommodate Class 1 and Class II concentration of animals should be subject to site plan review. The site plan submittal should demonstrate how the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All waste from a concentrated animal feeding operation should be controlled so that there is not discharge of waste (including stormwater runoff that comes in contact with animal waste) from the property; and no discharge of wastes, directly or indirectly, to surface or subsurface waters, including sinkholes, dry stream beds, flowing streams, wet weather tributaries, and drainage ditches. 
(2)  The no-discharge requirements of the KDHE, division of Environmental Quality, under the Kansas Clean Water Law, should be met. 
(3)  A copy of the KDHE "Letter of Approval", required, should be submitted with the Site Plan Review. 
(4)  Separation requirements of the KDHE for Concentrated Feeding Operations should be met. 
Such reviews should be placed as an item on the regular meeting schedule of the Planning Commission. A notice of the meeting should be sent to landowners in the notification area as prescribed by the KDHE rules. 
C.  Adult Entertainment Establishments are hereby prohibited in all zoning district within the City of Goodland and the unincorporated planning area and no building, structure, premises or land shall be used, constructed, reconstructed, altered or expanded as or for an Adult Entertainment Establishment. 
D.  Bed and Breakfast. Bed and Breakfast facilities shall be allowed by conditional use permit in all residential and commercial districts. The following requirements shall apply to all bed and breakfast facilities: 
(1)  The structure in which the bed and breakfast facility is located shall contain no less than 2,000 square feet of habitable floor area. 
(2)  The establishment is located in a dwelling unit permanently occupied by the owner or manager, wherein as an accessory use to the residential use, rooms are rented to the public for not more than fourteen (14) consecutive nights. 
(3)  Two (2) off-street parking spaces with one (1) additional off-street parking space per lodging room shall be provided, and said spaces shall be adequately screened from neighboring property. 
(4)  A time period may be established by the City Commission for each bed and breakfast establishment. 
(5)  No more than four bedroom units may be provided to guests. The City Commission may, however, further limit the number of lodging rooms allowed in order to maintain the character of the neighborhood in which the bed and breakfast facility is located. 
E.  Cemeteries, Crematories and Mausoleums. The following standards shall apply to cemeteries, crematories and mausoleums: 
(1)  Entrances: All cemeteries, crematories and mausoleums shall provide entrances on an arterial or collector street with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. 
(2)  Landscape Buffer: A landscape buffer shall be provided along all property lines abutting any R-1, R-2, or M-P zoned property, pursuant to Article VIII. 
F.  Communication Towers. Communication towers shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Principal Use: Communication towers shall always be considered a principal use. They may be located on lots occupied by another principal use. 
(2)  Setbacks: 
(A)  The minimum setback between communication towers and all property lines shall be equal to 20 percent of the height of the tower. 
(B)  Communication towers shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any existing or planned right-of-way. 
(C)  Communication towers shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the lot line of any R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
(D)  Peripheral supports and guy anchors for communication towers may be located within the required setbacks, provided that they shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property in which the tower is located and shall be located no closer than five feet from any lot line, and no closer than 10 feet from the lot line of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
(3)  Height: The principal support structure for communication towers shall be permitted to exceed the height limit of the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the setback standards of this section are complied with. 
(4)  Security Fences and Walls: A fence or wall not less than seven feet in height from finished grade shall be constructed around each communication tower and around each guy anchor and peripheral support. The fence or wall shall comply with the following standards: 
(A)  Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate in the required fence or wall. 
(B)  If the communication tower is adjacent to a residential zoning district or a lot occupied by a residential dwelling unit, the required fencing shall consist of a masonry wall or solid fence with trees and shrubs planted along the exterior of the fence or wall. At least one tree and one shrub shall be required for each 30 linear feet of fence or wall line. 
(C)  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the communication tower and it is present in a ground grid or in a tower, signs located every 20 feet and attached to the fence or wall shall display in large bold letters the following: "HIGH VOLTAGE - DANGER". 
(5)  Airport Approach Paths: Communication towers shall not encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach path as established by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(6)  Removal of Obsolete and Unused Towers: All obsolete or unused communication towers shall be removed within 12 months of cessation of use. 
(7)  Electromagnetic Radiation: Communication towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Communication Commission (FCC) standards for non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NER). 
G.  Composting Facility. The following standards shall apply to all Compost Facilities: 
(1)  Landscape Buffer: Compost Facilities shall have a landscape buffer around its perimeter, pursuant to Article VIII. The decision-making body may require a greater buffer to protect adjacent property from adverse visual and other impacts associated with a specific compost facility. 
(2)  Traffic Circulation: The operation shall provide entrances on arterial or collector streets only with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. No more than one vehicle entrance shall be allowed for each 660 feet of lot frontage on a public street. There shall be enough room on-site to accommodate peak traffic volume and company vehicles. The Building Official may require a traffic report to be submitted with the Conditional Use Permit application. 
(3)  Storage Bins: Storage bins or trailers will be allowed to be stored on-site as an ancillary use, providing they are durable, covered and meet the same setbacks required for the structure on the site. The bins shall be completely screened from view from off site. 
(4)  Setbacks: Structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from all lot lines and at least 300 feet from the lot line of any property zoned R-1, R-2, or M-P. 
(5)  Hours of Operation: Uses shall not operate before sunrise or after sunset. When located within 1,000 feet of an R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district the use shall not operate after 7:00 p.m. or before 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  Paving: All roads, driveways, parking lots and loading/unloading areas within 500 feet of any lot line shall be graded and improved with all-weather material. 
(7)  Stormwater Management: A stormwater management plan may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
(8)  Litter Control: The operation shall be attended on days of operation to maintain the property in a clean, litter-free condition. 
(9)  Hazardous Material: Operations shall not involve the on-site holding, storage or disposal of hazardous substances, except for such substances used for the operation of the facility such as fuel and pesticides. 
(10)  Material: No food scraps (except for vegetable scraps) or other vermin-attracting materials shall be processed, stored or disposed of on the site of the compost facility. Only yard/garden wastes are allowed as compost material. 
(11)  Other Regulations: All operations shall be licensed if required, have proper permits from the Kansas Department of Health and Environment and shall meet all City, County, State and Federal Health Department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features. 
H.  Convalescent Care. At least 70 square feet of usable open space shall be provided for each patient bed. This required open space may be designed to provide outdoor space for recreational activities or landscaped outdoor sitting areas. 
I.  Day Care (Limited and Commercial). 
(1)  Day Care, Limited: 
(A)  State Licensing: General Day Care uses shall be licensed by the State of Kansas and shall meet all City, County and State Health Department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment, and other features. 
(B)  Residential Districts: In the "R-1", "R-2" and "M-P" residential districts, Limited Day Care uses shall be conducted in a single-family or two-family dwelling unit that is occupied as a permanent residence by the licensed day care provider, except that an assistant may provide care during necessary absences of the regular day care provider. 
(2)  Day Care, Commercial: 
(A)  State Licensing: Commercial Day Care uses shall be licensed by the State of Kansas and shall meet all City, County and State Health Department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment, and other features. 
(B)  Vehicle Drop-Off Area: An off-street loading zone capable of holding one car per ten individuals cared for shall be provided, in addition to the required parking area, in order to provide for easy pickup and discharge of passengers. 
J.  Golf Courses. 
(1)  Location of Restaurants: Facilities such as restaurants and bars shall be allowed as an integral part of a principal club house building, provided there is no exterior display or advertising for the restaurant or bar. 
(2)  Location of Recreation Facilities: Buildings, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational facilities shall be set back at least 25 feet from the property line of any R-1, or R-2 zoning district. 
K.  Group Home (Limited or General). Group Homes shall be subject to the following standards only when located in a R-1, R-2, or M-P district: 
(1)  Spacing: A Group Home to be located within a residential zoning district shall not be located within 1,320 feet of another Group Home, measured as the shortest distance between any portion of the structure in which persons reside. 
(2)  Exterior Appearance: There shall be no alteration of the exterior of the Group Home that shall change the character thereof as a single-family residence. There shall be no alteration of the property on which the Group Home is located that will change the character thereof as property within a single-family dwelling district. 
(3)  Neighborhood Character: A Group Home constructed in an R-1, or R-2 district shall be constructed to be compatible with the architectural character of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
L.  Home Occupations. 
(1)  Restrictions and Limitations: 
(A)  The home occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the principal residential use of the premises and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of any one floor of a dwelling unit shall be utilized for a home occupation or not more than 25 percent of the main floor area of a detached structure. 
(B)  All materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall be stored within an enclosed structure. 
(C)  No alteration of the exterior of the principal residential structure shall be made which changes the character thereof as a dwelling. 
(D)  No sign shall exceed two (2) square feet, shall not be illuminated and shall be placed flat against the main wall of the principal residential structure. 
(E)  No person shall be engaged in such home occupation other than a person occupying such dwelling unit as his/hers residence, and not more than one non-resident employee on the premise at a time. 
(F)  No equipment shall be utilized that creates a nuisance due to noise, odor, emissions or electrical interference. 
(G)  No traffic shall be generated by the activity of the home occupation that is abnormal to a residential neighborhood. 
(H)  Permits shall be reviewed on a yearly basis by the Planning Commission, a fee of $25.00 shall be payable upon initial approval and annual reviews. 
(I)  If the permitted home occupation is discontinued for more that six consecutive months a new permit will be required. 
(J)  There shall be on file in the office of the city clerk a consent agreement to the proposed home occupation signed by seventy-five (75) percent of all owners of frontage within three hundred feet of the premises whereon such use is to be operated, and not separated there from by more than one (1) street or one (1) alley. 
(K)  Approval of home occupations shall follow the same procedures as required for a rezoning. 
(L)  The building official shall complete a site inspection after the application is completed and before the public hearing with the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Particular Home Occupations Permitted: Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to certain occupations that do not depend upon on-site commerce, and include the following list of occupations; provided, however, that each listed occupation is subject to the requirements of (A) through (L) above: 
(A)  Art, dancing, and music schools provided that instruction is limited to five pupils at one time. 
(B)  Barber Shops, Massage Shops, and Beauty Parlors, but not more than one work station. 
(C)  Ministers, rabbis, priests and other religious leaders. 
(D)  Professional offices for architects, engineers, planners, lawyers, accountants, bookkeepers, and similar professions. 
(E)  Offices for Realtors, insurance agents, brokers, sales representatives, and manufacturing representatives when no exchange of tangible goods is made on the premises. 
(F)  Watch, clock, and jewelry repair services. 
(G)  Radio, television, phonograph, recorder, and small appliance repair services. 
(H)  Music teachers, provided that instruction shall be limited to five pupils at a time. 
(I)  Home crafts and hobbies such as model making, rug weaving, lapidary work, cabinet making, etc. 
(J)  Tailoring, alterations, and seamstresses. 
(K)  Tool sharpening and filing. 
(L)  Services not dependent on client visits to the site, such as computer-assisted services and graphic design. 
(3)  Particular Home Occupations Prohibited: Permitted home occupations shall not in any event include the following: 
(A)  Antiques - retail. 
(B)  Funeral services. 
(C)  Groceries - retail. 
(D)  Second-hand merchandise - retail. 
(E)  Equipment rental. 
(F)  Automobile and other motor vehicle repair services including small engine repair. 
(G)  Physicians. 
(H)  Dentists. 
(I)  Chiropractors. 
(J)  Restaurants. 
(K)  Stables or Kennels. 
(L)  Tourist Home. 
(M)  Renting of trailers or equipment. 
M.  Hospitals. Hospitals and charitable institutions shall provide entrances on arterial or collector streets only with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. 
N.  Kennel. No kennel building or runs shall be located closer than 75 feet to any property line. 
O.  Landfills and Mining and Quarrying. Landfills and Mining and Quarrying uses shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum Site Area: A minimum site area of 35 acres shall be required. 
(2)  Entrances: There shall be no more than one entranceway from a public street for each 660 feet of street frontage. A traffic study shall be required. 
(3)  Hours of Operation: Uses shall not operate before sunrise or after sunset if located within 1,000 feet of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoned property. 
(4)  Separation from Residential: No digging or excavating shall occur within 100 feet of any lot line or within 300 feet of the lot line of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoned property. 
(5)  Paving: All roads, driveways, parking lots and loading and unloading areas within 500 feet of any lot line shall be graded and paved with an approved concrete or asphalt/concrete surface as to limit adjoining lots and public roads the nuisance caused by wind-borne dust. 
(6)  Slopes: The slope of material in any excavation shall not exceed the normal angle of repose of 55 degrees, whichever is less. 
(7)  Buffers and Fences: When any open excavation will have a depth of ten feet or more and create a slope of more than 30 degrees, there shall be erected a fence of not less than six feet in height with suitable gates where necessary, effectively blocking access to the area in which such excavation is located. Such fences shall be located 50 feet or more from the edge of the excavation. Fences shall be adequate to prevent trespass and shall contain warning signs spaced no more than 100 feet apart to be visible along the entire length of said fences. A buffer shall be provided around the site, pursuant to Article VIII. 
(8)  Stormwater Management: A stormwater management plan shall be required. 
(9)  Site Restoration: The following restoration requirements shall apply to all excavation uses, provided that landfills shall, instead, be subject to state and federal requirements: 
(A)  Restoration Plan: Before approval of a conditional use permit for an excavation use, the operation shall submit to the Building Official a detailed plan for restoration of the site, including information on the anticipated future use of the restored land, existing and proposed final contours with an interval of no more than five feet. The plan shall include type and number per acre of trees or shrubs to be planted, and the location of future roads, drives, drainage courses, or other improvements contemplated. 
(B)  The restoration plans shall be filed with and approved by the Planning Commission before quarrying or removal operations begin. The plans shall be prepared by a soil or geological engineer. 
(C)  Bonds: Before the issuance of any conditional use permit, the owner shall execute a bond sufficient to ensure restoration of the site in accordance with the approved restoration plan. Such bonds shall also be approved by the City Commission as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution, and shall run for the same term as the term of the conditional use permit and any renewals. 
(D)  Water Quality: In restoration, no filling operations shall be permitted which will likely result in contamination of ground or surface water, or soils, through seepage of liquid or solid waste or which will likely result in the seepage of gases into surface or sub-surface water or into the atmosphere. 
(E)  Appearance: The restoration plan shall provide that all areas within any single development be rehabilitated progressively as they are worked out or abandoned to a condition of being entirely lacking in hazards, inconspicuous, and blended with the general surrounding ground form so as to appear reasonably natural or they shall be restored pursuant to an approved restoration plan. 
(F)  Top Soil and Fills: Where topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set aside for reclamation of the premises and shall be re-spread over the premises after the operation. The area shall be brought to final grade by a layer of earth of two feet or original thickness, whichever is less, capable of supporting vegetation. The area shall be seeded or sodded in a manner approved by the Planning Commission. Fill shall be of a suitable material approved by the Planning Commission. 
(10)  City, County, State and Federal Standards: All operations shall be licensed if required, have proper permits from the Kansas Department of health and Environment and shall meet all City, County and Federal Health Department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features. 
P.  Manufactured Home Residential-Design. The following standards shall apply to all manufactured home residential-design dwellings: 
(1)  The manufactured home shall have minimum dimensions of 22 feet in width and 40 feet in length; 
(2)  The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home shall have a minimum vertical rise of four feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run and the roof finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction in the City; 
(3)  All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than 12 inches, exclusive of any guttering; 
(4)  The exterior siding shall consist of vinyl or metal horizontal lap siding (whose reflectivity does not exceed that of low luster white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction in the City; 
(5)  The manufactured home shall be set up in accordance with the recommended installation procedures of the manufacturer and the standards set by the National Conference of States on Building Codes and Standards and published in "Manufactured Home Installations, 1987" (NCS BCS A225.1) or the most recent edition, and attached an anchored to a permanent foundation in accordance with the K.S.A. 75-1211 to 75-1234, as amended; 
(6)  Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set by the building code and attached firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground; and 
(7)  A Manufactured Home Residential-Design, when installed, shall have substantially the same appearance of an on-site, conventionally built, single-family dwelling. 
Q.  Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes in the MP district shall be attached and anchored to a permanent foundation in accordance with the Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Code, K.S.A. 75-1211 to 75-1234, as amended. 
(1)  The exterior siding consists predominantly of vinyl or metal horizontal lap siding (the reflectivity of which does not exceed that of gloss white paint), wood, or hardboard, comparable in composition, appearance and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction in the City; 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall be secured to the ground by tie-downs and ground anchors in accordance with the Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle code (K.S.A. 75-1211 et seq.) and installed so that the finished floor elevation is not more than 24 inches above finished grade; 
(3)  Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the standards set by the City building code and attached firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground; and 
(4)  The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and transporting lights have been removed. 
(5)  Blocking: All manufactured homes shall be blocked at a maximum of ten (10) foot centers around the perimeter of each manufactured home in accordance with the Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Code and in accordance with the manufacture's guidelines. 
(6)  Pad Requirements: Shall be a flexible surface with a minimum of five (5) inch thick gravel, stone or compacted surface, treated to discourage plant growth, constructed to discharge water and edged to prohibit fraying or spreading of surfacing materials; or shall be of a hard surface of a minimum of two 18-inch wide concrete ribbons or slabs capable of carrying the weight and of sufficient length to support all blocking points of the manufactured home. 
R.  Multifamily. All multifamily development shall be subject to the following design guidelines and standards: 
(1)  Site Plan Review: Multifamily development shall be subject to site plan review requirements and procedures of Article XIII. 
(2)  Natural Features and Environment: Each site should be designed to preserve natural features and environmental resources, such as: 
(A)  Floodplains and drainage ways. 
(B)  Bodies of water. 
(C)  Prominent ridges and rock ledges. 
(D)  Existing tree cover including tree masses, wind rows and significant individual trees. 
(3)  Cut and Fill: Excessive cut and fill are unacceptable. The site plan should preserve the natural topography of the site. 
(4)  Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks, walkways, and paths) shall be located and designed to provide physical separation from vehicles along all public and private streets and within any parking area. 
(5)  Building Separation: All buildings shall be separated by a minimum distance of 15 feet. 
(6)  Lot Coverage: Each site plan should be designed to reflect unique site characteristics and strong neighborhood environments without overcrowding the site. 
(7)  Open Space: Open space should be provided to meet active and passive use requirements of the neighborhood. 
(A)  At least ten (10) percent of the total site area shall be set aside as common open space. The common open space shall be suitable for active or passive recreational use. Common open space areas should be centrally placed within the neighborhood. Common open space may include pools, tennis courts, and tot lots. Common open space may not be counted toward nor located in required zoning district setbacks. 
(B)  A minimum of 60 square feet of private open space shall be provided for each ground-level dwelling unit and each dwelling unit that is accessible from a walk out basement. Private areas should allow only limited access and be enclosed to ensure privacy. Private areas typically include yards, balconies and patios. 
(8)  Building Clustering: Unusable and unassigned open space surrounding buildings should be reduced by clustering buildings. Buildings should be clustered around a central common area, and not have the primary orientation directed toward the parking area. 
(9)  Building Orientation. 
(A)  Individual Buildings: Individual buildings should be oriented in a way that established neighborhoods and sub-neighborhoods. 
(B)  Reduction of Unusable Open Space: Unusable open space should be reduced through building orientation, the use of low walls, fencing, landscaping and entry design. 
(10)  Vehicular Circulation and Parking. 
(A)  Street Layout: The layout of streets should provide for safe operation of vehicles within the neighborhood. Excessively straight and wide streets encourage high speed traffic and should be avoided. Curvilinear designs, reduced street widths and cul-de-sacs create stronger neighborhood environments. 
(B)  Parking Area Layout: Double loaded parking areas along private streets or drives are generally not acceptable. Parking areas should be clustered and separated from the street. 
(C)  Parking Enclosures: Parking enclosures should be designed and sited so as to compliment the primary structures and to provide visual relief from extensive pavement area. 
(11)  Pedestrian Circulation. 
(A)  Pedestrian Linkages: Pedestrian access should be designed to provide reasonable linkages of dwelling units to neighborhood facilities such as recreation, services, mail and parking. 
(B)  Landscaping Details: Pedestrian systems should incorporate landscaping details to increase the visual interest and character of the neighborhood. 
(C)  Landscaping: Landscaping should be designed in sufficient form, quantity and location to reduce, to the greatest extent possible, negative impacts affecting the site and adjacent properties and to increase the sense of neighborhood scale, character and identify. 
(D)  Architectural Design: The architecture of multifamily housing is a key element in determining the character of a neighborhood. The architecture should create a strong feeling of identity through design principles of scale, harmony, rhythm and balance. 
(E)  Elongated sites with rectangular, double-loaded building footprints should be avoided. These designs typically lack interest and fail to create a strong sense of neighborhood. 
(F)  The architectural design of each unit or building should impart a feeling of neighborhood scale. Units should be designed with vertical and horizontal offsets to break up roof lines, define private outdoor areas, allow greater views, and admit light and air to unit interiors. Large, blank wall surfaces should be avoided. Windows and projecting wall surfaces should be used to break up larger wall surfaces and establish visual interest. 
(G)  The same level of architectural design and quality of materials should be applied to all sides of the building. The side and rear elevations, garages, carports, and all accessory structures should maintain the same level of design, aesthetic quality, and architectural compatibility. 
(H)  Screening from the street of all outdoor refuse areas, ground mounted mechanical equipment, utilities, and banks of meters shall be provided. The screening of these items is to be architecturally compatible with the major building components and may include landscaping. 
S.  Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor. 
(1)  Outdoor recreation and entertainment uses shall be located on arterials or collectors. Public activity areas shall be located at least 200 feet from any adjacent R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
T.  Recreational Vehicle Parks. Recreational Vehicle Parks shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The site selected for recreational vehicle parks shall be well drained and primarily designed to provide space for short-term occupancy to the traveling public. Location of the site may not necessarily front on a major roadway or thoroughfare, but it shall be directly accessible to the major roadway by means of a private road or public road that it has frontage on. Short-term occupancy shall not exceed 30 days, except as approved by the Building Official. 
(2)  Minimum tract size shall be two (2) acres and shall be in one (1) ownership. 
(3)  The maximum number of recreational vehicle spaces allowed within the permitted districts shall not be more than 20 per acre. Consideration shall be given to whether the recreational vehicle park and the density level are designed accordingly. The densities of overnight use may be higher than destination type since it primarily serves as a short stopping point while the destination type recreational vehicle park located at or near a scenic historical or outdoor recreational area provides for longer and extended stays of several days or weeks. 
(4)  Minimum width of a recreational vehicle space shall be 25 feet. The space shall be so designed to provide space for parking both a travel trailer and towing vehicle off the roadway. No travel trailer unit shall be closer than 10 feet to any other adjacent unit, structure or roadway, and all spaces shall have direct access to the roadway. No unit shall be placed closer than 30 feet to any of the development property lines, and the 10 feet nearest the property line shall be permanently maintained as a sodded and/or landscaped area. 
(5)  A central office or convenience establishment with an attendant shall be provided within the recreational vehicle park to register guests and provide service and supervision to the camp for camps in excess of 5 acres. 
(6)  The applicant for a recreational vehicle park shall submit a development plan to the Planning Commission for approval. Such plan shall contain the information as required below and any other information the Board reasonably shall deem necessary to fully evaluate the proposed development. The applicant shall submit the information on a sheet size not to exceed 24? × 36? dimensions as a proposed development plan showing: 
(A)  General layout of development with dimensions, depths, number of spaces and related sanitation accommodations. 
(B)  Parking area location, sizes and capacity. 
(C)  Ingress and egress points for the project. 
(D)  Use of structures. 
(E)  General layout of typical recreational vehicle space showing size of space and proposed improvements. 
(F)  Layout of roadway within the camp. 
(G)  Net density of proposed project, expressed in terms of units per acre. 
(H)  General landscaping plan indicating all new and retained plant material to be incorporated within the new development and layout of outdoor lighting system. 
(I)  Plan and method of sewage disposal and water supply. 
(J)  Location plan and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including proposed toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility areas. 
(K)  The development shall provide a general refuse storage area or areas that shall be provided with a paved concrete surface and shall be enclosed to screen it from view. 
(7)  The recreational vehicle parks shall be planned and constructed in accordance with the minimum standards as established in this section and as outlined below: 
(A)  All parking areas and roadways shall be constructed and paved with a hard surface bituminous or concrete material. 
(B)  All camps shall be provided with general outdoor lighting with a minimum of 0.3-foot candles of general illumination. 
(C)  All yard areas and other open spaces not otherwise paved or occupied by structures shall be sodded and/or landscaped and shall be maintained. 
U.  Auditorium or Stadium. 
(1)  Any parking area used for the overnight parking of buses and vehicles shall be located at least 100 feet from the lot line of a lot zoned R-1, R-2, or M-P. Any such parking area shall be screened from view of adjacent R-1, R-2, or M-P districts by a landscape buffer as approved by the Planning Commission. 
V.  Salvage Yards. The following standards shall apply to salvage yards, scrap and waste material storage yards, auto wrecking and junk yards: 
(1)  Separation from Residential: No salvage yard shall be located within 300 feet of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
(2)  Screening: The operation shall be conducted wholly within a non-combustible building or within an area surrounded on all sides by a fence or wall at least six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be of uniform height, uniform texture and color, and shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public, obscure the junk from normal view of the public, and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence or wall shall be installed in a way that retains all scrap, junk, or other materials within the yard. Scrap, junk or other salvaged materials shall be piled or stored so that they are not visible from outside the fenced in area and do not exceed the height of the enclosing fence or wall. 
(3)  Loading/Unloading: No junk shall be loaded, unloaded, or otherwise placed either temporarily or permanently outside the enclosed building, fence, or wall, or within the public right-of-way. 
W.  Single-family Attached. Single-family Attached development shall be subject to the standards of the underlying zoning district, as modified by the following standards: 
(1)  Lot Width: Each Single-family Attached dwelling unit shall be located on an individual lot having a minimum width of 50 feet. 
(2)  Building Coverage; Single-family Attached dwelling units shall be exempt from the Building Coverage standards of the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Setbacks: No interior side setback shall be required on the "attached" side of a lot containing a Single-Family Attached dwelling unit. The interior setback standards of the underlying zoning district shall apply to "end" units in a Single-Family Attached development. End units are those that are attached to other dwelling units on only one side. 
X.  Solid Waste Collection/Processing Facilities. The following standards shall apply to Solid Waste Collection/Processing Facilities: 
(1)  Screening: The operation shall be conducted wholly within a non-combustible building or within an area surrounded on all sides by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height. The fence or wall shall be of uniform height, uniform texture and color, and shall be so maintained by the proprietor as to ensure maximum safety to the public, obscure the junk from normal view of the public, and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence or wall shall be installed in a way that retains all scrap, junk, or other materials within the yard. No scrap, junk or other salvaged materials may be piled so to exceed the height of this enclosing fence or wall. 
(2)  Traffic Circulation: The operation shall provide entrances on arterial or collector streets only with ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion. There shall be enough room on-site to accommodate peak traffic volume and company vehicles. A traffic analysis shall be required. 
(A)  Storage Bins: Storage bins or trailers will be allowed to be stored on-site as an ancillary use, providing they are durable, covered and meet the same setbacks required for the structure on the site. The bins shall be screened as part of the operation. 
(B)  Loading/Unloading: No solid waste or junk shall be loaded, unloaded or otherwise placed either temporarily or permanently outside an enclosed building, fence or screened area or within the public right-of-way, except the use of storage bins placed on the outside an enclosed building for recycling. The operation shall be attended on days of operation to maintain the property in a clean, litter free condition. 
(C)  Separation for Residential: No structures shall be located within 300 feet a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoned property. 
(D)  Hours of Operation: Uses shall not operate before sunrise or after sunset if located within 1,000 feet of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoned property. 
(E)  Paving: All roads, driveways, parking lots and loading/unloading areas within 500 feet of any lot line shall be graded and paved with an approved concrete or asphalt/concrete surface. 
(F)  Stormwater Management: A stormwater management plan may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer. 
(G)  Other Regulations: All operations shall be licensed if required, have proper permits from the Kansas Department of Health and Environment and shall meet all City, County, State and Federal Health Department requirements pertaining to facilities, equipment and other features. 
(H)  Time Limit and Renewal of Conditional Use Permit: The Conditional Use Permit shall be effective for one year, at which time it may be renewed in accordance with procedures applicable to the original approval. If renewed, a new time limit on the Conditional Use Permit shall be established at the public hearing. The Conditional Use Permit shall be revoked by the Building Official it is determined by the Building Official that the use is creating a nuisance for nearby residents or businesses or is failing to comply with the conditions imposed on the operation. 
Y.  Temporary Uses Permitted. The following uses shall be allowed on a lot for which the vendor has a property interest: 
(1)  Christmas Tree Sales: Christmas tree sales in any business or industrial district for a period not to exceed 60 days. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with the yard and setback requirements of these regulations, provided that no trees shall be displayed within 30 feet of the intersection of the curb line of any two streets. 
(2)  Contractor's Office: Contractor's office and equipment sheds (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations) accessory to a construction project and to continue only during the duration of such project. 
(3)  Real Estate Office: Real estate office (containing no sleeping or cooking accommodations unless located in a model dwelling unit) incidental to a new housing development to continue only until the sale or lease of all dwelling units in the development. 
(4)  Carnivals and Circuses: A carnival or circus, but only in a commercial or industrial district, and then only for a period that does not exceed three weeks. Such use need not comply with the front yard requirements, provided that structures or equipment which might block the view of operators of motor vehicles on the public streets shall conform to the requirements of the sight triangle as defined by these regulations. 
(5)  Garage or Yard Sales: The sale of used or second-hand merchandise shall be permitted in any residential district providing that such use shall not exceed three consecutive days in duration, nor occur more than four-times, excluding city-wide sales, during a 12 month period at one residence. 
Z.  Fast Food Restaurant proposals shall present a site plan that allows adequate stacking of traffic on-site at any drive-through window to prevent conflicts with vehicular movement on public streets. 
AA.  Wind Turbines. Wind Turbines shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Permitted Use: Wind Turbines are a permitted use in the R-1, R-2, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts and shall meet the following setback requirements: 
(2)  Setbacks: 
(A)  Wind Turbines shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from any existing or planned right-of-way. 
(B)  Wind Turbines shall be set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the principal support structure from the lot line of any R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
(C)  Peripheral supports and guy anchors for Wind Turbines may be located within the required setbacks, provided that they shall be located entirely 
within the boundaries of the property in which the tower is located and shall be located no closer than five feet from any lot line, and no closer than 10 feet from the lot line of a R-1, R-2, or M-P zoning district. 
(3)  Height: The principal support structure for wind turbines shall be permitted to the height limit of the zoning district in which it is located, provided that the setback standards of this section are complied with. A conditional use permit may be granted to authorize a wind turbine in excess of the permitted height, however, the applicant must be able to show that the wind turbine can meet the required setbacks. 
(4)  Airport Approach Paths: Wind Turbines shall not encroach into or through any established public or private airport approach path as established by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(5)  Removal of Obsolete and Unused Wind Turbines: All obsolete or unused wind turbines shall be removed within 18 months of cessation of use. 
BB.  In the R-1 Residence District stables, sheds, pens or other places where horses, mules, asses, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, fowl or other animals are kept shall be no closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
CC.  Garages may be considered a principal use in the R-1 District instead of a residential structure only if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A garage shall not cover more than twelve (12) percent of the total lot area, with a maximum of 1,200 square feet; and no more than twenty (20) feet to the peak of the roof or structure. 
(2)  For lots 10,000 square feet and over, no garage shall be constructed or placed in such a manner as to restrict said lot from future construction of a single-family dwelling without having to first remove the garage. 
(3)  For lots under 10,000 square feet, garages can be constructed or placed without consideration for future construction. However, garages built on lots under 10,000 square feet without a residential structure must front a City street and cannot front an alley. 
(4)  Minimum Exterior Building Material Standards: A minimum of 50% of the garage's front exterior wall shall consist of one or more of the following: 
(a)  Stone material used for masonry construction, including but not limited to, granite, sandstone, slate, limestone, marble or other hard and durable all-weather stone. 
(b)  Brick material used for masonry construction composed of hard fired (kiln fired) all-weather common brick or other all-weather facing brick. 
(c)  Stucco or approved gypsum concrete/plaster materials. 
(d)  Glass. 
(e)  Other design components which create visual interest through the use of different textures, complementary colors, shadow lines and contrasting shapes. 
(5)  Driveway Requirements: All parking areas, driveways, or any part of the property used for vehicle travel shall consist of hot mix asphalt, concrete paving, stone or brick, excepting that garages which front an alley shall not be subject to these requirements. 
(6)  Site Plan Review: All applicants seeking the construction of a garage as a principal use in the R-1 District shall submit a Site Plan to the Building Official which shall include the following: 
(a)  Approximate size and locations of all structures. 
(b)  Access from streets. 
(c)  Imagery or description of exterior building materials to be used. 
(d)  Imagery or description of driveway construction materials to be used. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 5, § 1), 12-3-01; Ord. No. 1705 , § 1, 6-19-17; Ord. No. 1716 , § I, 8-20-18; Ord. No. 1724 , § 1, 8-5-19)  
Secs. 19-503—19-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-601. - Height regulations. 
Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator head houses, fire towers, grain elevators, monuments, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, church steeples, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy, are not subject to the height limitations contained in the District Regulations. In all planned districts, one additional foot of height above the specified height limitation shall be permitted for each foot of additional yard provided over the minimum requirement on all sides of the lot for these structures. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-602. - Yard regulations. 
A.  Minimum Yard Requirements: The yard requirements heretofore established in all districts shall be adjusted in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the property fronts on two intersecting streets (a corner lot), such lot shall maintain a front yard setback on both streets, except in the following cases: 
(a)  Where no lots within the same block front on one of the two intersecting streets, the side yard requirement along such street shall be 15 feet, subject to the provisions of paragraph (1) above. 
(2)  Double frontage lots shall maintain the required front yard setback along both frontages. 
B.  Where more than half of the buildings on a frontage have observed a front yard greater or less than required then: 
(1)  Where a building to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of adjacent buildings on the two sides, or 
(2)  Where a building to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-603. - Number of structures and uses on a parcel. 
In other than an industrial district, no more than one principal use and structure may be located upon a lot or tract unless the intensity of the Use Regulation is met for each structure. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-604. - Sight triangle. 
On a corner lot in any district, except "C-2", development shall conform to the requirements of the sight triangle as defined by this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-605. - Access to business and industrial districts. 
No land that is located in a residential district shall be used for a driveway, walkway or access to any land which is located in any commercial or industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-606. - Determination of structure setback line. 
The structure setback line shall be determined by measuring the horizontal distance between the property line and the vertical plane of the furthest architectural projection of the existing or proposed structure; except that certain architectural projections listed below may extend beyond the structure setback line, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Projections shall be defined as: Any structural or non-structural portion or appendage attached to the main structure which by design protrudes outward beyond the structure floor; wall, roof or foundation line. Projections include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Roof eaves; 
(2)  Cornices; 
(3)  Porches; 
(4)  Stairs; 
(5)  Bay and Egress Windows; 
(6)  Dormers; 
(7)  Combustible or Non combustible Ornamentation; 
(8)  Soffits; 
(9)  Balconies. 
B.  Exception for Canopies and Awnings: A canopy or awning may be permitted to overhang a public way in any business zoning or industrial zoning district providing: 
(1)  No portion of the canopy or awning shall be less than eight (8) feet above the level of the sidewalk or other public way. 
(2)  The canopy or awning may extend the full width of the building facade to which it is attached, and further, it shall not extend beyond a point two (2) feet inside the curb line of a public street. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-607. - Fences. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in other codes and regulations, the following regulations shall apply to the construction of fences: 
A.  No fence shall be constructed closer than four (4) feet from the backside of the curb or constitute a traffic hazard or interfere with the sight triangle. The fence may not prohibit public access on a sidewalk. 
B.  No fence shall be constructed in such a manner or be of such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals. 
C.  No person shall erect or maintain any fence which will materially damage the adjacent property by obstructing the view, shutting out the sunlight or hindering ventilation, or which shall adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. 
D.  No fence except fences erected upon public or parochial school grounds or in public parks, in public playgrounds and commercial and industrial zoned districts shall be constructed within fifteen (15) feet of the backside of the curb line in the front yard and of a height greater than four (4) feet with fifty Percent (50%) transparency or solid with no greater height than thirty (30) inches or seven (7) feet elsewhere; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may, as a conditional use, authorize the construction of a fence greater than seven (7) feet in height if the Planning Commission finds the public welfare is served. 
E.  Fences shall be constructed of the following materials and methods: 
(1)  Solid panels of plywood, wafer board or similar construction material and used construction or commercial objects, such as storage pallets, galvanized tin, shall not be allowed; except that, plywood, wafer board or similar construction material may be used for temporary fences around construction sites for public safety. 
(2)  Decorative fences in front yards shall be made of wood, woven wire, chain link, wrought iron, square tubing and/or metal tubing or similar approved material. Fences within the front yard shall be 50 percent or more transparent. Plywood, wafer board or similar construction material and used construction or commercial objects, such as storage pallets, shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 6, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-608—19-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-701. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish minimum requirements as to number of spaces, design and construction for off-street parking and loading areas. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-702. - Applicability. 
Off-street parking and loading space, as required in this article, shall be provided for all new structures, and for alterations and additions to existing structures. Off-street parking and loading space shall be required for any existing structure or structure which is altered in any manner so as to enlarge or increase capacity by adding or creating dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area or seats. Existing parking areas previously required shall not be used to satisfy required off-street parking for any new structures, alterations, or additions to existing structures or uses of land. Such existing parking space shall be maintained and shall not be reduced so long as the main structure or use remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere as provided in this article; except that no off-street parking or loading space shall be required for any commercial use located in the "C-2" Central Business District. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-703. - Off-street parking general provisions. 
A.  Utilization: Required accessory off-street parking facilities provided for the uses hereinafter listed shall be solely for the parking of motor vehicles in operating condition of patrons, occupants, or employees of such uses. 
B.  Accessory Use: Off-street parking and driveways shall be considered as an accessory use of the use for which the parking is provided. Parking not located on the same tract on which the main use is located must be located within the zoning district in which parking or storage lots are permitted as a main use; or be located in accordance with the provisions of this article relating to off-street parking exceptions. 
C.  Repair Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in association with any off-street parking facilities. 
D.  Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this regulation results in a requirement of a fractional space, the fraction of 0.49 or less may be disregarded, and a fraction in excess of 0.5 shall be counted as one parking space. 
E.  Mixed Uses: When a structure or development contains mixed uses, the off-street parking requirements shall be calculated for each individual use and the total parking requirement shall be the sum of individual parking requirements. 
F.  Residential Zoning Districts: The parking of Semi-Tractors, Tractor trailers or any combination is prohibited in residential districts. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-704. - Off-street parking layout and design requirements. 
Off-street parking improvements in other than the A-P, R-1, and R-2 Districts shall be subject to site plan review. The construction and renovation of certain structures and facilities must conform to the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Title III of 1990. Structure plans for construction, alteration or remodeling permits must identify how compliance with the ADA parking and other site requirements are to be met. Permits for new construction must comply with the entire Title III of the Act as it relates to the structure and site. 
The Building Official will provide information upon request to assist the public in interpreting the requirements of the ADA, which generally provide for at least one accessible route within the boundary of the site from a parking space or street to an accessible structure entrance. Accessible spaces and access aisles are required, as well, among other detailed provisions. 
For parking layout and design which is not subject to the ADA requirements, the following standards apply: 
A.  Area: A required off-street parking space shall be at least 9 feet in width and at least 19 feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, and columns. 
B.  Access: Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. 
C.  Design: Off-street parking spaces shall comply with the design standards relating to curb length, stall depth, driveway width, island width, barriers, and ingress and egress as may be established from time to time by the City of Goodland. 
D.  Surfacing: All open off-street parking, loading areas and driveways shall be graded and improved with an all-weather material such as asphalt, gravel or concrete. 
E.  Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking and loading areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a way as not to interfere with adjacent residential uses. 
F.  Landscaping and Screening: All off-street parking facilities in other than residential districts shall be screened and landscaped as required in site plan review and Article VIII. 
G.  Location of Parking Facilities: Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be the walking distance measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the entrance of the building which it is required to serve: 
(1)  For one-and two-family dwellings: On the same lot as the principal structure. 
(2)  For multifamily dwellings: Not more than 200 feet from the premises they are required to serve. 
(3)  For commercial and institutional uses (for hospitals, sanitariums, asylums, orphanages, rooming houses, club rooms, fraternity and sorority houses): Not more than 300 feet from the building they are required to serve. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-705. - Off-street parking required spaces. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
A.  Dwelling and Lodging Uses: 
(1)  Bed and Breakfast, Boarding or rooming houses: One parking space per rental unit plus one for the owner or manager. 
(2)  Dormitories, fraternities, or sororities (Group Residential) Two parking spaces for each three occupants based on the maximum design capacity of the structure. 
(3)  Hotels and motels: One space per each rental unit plus one space per each two employees in the largest working shift and such spaces as are required for restaurants, assembly rooms, and other affiliated facilities provided. 
(4)  Manufactured home parks: Two parking spaces per each manufactured home. 
(5)  Nursing homes, rest homes, etc.: One parking space per each five (5) beds based on the designed maximum capacity of the structure, plus one parking space for each employee. 
(6)  Single-family: Two spaces per dwelling unit which may include enclosed parking. 
(7)  Two-family and multifamily: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit. Two-family and multifamily dwelling units designed specifically for the elderly, one space per two dwelling units. 
B.  Business, Commercial, and Industrial Uses: 
(1)  Automobile, truck, recreational vehicle and manufactured home sales and rental lots: One parking space for each 3,000 square feet of open sales lot area devoted to the sale, display and rental of said vehicles, plus one parking space for each employee. 
(1)[(2)]  Automobile salvage yards: One parking space for each employee, plus one parking space for each 10,000 square feet of storage area. 
(2)[(3)]  Financial, business, and professional offices: One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
(4)  Bowling alleys: Five (5) parking spaces for each lane. 
(5)  Cartage, express, parcel delivery and freight terminal establishments: One parking space for each two employees in the largest working shift in a 24-hour period, plus one parking space for each vehicle maintained on the premises. 
(6)  Automobile wash: Three holding spaces for each car washing stall plus two drying spaces for each car washing stall. 
(7)  Funeral homes and mortuaries: One parking space for each four seats based upon the designed maximum capacity of the parlor, plus one additional parking space for each employee and each vehicle maintained on the premises. 
(8)  Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture repair shop: One parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area. 
(9)  Manufacturing, production, processing, assembly, disassembly, cleaning, servicing, testing or repairing of goods, materials or products: One (1) parking space per three employees based upon the largest working shift in any 24-hour time period. 
(10)  Medical and dental clinics or offices: One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per two employees. 
(11)  Restaurants, private clubs and taverns: One parking space for each 2.5 seats based on the maximum designed seating capacity; provided, however, that drive-in restaurants shall have a minimum of at least ten parking spaces. 
(12)  Retail stores and shops: One parking space per 200 square feet of floor area plus 1 space per two employees. 
(13)  Service stations: One parking space for each employee plus two spaces for each service bay. 
(14)  Theaters, auditoriums, and places of assembly with fixed seats: One parking space for each 3.5 seats. 
(15)  Theaters, auditoriums, and places of assembly without fixed seats: One parking space for each four people, based upon the computed occupant load of the structure or the assembly area. 
(16)  Warehouse, storage and wholesale establishments: One parking space for each two employees based upon the largest working shift in any 24-hour period. 
(17)  All other business and commercial establishments not specified above: One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
C.  Other Uses: 
(1)  Churches: One parking space for each four seats based upon the maximum designed seating capacity, including choir lofts. 
(2)  Elementary, junior high and equivalent parochial and private schools: Two parking spaces for each classroom. 
(3)  High schools, colleges, universities and other similar public or private institutions of higher learning: Eight parking spaces for each classroom, plus one space for each two employees. 
(3)[(4)]  Hospitals: One parking space for every four beds, plus one parking space for each resident or staff doctor plus one space for each two employees based on the largest working shift in any 24-hour period. 
(4)[(5)]  Laundromats: One parking space for each two washing machines. 
(5)[(6)]  Library: One space per 400 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space per two employees. 
(6)[(7)]  Nursery schools and day care centers, public or private: One parking space for each employee plus one parking space for each eight children. In addition, adequate space and traffic flow pattern shall be provided for the drop-off and pick-up of children. 
(7)[(8)]  Fraternal associations and union headquarters: One parking space for each three seats based upon the design maximum seating capacity. 
(8)[(9)]  Swimming pools and clubs: One parking space for each 50 square feet of water area. 
(9)[(10)]  Trade and commercial schools: One parking space for each three students and employees. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-706. - Conditional uses. 
A.  District Permitted: In order to provide off-street parking areas, the Planning Commission may, after public notice and hearing, grant as a conditional use the establishment of parking areas in any zoning district under the provisions further set forth in this section. 
B.  Location: Parking provided under this section must be within 300 feet (along lines of public access) from the boundary of the use for which the parking is provided. 
C.  Use: The parking area shall be used for passenger vehicles only, and in no case shall it be used for sales, repair work, storage, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. Only such signs as are necessary for the proper operation of the parking lot shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 7, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-707. - Loading and unloading regulations. 
Loading and unloading space shall be provided off-street and on the same premises with every structure or part thereof, hereafter erected, established or enlarged and occupied for goods display, retail operation, department store, market, hotel, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, office uses or warehouses, manufacturing or other uses, involving the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by motor vehicles. The loading and unloading space or spaces shall be so located to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys and walkways. 
A.  Spaces Required: 
(1)  For all uses in the "C-1" Districts, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
Gross Floor Area 
of Establishments 	Required Number of Loading Berths 	Required Size of Loading Berths 
1,000—10,000 s.f. 	1 	10' × 25' 
10,000—25,000 s.f. 	2 	10' × 25' each 
25,000—40,000 s.f. 	2 	10' × 70' each 
40,000—100,000 s.f. 	3 	10' × 70' each 
 
(2)  For all uses in the "I-1" and "I-2" Districts, loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the following table: 
Gross Floor Area 
of Establishments 	Required Number of Loading Berths 	Required Size of Loading Berths 
1,000—10,000 s.f. 	1 	10' × 25' 
10,000—40,000 s.f. 	2 	10' × 70' 
40,000—100,000 s.f. 	3 	10' × 70' each 
 
(3)  For each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or any fraction thereof over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, one additional berth shall be provided. Each such additional berth shall be at least 10 feet in width by 60 feet in length.  
Secs. 19-708—19-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFERING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-801. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish minimum landscaping and buffering requirements for new development within the City of Goodland. Two types of landscaping/buffering are described in this article: Transition Buffers and Dumpster Screening. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-802. - Applicability. 
Landscaping, screening and buffering, as required in this article, shall be provided for all new development, except that specifically exempted in Section 19-803 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-803. - Exemptions. 
Improvements or repairs to existing development that do not result in an increase in floor area and changes in use that do not result in an increase in intensity shall be exempt from the regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-804. - Transition buffer general provisions. 
A.  Location of Buffers. Transition buffers shall be located along those portions of a site that are along those portions of adjoining lots with a different zoning classification. 
B.  Responsibility for Installing Buffers. The developing property shall always be responsible for providing required buffers. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-805. - Transition buffer specifications. 
When a transition buffer is required by this code, such transition buffer shall consist of a planting screen meeting the specifications herein. A landscaped berm or a fence screen meeting the specifications herein may be used in lieu of such planting screen if a variance for such substitution is granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
A.  Planting Screens. Planting screens shall consist of trees, bushes or shrubs of a variety and so planted and kept as to be achieved within thirty-six (36) months after occupancy of the premises to be screened. 
(1)  Such screen shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet above grade at any particular point along its length. 
(2)  Any two (2) foot square segment of a planting screen shall contain no more than thirty percent (30%) open space affording a direct horizontal view through such screen if such segment is over two (2) feet above grade. 
B.  Landscaped Berm. Adequate evidence shall be furnished demonstrating that the construction of such berm, along with any necessary culverts and ditching, will not create adverse drainage and flooding conditions on adjacent property. 
(1)  Such berm shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width at the base and at least four (4) feet in height, as measured perpendicular to grade level at any point along its length. Side slopes shall have a gradient no steeper than three to one. 
(2)  Side slopes of such berm shall be sodded so as to prevent erosion. The top of the berm shall contain a planting screen above except that the minimum height of such planting screen need be no more than three feet above the top of the berm at any particular point along its length. Construction and material of such berm shall be as approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
C.  Fence Screen. A fence screen shall not be less than six (6) feet in height above grade level, at any particular point along its length. Any two (2) foot square segment of such screen shall contain no more than thirty percent (30%) open space affording a direct horizontal view through such screen. Construction and material of such fence screen shall be as approved by the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-806. - Transition buffer requirements. 
Landscape buffers shall be provided and maintained when certain land uses are adjacent to one another. This requirement is intended to help ease the land use transition between areas of varying development intensity and to ensure land use compatibility. 
A.  Determination Transition Buffer Requirements. The following procedure shall be followed in determining if a transition buffer is required. Using the matrix in sub-section 19-806.B., Transition Buffer Requirements, of this article: 
(1)  Identify the minimum zoning classification required to accommodate the proposed use. These classifications are listed under "Proposed Zoning" in the first column. 
(2)  For Transition Buffer Requirements, identify the actual zoning classification of the abutting site(s). These classifications are listed under the heading "Adjacent Zoning." 
(3)  Determine if a transition buffer is required by crossing the previously identified proposed zoning with the adjacent zoning. The letter "R" indicates that a transition buffer is required, otherwise, no transition buffer is required. 
B.  Transition Buffer Requirements. 
TRANSITION BUFFER REQUIREMENTS 
ZONING OF PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT 	ADJACENT ZONING 
	AP 	R-1 	R-2 	M-P 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 
R-1 								
R-2 								
M-P 		R 	R 					
C-1 		R 	R 	R 	R 			
C-2 		R 	R 	R 	R 			
I-1 		R 	R 	R 	R 	R 		
I-2 		R 	R 	R 	R 	R 		
 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-807. - Dumpster screening. 
Dumpsters for solid waste located in "C-1", "I-1" and "I-2" districts shall be completely screened from view of roadways and adjacent sites by fences, walls or vegetative screens. The screen shall be designed to accommodate refuse hauling equipment, and provide complete visual screening of the dumpster and be compatible in material and color with the principal structure on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-808. - Community policing through environmental design (CPTED). 
Landscaping and berming improvements shall be designed according to CPTED principles in order to reduce or eliminate isolated public pedestrian and parking areas that cannot be seen from activities occurring off site. 
CPTED's Basic Principles are summarized as follows: 
• Territoriality: People protect territory that they feel is their own and have a certain respect for the territory of others. Fences, pavement treatments, art, signs, good maintenance, and landscaping are some physical ways to express ownership. Identifying intruders is much easier in a well-defined space. 
• Natural Surveillance: Criminals don't want to be seen. Placing physical features, activities, and people in ways that maximize the ability to see what's going on discourages crime. Barriers, such as bushes, sheds, or shadows, make it difficult to observe activity. Landscaping and lighting can be planned to promote natural surveillance from inside a home or building and from the outside by neighbors or people passing by. Maximizing the natural surveillance capability of such "gatekeepers" as parking lot attendants and hotel desk clerks is important. 
• Activity Support: Encouraging legitimate activity in public spaces helps discourage crime. A basketball court in a public park or community center will provide recreation for youth, while making strangers more obvious and increasing active natural surveillance and the feeling of ownership. Any activity that gets people out and working together — a clean-up day, a block party, a Neighborhood Watch group, a civic meeting — helps prevent crime. 
• Access Control: Properly located entrances, exits, fencing, landscaping, and lighting can direct both foot and automobile traffic in ways that discourage crime. Access control can be as simple as a neighbor on the front porch or the strategic location of a front office. Other strategies include development of a well-designed street system to discourage through traffic on local streets or introducing apartment, commercial or office complex-based parking stickers. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 8, § 8), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-809—19-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-901. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of these sign regulations to qualify, supplement or define the allowable uses of the several types of signs allowed in the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-902. - Applicability. 
Any sign shall, by definition, be a structure. No land, personal property or structure shall be used for sign purposes except as specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-903. - Nonconforming signs. 
All signs legally existing at the time of passage of these regulations may remain in use under the conditions of legal nonconformance. Signs in legal nonconformance shall not be enlarged, moved, lighted, or reconstructed; however, the change of the advertising display shall not be restricted except as previously stated. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-904. - Removal of nonconforming signs. 
Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. 
A.  Removal of On-Site Nonconforming Signs: All on-site nonconforming signs not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of these regulations shall be removed or shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this regulation (a) when the nature of the business conducted on the premises changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend, or (b) when the name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size, or legend. 
B.  Removal of signs upon destruction of principal structures: When a principal structure is destroyed or removed due to natural or manmade circumstances, all signs on the property shall be removed within 90 days, unless a building permit has been issued to replace the structure within said time period. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-905. - Permit required. 
No sign except temporary signs as defined in this article may be erected or altered until a sign permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. 
A.  Application: Application for permits required under this Article shall be made on forms provided by the Building Inspector and accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Plans and specifications of the proposed sign; the right to inspect all permanent signs and marquees prior to their installation and erection and prior to the issuance of a permit. Sign structures greater than thirty-five (35) feet above grade shall be required to have an engineered stamp. 
(2)  A certificate of Accident Public Liability Insurance issued to the person or firm installing, erecting or maintaining a sign or marquee over public property and providing coverage in the amount of no less than the City's limit of liability under the City's Tort Claims Act. 
B.  Permit Fees: Every application before being granted a permit hereunder, shall pay to the City Clerk the following permit fee for each such sign or other advertising structure regulated by this article: 
(1)  All signs requiring a permit other than temporary—-$1.00 per square foot per side, up to $50.00. 
(2)  Temporary Signs in excess of 9 square feet—-$10.00, when required. 
C.  Inspection: As soon as a sign has been erected, the permittee shall notify the building inspector who shall inspect such sign and approve the same if it is in compliance with the provisions of this article. The building inspector may, from time to time, as he deems necessary, inspect all signs or other advertising structure regulated by this article for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure or whether it is in need of removal or repair. 
D.  Permit Revocable at Any Time: All rights and privileges acquired under the provisions of this article or any amendment thereto are mere licenses revocable at any time by the building inspector; and all such permits shall contain this provision. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-906. - Review and action. 
The Building Official shall review the Sign Permit application in detail for the purpose of determining whether the proposed sign complies with all the applicable sign regulations of this Article, if applicable. Within 15 days of the submission of a complete application for a Sign Permit, the Building Official shall either: 
A.  Issue the Sign Permit, if the sign complies in every respect with the standards of this Article, if applicable; or 
B.  Deny the Sign Permit if the sign fails in any way to comply with the standards of this Article. The Building Official shall specify all reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-907. - Classification of signs. 
A.  Functional Types: 
(1)  Advertising Sign: (Billboards) A sign which directs the attention of the public to any goods, merchandise, property, business, service, entertainment or amusement conducted or produced which is bought or sold, furnished, offered or dealt in elsewhere than on the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
(2)  Bulletin Board Sign: A sign that indicates the name of an institution or organization on whose premises it is located and which contains the name of the institution or organization, the name or names of persons connected with it, and announcement of persons, events or activities occurring at the institution. Such sign may also present a greeting or similar message. 
(3)  Business Sign: A sign, which directs attention to a business or profession, conducted, or to products, services or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
(4)  Identification/Address Sign: A sign giving only the name and address of a structure, business, development or establishment. Such signs may be wholly or partly devoted to a readily recognized symbol; however, each numerical address assigned by the City of Goodland as the official street address of a property shall be displayed and visible from the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Name Plate Sign: A sign giving the name and/or address of the owner or occupant of a structure or premises on which it is located and, where applicable, a professional status. 
(6)  Temporary Sign: A display sign as listed below that is limited in time that such sign may remain in use either by the limitations of these regulations or the conditions of a sign permit. 
(a)  Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of a lot or tract of land on which the sign is located, or to the sale or lease of one or more structures, or a portion thereof on which the sign is located. 
(b)  Construction Sign: A temporary sign indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors and similar artisans involved in the design and construction of a structure, complex or project only during the construction period and only on the premises on which the construction is taking place. 
(c)  Political Campaign Sign: Any sign relating to a candidate, political party, ballot issue, or other issue to be voted upon in any public election. 
B.  Structural Types: 
(1)  Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign: A sign that is mounted on, painted on, or attached to, an awning, canopy or marquee. No such signs shall project above, below or beyond the awning, canopy or marquee. 
 
(1)[(2)]  Ground Sign: Any sign placed upon, or supported by, the ground independent of the principal structure on the property, where the bottom edge of the sign is less than six feet above the ground, the height is no greater than 10 feet, and the base is no less than 50 percent of the width of the face of the sign, presenting a monolithic structure. 
 
(2)[(3)]  Monument Sign: Any sign whose base is greater in width than the face of the sign, and whose height is no greater than 6 feet. 
 
(3)[(4)]  Elevated Sign (pole sign): Any sign placed upon, or supported by, the ground independent of the principal structure on the property where the bottom edge of the sign is ten feet or more above the ground level. 
(4)[(5)]  Portable Display Sign: Any movable display structure, capable of relocation, under its own power, or towed by a motor vehicle. The display message of the sign may be painted or non-painted and capable of being readily altered. Portable display signs may be with or without electrical illumination and power, and with or without wheels. 
 
(5)[(6)]  Projecting Sign: A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a structure for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such structure. 
 
(6)[(7)]  Wall Sign: A sign fastened to or painted on a wall of a structure in such a manner that the wall becomes merely the supporting structure or forms the background surface, and which does not project more than 12 inches from such structure. 
 
(7)[(8)]  Roof Sign: A sign totally supported on the roof of a structure. Roof signs shall not project more than 12 inches beyond the face of the structure. 
 
(8)[(9)]  Window Sign: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-908. - General provisions. 
A.  Gross Area of Sign: Gross area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign, exclusive of the base on which it is mounted or from which it is suspended. Double-faced signs shall be calculated as the area of one side only. Three-dimensional or multi-faced signs shall be calculated as the maximum area visible from any single direction at any point in time. On lots where more than one sign is located, the total gross area of all the signs shall not exceed the maximum gross area for one sign permitted by this regulation. 
For computing the gross area of any wall sign, which consists of letters mounted or painted on a wall, the area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular figure, which can encompass all of the letters. 
B.  Sign Height: Sign height shall be measured from the ground elevation at the base of the sign to the highest element of the sign. 
C.  Illuminated Signs: A sign designed to give forth artificial light or designed to reflect light derived from any source. 
(1)  Illuminated signs shall be designed as to reflect or direct light away from any residential dwelling district and any illuminated sign located on a lot adjacent to, in front of or across the street from any residential district, which sign is visible from such residential district, shall not be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)  Illuminated signs in direct vision of a traffic signal shall not be in red, amber or green illumination. 
D.  Flashing or Moving Signs: For the purpose of this regulation, any sign that is revolving, rotating, moving, animated, has moving lights or creates the illusion of movement shall be considered a moving sign. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not constant in intensity and color at all times is considered a flashing sign. 
(1)  Flashing signs shall not be permitted which are in any way similar to traffic signals or emergency vehicle lights. 
(2)  A sign which displays the current time and/or temperature by use of intermittent lighting shall not be deemed a flashing sign if the lighting changes are limited to text indicating time, temperature or other public messages. Such sign shall not in any case exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(3)  Flashing or moving signs are prohibited in all districts except the C-1, I-1 and I-2 Districts. 
E.  Accessway or Window: No sign shall block any required accessway or window. 
F.  Signs on Trees or Utility Poles: No sign shall be attached to any utility pole or tree. 
G.  Traffic Safety: 
(1)  No sign shall be maintained at any location where by reason of its position, size, shape or color, may obstruct, impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any traffic or railroad control sign, signal or device, or where it may interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(2)  Any sign located within three (3) feet of a driveway, alley, or within a parking area shall have its lowest elevation at least eight feet above the curb level; however, in no event shall any sign be placed so as to project over any public right-of-way, except in the "C-2", Central Business District, where signs may project over a sidewalk. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall any sign be placed in the sight triangle as defined by this regulation. 
H.  Lineal Street Frontage: In those districts where gross sign area is allocated based on lineal street frontage and the tract or parcel is adjacent to more than one street, the lineal street frontage shall be the distance of that property line abutting the major street. 
I.  Scale and Context: Signs shall be in scale with the site or structure where located and in context with the site, structure and service offered. 
(1)  Scale includes both human scale and proportion. Signs shall be proportional to the element they are attached to and the facade as a whole. 
(2)  Context includes form, style, color, balance and structure lines: 
Form: Sign shape and its relationship to the structure or service offered. 
Style: Historical, eclectic, modern or contemporary shapes, texts and colors. 
Color: Analogous or complementary in relation to site or structure. 
Balance: Location of sign in structure element relating to balance through location, mass and color. 
Structure Lines: Major lines of building elements and compatibility to outlines, horizontal and vertical lines such as roof line, ground line, window lines, etc. 
J.  All signs must be constructed of permanent all-weather materials. 
 
 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 8), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-909. - Exemptions. 
A.  Total Exemptions: The following signs shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, except for the provisions of Sections 19-910.A. through 19-910.D.: 
(1)  Flags or emblems of a government or of a political, civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization, displayed on private property. 
(2)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings and other instructional or regulatory signs having to do with health, safety, parking, swimming, dumping, etc. 
(3)  Memorial signs displayed on public or private property. 
(4)  Small signs, not exceeding three square feet in area, displayed on private property for the convenience of the public, including signs to identify entrance and exit drives, parking areas, one-way drives, restrooms, freight entrances, and other similar signs; except that such signs shall not display logos or other business advertisements. 
(5)  Scoreboards in athletic stadiums. 
(6)  Temporary signs for the sale of household goods at a residence (for example, garage sales or auctions) for a period not to exceed five (5) days. 
(7)  Political signs set outside the public right-of-way and compliance with sight triangle requirements. 
B.  Exemptions from Sign Permit: The following signs are exempt from the sign permit section of this article, but shall comply with all of the other regulations imposed by this article: 
(1)  Nameplate signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in gross area accessory to a single-family or two-family dwelling. 
(2)  Bulletin board signs not exceeding 100 square feet in gross area accessory to a church, school or public or non-profit institution. 
(3)  Business signs when located on property used for agricultural purposes and pertaining to the sale of agricultural products produced on the premises. 
(4)  Real estate signs not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area. 
(5)  Construction signs not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area. 
(6)  Window signs not exceeding 25% of the window surface in commercial and industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 9), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-910. - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Signs on Public Property: Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation, except that logo signs on public athletic fields shall be allowed. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. 
B.  Obscene or Indecent Advertisement: No person shall display upon any sign or other advertising structure any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
C.  Roof Signs Above Roofline: Roof signs mounted or projecting above the highest roofline. 
D.  Located on Right-of-Way: Any sign located on public right-of-way except those signs required by governmental authority or political signs as may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 10), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-911. - Temporary portable display signs, with or without wheels attached. 
Portable display signs shall be allowed on a premises in a commercial or industrial zoned district for not more than seven consecutive days, and no more than 30 days in a 12 month period. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 11), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-912. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs shall be erected and maintained in a safe and attractive manner and shall be subject to applicable regulations except as specifically modified herein. 
A.  Real Estate Signs: Real Estate Signs shall be removed within one week of the date of sale, rental, or lease. 
B.  Construction Signs: The zoning district shall regulate Construction signs. Such signs are subject to yard area requirements and may be erected at the start of construction and shall be removed within thirty (30) days of issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Signs over thirty-two (32) square feet in area shall be authorized by the Building Official, who shall base his decision on setback, traffic speed, sign design, and surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 12), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-913. - Maintenance. 
A.  All signs within the City shall be maintained in a safe condition and in such a manner that they shall not become a visual detriment to the community at large. The Building Inspector shall be charged with the responsibility and authority to inspect all signs within the City and direct the maintenance of said signs. Maintenance of signs is defined as keeping sign structures in a safe condition, free of rust, with broken glass or plastic replaced, electrical lights and other electrical operations in operable condition, letters and other sign components in the equivalent condition as on the sign permit or as approved. 
B.  Should the Building Inspector find a non-maintained sign as defined above, it shall cause the owner of said sign to be notified as to the deficiency and the corrective action that needs to be taken. 
C.  Should the owner fail to exhibit evidence of compliance within 30 days after the mailing of the letter of notification, the Building Inspector shall cause the owner to be cited for violation of this regulation. 
D.  Painted Sign Maintenance: The owner of any sign as defined and regulated by this Regulation shall be required to have properly painted at least once every two (2) years all parts and supports of the sign, unless the same are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 13), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-914. - Office parks, shopping centers and planned districts. 
In the case of a proposed office park, shopping center, or other grouping of three or more tenants or establishments (new or remodeled), the developer shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission a master signage plan for all permanent exterior signs. Such plan shall set standards that shall run with all leases or sales of portions of the development. A full and accurate description of all signs shall be included indicating location, placement, materials, graphic design styles, type of illumination, etc. Final development plans shall not be approved until the Planning Commission has approved the sign standards. For purposes of this section the terms "shopping center, office park, or their groupings," shall mean a project of one or more buildings that has been planned as an integrated unit or cluster of units on property under unified control or ownership. The sale, subdivision, or other partition of the site does not exempt the project or portions thereof from complying with these regulations. 
A.  In the case of a "shopping center, office park or other grouping" which is occupied by more than one tenant, one (1) monument sign or ground sign may be permitted in addition to the wall mounted signs, which sign shall depict only the name of the center or grouping of shops or offices. 
B.  Where all tenants and/or property owners within a building or "shopping center, office park or other grouping" agree in writing, one tenant may, in lieu of the wall sign permitted, have one (1) monument sign or ground sign depicting the business or product. The design and location of this sign shall be subject to approval of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 14), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-915. - District regulations. 
ZONING DISTRICT 
STANDARDS 	AP 	R-1 	R-2 	M-P 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 
	A 	B 	C 	C 	C 	D 	E 	F 
FUNCTIONAL SIGN TYPES 
Advertising Sign 							P 	P 
Bulletin Board 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Business Sign 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 
Construction Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Identification Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Name Plate Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Temporary Sign 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
STRUCTURAL SIGN TYPES 
Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign 					P 	P 	P 	P 
Elevated Sign 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 
Ground Sign 		P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
Monument Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
Portable Display Sign 					P 		P 	P 
Projecting Sign 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 
Wall Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Roof Sign 							P 	P 
Window Sign 	P 				P 	P 	P 	P 
 
A.  Permitted (by right): Functional and Structural Sign Types identified in a zoning district column of the Sign Table with a "P" are "permitted by right" and shall be permitted in such zoning district. 
B.  Not Permitted: Functional and Structural Sign Types not designated in a zoning district column of the Sign Table as permitted by right are not allowed in such zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 15), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-916. - Sign standards. 
A.  "A-P" Airport District 
(1)  Functional Types Permitted: 
(a)  Business; 
(b)  Construction; 
(c)  Identification; 
(d)  Name Plate. 
(2)  Structural Types Permitted: 
(a)  Elevated Signs; 
(b)  Projecting; 
(c)  Monument; 
(d)  Wall; 
(e)  Window. 
(3)  Number of Signs Permitted: 
(a)  Construction - One per parcel. 
(b)  Elevated - One per parcel. 
(c)  Monument - One per parcel. 
(d)  Projecting - One per parcel. 
(4)  Maximum Gross Surface Area: 
(a)  Elevated - 64 square feet. 
(b)  Monument - 32 Square feet. 
(c)  Projecting - 64 square feet. 
(d)  Temporary - As regulated by Section 19-912 of this Article. 
(e)  Wall - The total area of the wall sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet from which the sign is attached. 
(5)  Maximum Height: Sign height will be required to be approved by the FAA prior to construction. 
(6)  Required Setback: 0 feet. 
(7)  Illumination: Illuminated signs shall be permitted. 
(8)  The FAA will review and approve all projects prior to construction. 
B.  "R-1" Single-Family District, "R-2" Multifamily District, "M-P" Manufactured Home Park Residential District: 
(1)  Functional Types Permitted: 
(a)  Bulletin Board; 
(b)  Identification; 
(c)  Name Plate; 
(d)  Temporary. 
(2)  Structural Types Permitted: 
(a)  Ground, 
(b)  Monument. 
(3)  Number of Signs Permitted: One (1) sign per parcel. 
(4)  Maximum Gross Area: 
(a)  Bulletin board and identification signs: 32 square feet. 
(b)  Construction signs: 20 square feet. 
(c)  Temporary signs: As regulated by Section 19-912 of this Article. 
(d)  Identification and Name Plate signs: 4 square feet. 
(e)  Monument and Ground signs: 32 square feet only in association with a church, hospital, subdivision and Manufactured Home Park. 
(5)  Maximum Height: 10 feet. 
(6)  Required Setback: No sign shall be placed closer to the front property line than one-half the distance of the front yard; except that real estate signs, name plate signs and identification signs shall be exempt from setback requirements. 
(7)  Illumination: Bulletin board signs may be indirectly illuminated with incandescent or fluorescent lighting. 
C.  "C-1" General Business District: 
(1)  Functional Types Permitted: 
(a)  Bulletin Board; 
(b)  Business; 
(c)  Identification; 
(d)  Name Plate; 
(e)  Temporary. 
(2)  Structural Types Permitted: 
(a)  Awning, Canopy or Marquee; 
(b)  Ground; 
(c)  Monument; 
(d)  Elevated; 
(e)  Portable; 
(f)  Projection; 
(g)  Wall; 
(h)  Window. 
(3)  Number of Signs Permitted: 
(a)  Awning, canopy or marquee signs and window signs: No limitations. 
(a)[(b)]  Construction, ground, monument, elevated or portable display signs: One per parcel. 
(b)[(c)]  Wall or projecting signs: One per parcel. 
(4)  Maximum Gross Area: 
(a)  Ground and Monument - 32 Square feet. 
(b)  Elevated - One square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage, not to exceed four hundred (400) square feet per parcel. 
(c)  Portable - 32 Square feet. 
(d)  Projecting - One square foot for each two (2) lineal feet of the building wall from which the sign projects, not to exceed 64 square feet. The total area of a projecting sign shall be subtracted from the permitted total area of the wall sign. 
(e)  Wall - The total area of the wall sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet from which the sign is attached. 
(5)  Maximum Height: 
(a)  All signs north and east of a line extending north of the center of the intersection of 8th Street and Cattle Trail, thence south to the center of the intersection of 19th Street and Cattle Trail, thence east along the centerline of 19th Street to the center of the intersection of Eustis Avenue and 19th Street, thence north along the centerline of Eustis Avenue to the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, thence a line extending east along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(b)  All signs south and west of a line extending north of the center of the intersection of 8th Street and Cattle Trial, thence south to the center of the intersection of 19th Street and Cattle Trial, thence east along the centerline of 19th Street to the center of the intersection of Eustis Avenue and 19th Street, thence north along the centerline of Eustis Avenue to the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, thence a line extending east along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, shall have a maximum height of eighty (80) feet. 
(6)  Required Setback: No required setback. 
(7)  Illumination: Illuminated signs shall be permitted. 
D.  "C-2" Central Business District: 
(1)  Functional Types Permitted: 
a.  Bulletin Board; 
b.  Business; 
c.  Identification; 
d.  Name Plate; 
e.  Temporary. 
(2)  Structural Types Permitted: 
a.  Awning, Canopy or Marquee; 
b.  Elevated; 
c.  Projecting; 
d.  Wall; 
e.  Window. 
(3)  Number of Signs Permitted: 
(a)  Awning, canopy or marquee signs and window signs: No limitation. 
(b)  Construction or elevated signs: One per parcel. 
(c)  Wall and projecting signs: One per parcel. 
(4)  Maximum Gross Surface Area: 
(a)  Construction - 20 Square feet per parcel. 
(b)  Elevated - One square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage, not to exceed 150 Square feet per parcel. 
(c)  Projecting - One square foot for each two (2) lineal feet of building wall from which the sign projects, not to exceed 64 square feet. The total area of the projecting sign shall be subtracted from the permitted total area of wall signs. 
(d)  Wall - The total area of the wall sign shall not exceed three (3) lineal feet of the building wall from which the sign is attached. 
(5)  Maximum Height: 
(a)  35 feet; except wall and projecting signs may extend to the roof eave line or parapet wall. 
(6)  Required Setback: 0 feet. 
(7)  Illumination: Illuminated signs shall be permitted. 
E.  "I-1" Light Industrial District and "I-2" Heavy Industrial District: 
(1)  Functional Types Permitted: 
(a)  Advertising; 
(b)  Business; 
(c)  Identification; 
(d)  Name Plate; 
(e)  Temporary. 
(2)  Structural Types Permitted: 
(a)  Awning, Canopy or Marquee; 
(b)  Elevated; 
(c)  Ground; 
(d)  Monument; 
(e)  Portable; 
(f)  Projecting; 
(g)  Roof; 
(h)  Wall; 
(i)  Window. 
(3)  Number of Signs Permitted: Except as modified by Advertising Signs in sub-section 19-916.F.8. below. 
(a)  Awning, canopy or marquee signs and window signs: No limit. 
(b)  Construction, ground, monument, portable or elevated signs: One per parcel. 
(c)  Wall, projecting, and roof signs: One per parcel. 
(4)  Maximum Gross Surface Area: 
(a)  Construction - 20 Square feet per parcel. 
(b)  Elevated - One square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage, not to exceed 400 square feet per parcel. 
(c)  Ground, Monument and Portable - 32 Square feet per parcel. 
(d)  Wall - the total area of the wall sign shall not exceed three (3) square feet for each lineal foot of building wall from which the sign is attached. 
(e)  Projecting - One square foot for each lineal feet of the building wall from which the sign projects, not to exceed 64 square feet. The total area of the projecting signs shall be subtracted from the permitted total area of the wall sign. 
(f)  Roof - 150 Square feet per parcel. 
(g)  Advertising - 400 Square feet per parcel. 
(5)  Maximum Height: 
(a)  All signs north and east of a line extending north of the center of the intersection of 8th Street and Cattle Trail, thence south to the center of the intersection of 19th Street and Cattle Trail, thence east along the centerline of 19th Street to the center of the intersection of Eustis Avenue and 19th Street, thence north along the centerline of Eustis Avenue to the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, thence a line extending east along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, except as modified by Advertising Signs in sub-section F.8 below. 
(b)  All signs south and west of a line extending north of the center of the intersection of 8th Street and Cattle Trial, thence south to the center of the intersection of 19th Street and Cattle Trial, thence east along the centerline of 19th Street to the center of the intersection of Eustis Avenue and 19th Street, thence north along the centerline of Eustis Avenue to the centerline of the railroad right-of-way, thence a line extending east along the center line of the railroad right-of-way, shall have a maximum height of eighty (80) feet, except as modified by Advertising Signs in sub-section 19-916.F.8. below. 
(6)  Required Setback: No Setback required, except as modified in sub-section F.8 below. 
(7)  Illumination: Illuminated signs shall be permitted, except as modified by Advertising Signs in sub-section 19-916.F.8. below. 
(8)  Advertising Signs (Billboards): Advertising signs (billboards) may be allowed within the C-1, General Business District; I-1, Light Industrial District and I-2, Heavy Industrial District, provided that they meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Advertising signs visible from a primary highway shall not be erected within the limits of a city less than 300 feet of another sign on the same side of the highway. Advertising signs visible from a freeway or interstate highway shall not be erected within 500 feet of another sign on the same side of the highway. Signs shall be measured from the widest part of each structure, i.e. lights and walkways. 
(b)  No part of an advertising sign shall project or protrude into a public right-of-way. 
(c)  The surface display area of any side of an advertising sign may not exceed 1,200 square feet, per facing, including border, trim, embellishments, but not including base or apron, supports, and other structural members. Two signs not exceeding 600 square feet each may be erected in a facing, side by side or "double decked", and doubled-faced, back-to-back or V-type signs shall be permitted and shall be treated as one structure with a maximum area of 1,200 square feet permitted for each side or facing. To be classified as "back-to-back" there must not be more than 15 feet between structures or faces, to allow for cross bracing. 
(d)  Signs shall not be erected which exceed 30 feet in height, 60 feet in length, per facing, but not including base or apron, supports, and other structural members. Total sign structure height will be regulated as stated in Section 19-916.F(5). 
(e)  No advertising sign shall be on top of, cantilevered, or otherwise suspended above the roof of any building. 
(f)  An advertising sign may be illuminated, provided such illumination is concentrated on the surface of the sign and is so located as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of an adjacent street or highway, the path of on-coming vehicles, or any adjacent premises. In no event shall any advertising sign have flashing or intermittent lights, nor shall the lights be permitted to rotate or oscillate. 
(g)  An advertising sign must be constructed in such a fashion that it will withstand all wind and vibration forces that can normally be expected to occur in the vicinity. An advertising sign must be maintained so as to assure proper alignment of structure, continued structural soundness, and continued readability of message. 
(h)  An advertising sign established within a business, commercial, or industrial area, as defined in the "Highway Advertising Act of 1972" (1972 PA 106, as amended) bordering interstate highways, freeways or primary highways as defined in said Act shall, in addition to complying with the above conditions, also comply with all applicable provisions of the Act and the regulations provided there under, as such may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 9, § 16), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-917—19-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 19-1001. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, and purposes. 
A.  Statutory Authorization. 
(1)  The Legislature of the State of Kansas has in K.S.A. 12-741 et seq., and specifically in K.S.A. 12-766, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Governing Body of the City of Goodland, Kansas, ordains as follows: 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
(1)  Flood Losses Resulting from Periodic Inundation: The special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Goodland, Kansas are subject to inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  General Causes of the Flood Losses: These flood losses are caused by (1) the cumulative effect of development in any delineated floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities; and (2) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods, hazardous to others, inadequately elevated, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. 
(1)  It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare; to minimize those losses described in Article I, Section B(1); to establish or maintain the community's eligibility for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 59.22(a)(3); and to meet the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3(b) and K.A.R. 5-44-4 by applying the provisions of this chapter to: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial construction; and 
(c)  Protect individuals from buying lands that are unsuited for the intended development purposes due to the flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1002. - General provisions. 
A.  Lands To Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Goodland, Kansas identified as unnumbered A zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated February 24, 1981 as amended, and any future revisions thereto. This chapter shall additionally apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Goodland, Kansas that have not been mapped on a FIRM or a Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) and have been identified by the community as having the presence of flood-prone areas. In all areas covered by this chapter, no development shall be permitted except through the issuance of a floodplain development permit, granted by the Governing Body or its duly designated representative under such safeguards and restrictions as the Governing Body or the designated representative may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community, and as specifically noted in Article IV. 
B.  Compliance. No development located within the special flood hazard areas of this community shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
C.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only. 
D.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by Kansas Statutes. 
E.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside unnumbered A zones or land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create a liability on the part of City of Goodland, Kansas, any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
F.  Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1003. - Administration. 
A.  Floodplain Development Permit. 
(1)  A floodplain development permit shall be required for all proposed construction or other development, including the placement of manufactured homes, in the areas described in Article II, Section A. No person, firm, corporation, or unit of government shall initiate any development or substantial-improvement or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a separate floodplain development permit for each structure or other development. 
B.  Designation of Floodplain Administrator. 
(1)  The Building Official for the City of Goodland, Kansas, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter as the Floodplain Administrator. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator. 
(1)  Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(a)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the floodplain development permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(b)  Review of all applications for floodplain development permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by Federal, State, or local law; 
(c)  Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(d)  Issue floodplain development permits for all approved applications; 
(e)  Notify adjacent communities and the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(f)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(g)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(h)  Verify and maintain a record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) that the new or substantially improved non-residential structures have been floodproofed; and 
(i)  When floodproofing techniques are utilized for a particular non-residential structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall require certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 
D.  Application for Floodplain Development Permit. 
(1)  To obtain a floodplain development permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every floodplain development permit application shall: 
(a)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block and tract, house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and specifically locate the proposed building or work; 
(b)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the floodplain development permit; 
(c)  Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is intended; 
(d)  Indicate the assessed value of the structure and the fair market value of the improvement; 
(e)  Identify the existing base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed development; 
(f)  Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Floodplain Administrator; 
(g)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications for proposed construction; and 
(h)  Be signed by the permittee or his authorized agent who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1004. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General Standards. 
(1)  No permit for floodplain development shall be granted for new construction, substantial-improvements, and other improvements, including the placement of manufactured homes, within any unnumbered A zone unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. 
(2)  All areas identified as unnumbered A zones on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) are subject to inundation of the 100-year flood; however, the base flood elevation is not provided. Development within unnumbered A zones is subject to all provisions of this chapter. If Flood Insurance Study data is not available, the community shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available from Federal, State, or other sources. 
(3)  All new construction, subdivision proposals, substantial-improvements, prefabricated buildings, placement of manufactured homes, and other developments shall require: 
(a)  Design or adequate anchorage to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(b)  Construction with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  utilization of methods and practices that minimize flood damages; 
(d)  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service facilities be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(e)  New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and on-site waste disposal systems be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination; and 
(f)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, located within special flood hazard areas are required to assure that: 
1.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
4.  All proposals for development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is lesser, include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(4)  Agricultural Structures. 
(a)  Structures used solely for agricultural purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; there is no permanent retail, wholesale, or manufacturing use included in the structure; a variance has been granted from the floodplain management requirements of this chapter; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(5)  Accessory Structures. 
(a)  Structures used solely for parking and limited storage purposes, not attached to any other structure on the site, of limited investment value, and not larger than 400 square feet, may be constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed provided there is no human habitation or occupancy of the structure; the structure is of single-wall design; a variance has been granted from the standard floodplain management requirements of this chapter; and a floodplain development permit has been issued. 
(6)  Critical Facilities. 
(a)  All new or substantially improved critical nonresidential facilities including, but not limited, to governmental buildings, police stations, fire stations, hospitals, orphanages, penal institutions, communication centers, water and sewer pumping stations, water and sewer treatment facilities, transportation maintenance facilities, places of public assembly, emergency aviation facilities, and schools shall be elevated above the .2 percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 500-year flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the 500-year flood level the structure is water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Article 3, Section C(9). 
(b)  All critical facilities shall have access routes that are above the elevation of the 500-year flood. 
(c)  No critical facilities shall be constructed in any designated floodway. 
(7)  Storage, Material, and Equipment. 
(a)  The storage or processing of materials within the special flood hazard area that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. 
(b)  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods, if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning. 
(8)  Hazardous Materials. 
(a)  All hazardous material storage and handling sites shall be located out of the special flood hazard area. 
(9)  Nonconforming Use. 
(a)  A structure, or the use of a structure or premises that was lawful before the passage or amendment of the ordinance, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(b)  If such structure, use, or utility service is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future use of the building shall conform to this chapter. 
(c)  If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the pre-damaged market value of the structure. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, building, safety codes, regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination. 
(10)  Cumulative Improvement. 
(a)  A structure may be improved (remodeled or enlarged) without conforming to current requirements for elevation so long as the cumulative value of all work done within the last five calendar years does not exceed 50 percent of the structure's current market value. If the cumulative value of the improvement exceeds 50 percent of the structure's current market value, the structure must be brought into compliance with Article 4, Section B(1) which requires elevation of residential structures to or above the base flood elevation or the elevation/floodproofing of non-residential structures to or above the base flood elevation. 
B.  Specific Standards. 
(1)  In all areas of special flood hazard, once base flood elevation data is obtained, as set forth in Article 4, Section A(2), the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential Construction: New construction or substantial-improvement of any residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot above base flood level. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. 
(b)  Non-Residential Construction: New construction or substantial-improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in Article 3, Section C(9). 
(c)  Require, for all new construction and substantial-improvements, that fully enclosed areas below lowest floor used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
(2)  The bottom of all opening shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(2)  In all areas of special flood hazard, once floodway data is obtained, as set forth in Article 4, Section A(2), the following provisions are required: 
(a)  The designated floodway shall be based on the standard that the area chosen for the floodway must be designed to carry the waters of the base flood, without increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot at any point; and 
(b)  the community shall prohibit any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial-improvements, and other development within the designated regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  Manufactured Homes. 
(1)  All manufactured homes to be placed within special flood hazard areas shall be required to be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
(2)  Require manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within unnumbered A zones on the community's FIRM or FHBM on sites: 
(a)  Outside of manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(b)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(c)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(d)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial-damage" as the result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood level and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. 
(3)  Require that manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within unnumbered A zones on the community's FIRM or FHBM, that are not subject to the provisions of Article 4, Section C(2) of this chapter, be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of one (1) foot above the base flood level; or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely attached to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. The elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor. 
D.  Recreational Vehicles. 
(1)  Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within unnumbered A zones on the community's FIRM or FHBM either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use*; or 
(c)  Meet the permitting, elevating, and the anchoring requirements for manufactured homes of this chapter. 
*A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1005. - Floodplain management variance procedures. 
A.  Establishment of Appeal Board. 
(1)  The Board of Zoning Appeals as established by the City of Goodland, Kansas shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the floodplain management requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Responsibility of Appeal Board. 
(1)  Where an application for a floodplain development permit or request for a variance from the floodplain management ordinance is denied by the Floodplain Official, the applicant may apply for such floodplain development permit or variance directly to the Appeal Board, as defined in Article 5, Section A. 
(2)  The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  Further Appeals. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court of the County as provided in K.S.A. 12-759 and 12-760. 
D.  Floodplain Management Variance Criteria. 
(1)  In passing upon such applications for variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all technical data and evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the following criteria: 
(a)  Danger to life and property due to flood damage; 
(b)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(c)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(d)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(e)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(f)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flood damage, for the proposed use; 
(g)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(h)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(i)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(j)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(k)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; streets; and bridges. 
E.  Conditions For Approving Floodplain Management Variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial-improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items 2 through 6 below have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or local inventory of historic places upon determination, provided the proposed activity will not preclude the structure's continued historic designation. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (a) showing of good and sufficient cause, (b) determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(6)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that: (a) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (b) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter. 
F.  Conditions For Approving Variances for Agricultural Structures. 
(1)  Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Article 5, Sections D and E of this chapter: 
(2)  In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
(a)  All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the agricultural structure. Residential structures, such as farmhouses, cannot be considered agricultural structures. 
(b)  Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). 
(c)  For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Article 4, Section A(3)(b) of this ordinance. 
(d)  The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with Article 4, Section A (3)(a) of this ordinance. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(e)  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Article 4, Section A (3)(d) of this ordinance. 
(f)  The agricultural structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Article 4, Section B(1)(c) of this ordinance. 
(g)  The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of Article 4, Section B(2)(b) of this ordinance. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood. 
(h)  Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage. 
(i)  No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the agricultural structures. 
(j)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter. 
(k)  Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and a registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
G.  Conditions for Approving Variances for Accessory Structures. 
(1)  Any variance granted for an accessory structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Article 5, Sections D and E of this ordinance: 
(2)  In order to minimize flood damages during the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued for accessory structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-floodproofed: 
(a)  Use of the accessory structures must be solely for parking and limited storage purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). 
(b)  For any new or substantially damaged accessory structures, the exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Article 4, Section A(3)(b) of this ordinance. 
(c)  The accessory structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in accordance with Article 4, Section A(3)(a) of this ordinance. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces. 
(d)  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Article 4, Section A (3)(d) of this ordinance. 
(e)  The accessory structures must meet all National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) opening requirements. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters in accordance with Article 4, Section B(1)(c) of this ordinance. 
(f)  The accessory structures must comply with the floodplain management floodway encroachment provisions of Article 4, Section B(2)(b) of this ordinance. No variances may be issued for accessory structures within any designated floodway, if any increase in flood levels would result during the 100-year flood. 
(g)  Equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected from any flood damage. 
(h)  No disaster relief assistance under any program administered by any Federal agency shall be paid for any repair or restoration costs of the accessory structures. 
(i)  A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that (1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage and (2) such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required by this chapter. 
(j)  Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and approved by the community and registered professional engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for construction. 
H.  Conditions for Approving Variances for Temporary Structures. 
(1)  Any variance granted for a temporary structure shall be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in Article 5, Sections D and E of this ordinance: 
(2)  A temporary structure may be considered for location within the one percent annual chance flood event, also referred to as the 100-year floodplain only when all of the following criteria are met: 
(a)  Use of the temporary structure is unique to the land to be developed and cannot be located outside of the floodplain nor meet the NFIP design standards; 
(b)  Denial of the temporary structure permit will create an undue hardship on the property owner; 
(c)  Community has adopted up-to-date NFIP and building regulations to direct placement and removal of the temporary structure; and 
(d)  Community has sufficient staff to monitor the placement, use, and removal of the temporary structure throughout the duration of the permit. 
(3)  Once all of the above conditions are met, an application for a special use permit must be made to the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider all applications for special use permits for a temporary structure based on the following criteria: 
(a)  The placement of any temporary structure within the special flood hazard areas as shown on the community's adopted FEMA/NFIP map shall require an approved special use permit. The special use permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed 180 days. 
(b)  Special use permits applications, for a temporary structure to be located in special flood hazard areas, shall conform to the standard public hearing process prior to any community action on the permit request. 
(c)  An emergency plan for the removal of the temporary structure that includes specific removal criteria and time frames from the agency or firm responsible for providing the manpower, equipment, and the relocation and disconnection of all utilities shall be required as part of the special use permit application for the placement of any temporary structure. 
(d)  On or before the expiration of the end of the 180 day special use permit period, the temporary structure shall be removed from the site. All utilities, including water, sewer, communication, and electrical services shall be disconnected. 
(e)  To ensure the continuous mobility of the temporary structure for the duration of the permit, the temporary structure shall retain its wheels and tires, licenses, and towing appurtenance on the structures at all times. 
(f)  Under emergency flooding conditions, the temporary structure shall be removed immediately or as directed by the community and as specified in the emergency removal plan. 
(g)  Location of any temporary structure within the regulatory floodway requires the provision of a "no-rise" certificate by a registered professional engineer. 
(h)  Violation of or non-compliance with any of the stated conditions of the special use permit during the term thereof, shall make the permit subject to revocation by resolution of the governing body of the community. Issuance of permit revocation notice shall be made to the landowner, the occupant of the land, and to the general public. 
(i)  Any deviation from the approved site plan shall be deemed a violation of the special use permit approval and the uses allowed shall automatically be revoked. The subsequent use of the land shall be as it was prior to the special permit approval. In event of any violation, all permitted special uses shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be illegal, non-conforming uses and shall be summarily removed and abated. 
If the temporary structure is to be returned to its previously occupied site, the process for issuing a special use permit must be repeated in full. Any subsequent permit shall be valid for 180 days only. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1006. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with granting of variances) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($ 1,000.00), and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Goodland, Kansas or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1007. - Amendments. 
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Goodland, Kansas. At least 20 days shall elapse between the date of this publication and the public hearing. A copy of such amendments will be provided to the FEMA Region VII office. The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the NFIP regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 10, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1008. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"100-year Flood" see "base flood." 
"Accessory Structure" means the same as "appurtenant structure." 
"Actuarial Rates" see "risk premium rates." 
"Administrator" means the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
"Agency" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
"Agricultural Commodities" means agricultural products and livestock. 
"Agricultural Structure" means any structure used exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities. 
"Appeal" means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
"Appurtenant Structure" means a structure that is on the same parcel of property as the principle structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
"Area of Special Flood Hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
"Base Flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
"Building" see "structure. 
"Chief Executive Officer" or "Chief Elected Official" means the official of the community who is charged with the authority to implement and administer laws, ordinances, and regulations for that community. 
"Community" means any State or area or political subdivision thereof, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, levees, levee systems, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Elevated Building" means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
"Eligible Community" or "Participating Community" means a community for which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance under the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
"Existing Construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
"Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood" or "Flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of inland waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined above in item (1). 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood areas having special flood hazards have been designated as (unnumbered or numbered) A zones. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Floodplain" or "Flood-prone Area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see "flooding"). 
"Floodplain Management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain Management Regulations" means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain and grading ordinances) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents. 
"Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
"Functionally Dependent Use" means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This term includes only docking facilities and facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Highest Adjacent Grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic Structure" means any structure that is (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or (2) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Lowest Floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable floodproofing design requirements of this chapter. 
"Manufactured Home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Map" means the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
"Market Value" or "Fair Market Value" means an estimate of what is fair, economic, just and equitable value under normal local market conditions. 
"Mean Sea Level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced. 
"New Construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
"(NFIP)" means the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). 
"Participating Community" also known as an "eligible community," means a community in which the Administrator has authorized the sale of flood insurance. 
"Person" includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including Federal, State, and local governments and agencies. 
"Principally Above Ground" means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure, less land value, is above ground. 
"Recreational Vehicle" means a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Remedy A Violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with Federal, State, or local floodplain management regulations; or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
"Risk Premium Rates" means those rates established by the Administrator pursuant to individual community studies and investigations which are undertaken to provide flood insurance in accordance with Section 1307 of the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and the accepted actuarial principles. "Risk premium rates" include provisions for operating costs and allowances. 
"Special Flood Hazard Area" see "area of special flood hazard." 
"Special Hazard Area" means an area having special flood hazards and shown on a FIRM or FHBM as zones (unnumbered or numbered) A, AO, AE, or AH. 
"Start of Construction" includes substantial-improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvements were within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, the installation of streets and/or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, the erection of temporary forms, nor installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial-improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"State Coordinating Agency" means the Division of Water Resources, Kansas Department of Agriculture, or other office designated by the governor of the state or by state statute at the request of the Administrator to assist in the implementation of the NFIP in the state of Kansas. 
"Structure" means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. "Structure" for insurance purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
"Substantial-Damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial-Improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial-damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Temporary Structure" means a structure permitted in a district for a period not to exceed 180 days and is required to be removed upon the expiration of the permit period. Temporary structures may include recreational vehicles, temporary construction offices, or temporary business facilities used until permanent facilities can be constructed, but at no time shall it include manufactured homes used as residences. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief by the community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. Flood insurance requirements remain in place for any varied use or structure and cannot be varied by the community. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water Surface Elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain.  
Secs. 19-1009—19-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
Sec. 19-1101. - General. 
Nonconformities are of three types: nonconforming lots of record, nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses. A definition of each type is as follows: 
A.  Nonconforming Lot of Record: An unimproved lot which is part of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded prior to the adoption of these regulations, and neither said lot nor parcel complies with the lot width or area requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located. 
B.  Nonconforming Structure: An existing structure which does not comply with the height or yard requirements which are applicable to new structures in the zoning district in which it is located. 
C.  Nonconforming Use: An existing use of a structure or of land which does not comply with the use regulations applicable to new uses in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 11, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1102. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
The Building Inspector shall issue a building permit for any nonconforming lot of record, provided that: 
A.  Said lot is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning regulations; and 
B.  Said lot has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations; and 
C.  Said lot can meet all yard regulations for the district in which it is located; and 
D.  Said lot can be served by municipal sewerage disposal; or can meet minimum standards for on-site sewage treatment as required by Northwest Local Environmental Protection Group, should the City determine that the lot cannot be served by the municipal disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 11, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1103. - Nonconforming structures. 
A.  Authority to Continue: Any nonconforming structure which is devoted to a use which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located, may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful. 
B.  Enlargement, Repair, Alterations: Any nonconforming structure may be enlarged, maintained, repaired or remodeled; provided, however, no such enlargement, maintenance, repair or remodeling shall either create any additional nonconformity or increase the degree of existing nonconformity of all or any part of such structure; provided further, existing manufactured home parks not meeting the requirements of these regulations shall be declared nonconforming and shall not be permitted to add spaces or make any improvements inconsistent with the terms and conditions of these regulations. 
C.  Damage or Destruction: In the event that any nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its appraised value, such structure shall not be restored unless it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. When a structure is damaged to the extent of 50 percent or less, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
D.  Moving: No nonconforming structure shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless the entire structure shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after being moved. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 11, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1104. - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Authority to Continue: Any lawfully existing nonconforming use or part or all of a structure or any lawfully existing nonconforming use of land, may be continued, so long as otherwise lawful. 
B.  Ordinary Repair and Maintenance: 
(1)  Normal maintenance and incidental repair, or replacement, installation or relocation of non-bearing walls, non-bearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, may be performed on any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use. 
(2)  Nothing in these regulations shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of a structure in accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with protecting the public safety and who declares such structure to be unsafe and orders its restoration to a safe condition. 
C.  Extension: A nonconforming use shall not be extended, expanded, enlarged, or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activities shall include, without being limited to: 
(1)  Extension of such use to any structure or land area other than that occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of these regulations (or on the effective date of subsequent amendments hereto that cause such use to become nonconforming). 
(2)  Extension of such use within a structure to any portion of the floor area that was not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date of these regulations (or on the effective date of subsequent amendments hereto that cause such use to become nonconforming); provided, however, that such use may be extended throughout any part of such structure that was lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use on such effective date. 
D.  Enlargement: No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged or added to in any manner unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
E.  Damage or Destruction: In the event that any structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its appraised value, such structure shall not be restored unless such structure and the use thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. When such damage or destruction is 50 percent or less, no repairs or restoration shall be made unless a building permit is obtained, and restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
F.  Moving: No structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use and no conforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part for any distance whatever, to any other location on the same or any other lot, unless the entire structure and the use thereof or the use of land shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning districts in which it is located after being so moved. 
G.  Change in Use: If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may as a special use be changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with Article 14. Once a change is made to a more appropriate use, the use shall not be returned to the original use or a less appropriate use. 
H.  Abandonment or Discontinuance: When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned for a period of 12 consecutive months, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished or resumed, and any subsequent use or occupancy of such land shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which such land is located. 
I.  Nonconforming Accessory Uses: No use which is accessory to a principal nonconforming use shall continue after such principal use shall cease or terminate. 
J.  Nonconforming Residential Uses: Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 4(C) and 4(D), any structure which is devoted to a residential use and which is located in a business or industrial district, may be remodeled, extended, expanded, and enlarged; provided that after any such remodeling, expansion or enlargement, such structure shall not be used to accommodate a greater number of dwelling or lodging units than such structure accommodated prior to any such work. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 11, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1105. - Status of conditional uses. 
A.  Status of Existing Conditional Uses: Where a use exists at the effective date of these regulations and is permitted by these regulations only as a conditional use in the zoning district in which it is located, such use shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a lawful conforming use in such zoning district. Such conditional use shall not be enlarged or expanded unless a conditional use application is approved as set out in Article XII of these regulations. 
B.  Status of Future Conditional Uses: Any use for which a conditional use permit has been issued, as provided in these regulations, shall not be deemed to be a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a lawful conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 11, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-1106—19-1200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 19-1201. - General considerations. 
A.  Delegation of Power: The City Commission shall decide whether conditional use permits shall be granted only after having received a recommendation from the Planning Commission. In no event shall a conditional use permit be granted where the proposed use is not authorized by the terms of these regulations, or where the standards of this Article are not found to exist. 
B.  Conditions and Guarantees: Prior to the granting of any conditional use permit, the Planning Commission or City Commission may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use permit as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and conditions contained herein. In all cases in which a conditional use permit is granted, the Planning Commission may recommend or the City Commission may require such evidence and guarantees as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the conditions stipulated are being, and will be, fully complied with. 
C.  Conditional Use Permits in Residential Districts: In no event shall conditional use permits in residential districts be transferable from an owner-applicant to a subsequent owner of the subject real estate or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 12, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1202. - Procedures. 
A.  Application: A written application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the Building Official and shall include a statement indicating the section of the regulations under which the permit is sought, the grounds upon which it is requested, and sufficient evidence to show that the use will conform to the standards set forth. The application shall be accompanied by an area map and site plan of the subject property. 
B.  Fees: Every application for a conditional use permit shall be subject to a filing fee as established by the City Commission. (See Article 19 [of the ordinance from which this section derived].) 
C.  Site Plan: All applicants for a conditional use permit shall submit with their application five (5) copies of a development plan for the property which shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
(a)  Approximate size and locations of all structures. 
(b)  Access from streets. 
(c)  Parking arrangements and numbers of spaces. 
(d)  Interior drives and service areas. 
(e)  Landscaped areas. 
(f)  All proposed signs. 
(2)  Location map showing development and zoning of adjacent property within 100 feet. 
(3)  The full legal description of the boundaries of said development area. 
(4)  A description of the general character of all structures. 
D.  Hearing: Upon receipt of the formal application and all accompanying material, the Building Official shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission; provided, however, that notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 20 days prior to the date set for hearing. The Planning Commission shall submit a recommendation to their City Commission within 30 days after the close of the public hearing. 
E.  Findings: In making a recommendation to the City Commission, the Planning Commission shall specify the particular grounds relied upon and their relation to the proposed use and shall make affirmative findings that the proposed use conforms with the general standards set forth in this Article. In no case shall a conditional use permit be granted if the proposed use will constitute a nuisance or a public health or safety hazard to adjacent properties or to the community at large. 
F.  Action by City Commission: The City Commission shall consider the Planning Commission's recommendation at the next regularly scheduled City Commission meeting for which the agenda item can be docketed. The City Commission shall consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission and act in accordance with the procedures for amending zoning district boundaries. If the City Commission fails to act upon a recommendation within 120 days from the receipt thereof, the application shall be deemed to have been denied. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 12, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1203. - Standards for issuance of conditional use permits. 
Before any permit shall be granted, the Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying that adequate provision has been made for the following: 
A.  The location and size of the proposed use in relation to the site and to adjacent sites and uses of property, and the nature and intensity of operations proposed thereon. 
B.  Accessibility of the property to police, fire, refuse collection and other municipal services; adequacy of ingress and egress to and within the site; traffic flow and control; and the adequacy of off-street parking and loading areas. 
C.  Utilities and services, including water, sewer, drainage, gas, and electricity, with particular reference to location, availability, capacity and compatibility. 
D.  The location, nature, and height of structures, walls, fences, and other improvements; their relation to adjacent property and uses; and the need for buffering or screening. 
E.  The adequacy of required yard and open space requirements and sign provisions. 
F.  The general compatibility with adjacent properties, other properties in the district, and the general safety, health, comfort and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 12, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1204. - Additional conditions for conditional uses. 
In granting a conditional use, the City may impose such conditions, safeguards and restrictions upon the premises to reduce or minimize any potential injurious effect of such conditional uses upon other property in the neighborhood, and to carry out the general purpose and intent of these regulations. The use standards specified for the uses listed in Section 19-502 of Article V shall also be requirements for the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 12, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1205. - Time limit. 
A.  Sunset: A conditional use permit shall expire, upon public hearing, unless a building permit is taken within 12 months to effectuate such conditionally permitted use; or if no building permit is required, evidence of use is filed with building inspector. 
B.  Abandonment: Once a conditionally permitted use ceases or is abandoned for a period of more than 12 months, the conditional use permit shall expire upon public hearing; except that the conditional use permit for an auto salvage yard shall automatically expire if the state license for operating the auto salvage yard lapses for a period of time more than six months. 
C.  Home Occupation: A conditional use permit for a home occupation shall not be transferable to a new owner of the real estate. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 12, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-1206—19-1300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 19-1301. - Intent. 
The City of Goodland recognizes that the very nature of land development creates potential for traffic congestion, overcrowding, adverse visual environmental impacts, and health problems. Also, the City strives to achieve the goal of promoting growth in Goodland, while stabilizing the established residential patterns of the area. The City seeks to ensure that any location that must accommodate urban uses, shall be subject to Site Plan Review by the Planning Commission. The Site Plan Review process shall help ensure that the meaning and intent of the Zoning Regulations, and all portions thereof, are fully complied with. 
The Site Plan Review regulates the development of structures and sites in a manner that considers the following concerns: 
A.  The balancing of landowners' rights to use their land, with the corresponding rights of abutting and neighboring landowners to live without undue disturbances (e.g., noise, smoke, fumes, dust, odor, glare, stormwater runoff, etc.); 
B.  The convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site, and in relation to adjacent areas or roads; 
C.  The adequacy of waste disposal methods and protection from pollution of surface or groundwater; 
D.  The protection of historic and natural environmental features on the site under review, and in adjacent areas; and 
E.  The stability of the built environment—particularly residential neighborhoods—by promoting urban development that is compatible with clearly identified natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1302. - Applicability. 
The Building Official shall require that all applications for building permits for developments in the multifamily, commercial and industrial zoning districts be subject to Site Plan Review in accordance with these regulations, and for redevelopment in the following circumstances: if the redevelopment enlarges the size of the original structure by more than 1,500 square feet. Developments shall be encouraged to implement the objectives of the Future Land Use Plan to foster compatibility among land uses in the City of Goodland. Site Plan Reviews shall be performed by the Building Official, and submitted to the Planning Commission for approval if in conjunction with a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1303. - Site plan review. 
The Planning Commission shall perform their review at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission for which the item may be scheduled and shall adjourn and reconvene as is determined necessary. 
The applicant may appeal a site plan review determination to the City Commission for approval in the event that an applicant alleges that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Official or the Planning Commission in the enforcement of Site Plan Review. The request for review by the City Commission shall be accompanied by a complete description of the error(s) alleged. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1304. - Authority. 
Building permits shall not be issued for any use of land or proposed construction on a lot in the zoning districts in which Site Plan Review is applicable, unless Site Plan Review approval has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1305. - Submission requirements. 
The Site Plan shall include the following data, details, and supporting plans which are relevant to the proposal. The number of pages submitted will depend on the proposal's size and complexity. The applicant shall make notations explaining the reasons for any omissions. 
Site Plans shall be prepared at a discernable scale. 
A.  Name of the project, address, boundaries, date, north arrow and scale of the plan. 
B.  Name and address of the owner of record, developer, and seal of the engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect. 
C.  Name and address of all owners of record of abutting parcels. 
D.  All existing lot lines, easements, and rights-of-way. Include area in acres or square feet, abutting land uses and structures. 
E.  The location and use of all existing and proposed structures within the development. Include all dimensions of height and floor area, and show all exterior entrances and all anticipated future additions and alterations. For development in the "C-2" Central Business District, indicate design details to make new construction compatible with existing structures. 
F.  The location of all present and proposed public and private ways, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, ramps, curbs and fences. Location, type, and screening details for all waste disposal containers shall also be shown. 
G.  The location, height, intensity, and bulb type (e.g., fluorescent, sodium incandescent) of all external lighting fixtures. The direction of illumination and methods to eliminate glare onto adjoining properties must also be shown. 
H.  The location, height, size, materials, and design of all proposed signage. 
I.  A landscape plan showing all existing open space, trees, forest cover and water sources, and all proposed changes to these features including size and type of plant material. Water sources will include ponds, lakes, brooks, streams, wetlands, floodplains, and drainage retention areas. 
J.  The location of all present and proposed utility systems including: 
(1)  Sewerage system; 
(2)  Water supply system; 
(3)  Telephone, cable and electrical systems; and 
(4)  Storm drainage system including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch basins, head walls, end walls, hydrants, manholes, and drainage swells. 
K.  Plans to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater, erosion of soil both during and after construction, excessive run-off, excessive raising or lowering of the water table, and flooding of other properties, as applicable. 
L.  Existing and proposed topography shown at not more than two-foot contour intervals. All elevations shall refer to the United States Geodetic Survey (USGS) datum. If any portion of the parcel is within the 100-year floodplain, the area shall be shown, with base flood elevations; and the developer shall present plans for meeting Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) requirements as discussed in Article XI. 
M.  Existing and proposed zoning district boundaries adjacent to the site's perimeter shall be drawn and identified on the plan. 
N.  Traffic flow patterns within the site, entrances and exits, loading and unloading areas, curb cuts on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
The Building Official may require a detailed traffic study for mixed use and multi-tenant developments, or for developments in heavy traffic areas to include: 
(1)  The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels; 
(2)  The projected traffic flow pattern including vehicular movements at all major intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site; and 
(3)  The impact of this traffic upon existing abutting public and private ways in relation to existing road capacities. Existing and proposed daily and peak hour traffic levels, as well as road capacity levels, shall also be given. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1306. - Standard of review. 
The recommendations of the Building Official shall be based on the following standards: 
A.  The extent to which the proposal conforms to the previous sections of these regulations. 
B.  The extent to which the development would be compatible with the surrounding area and the Development Guidelines of this Article. 
C.  The extent to which the proposal conforms to the provisions of the City's Subdivision Regulations. 
D.  The extent to which the proposal conforms to customary engineering standards used in the City. 
E.  The extent to which the location of streets, paths, walkways, and driveways are located so as to enhance safety and minimize any adverse traffic impact on the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1307. - Development guidelines, commercial and industrial districts. 
In zoning districts permitting commercial and industrial uses, buildings should meet the following minimum guidelines, based on site plan review: 
A.  The form and proportion of buildings shall be consistent or compatible with the scale, form and proportion of existing development in the immediate area. 
B.  The rhythm of structural mass to voids, such as windows and glass doors, of a front facade should relate to the rhythms established in adjacent buildings. 
C.  Where large structures are proposed with overly-long facades (walls), where one dimension exceeds the length of the perpendicular dimension, such as warehouses, building mass should be articulated with variations in the building plane and parapet height and through the use of other unique design or site plan features. Parking lots along the facade can also relieve horizontally through the use of landscaped fingers and islands containing trees and shrubs. 
D.  Architectural design should create visual interest through the use of different textures, complementary colors, shadow lines and contrasting shapes. The use of walls in a single color, with little detailing or completely blank is discouraged. 
E.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. 
F.  Careful consideration of durable materials, proportions, and shapes, emphasizing the importance of roofs as integral and embracing elements of the over-all design is particularly important. 
G.  Use of substantial amounts of masonry materials (face brick, stucco, stone) is encouraged. The use of aluminum siding, metal ribbed panels, and extensive mirrored glass surfaces are discouraged. Evaluation of building materials shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship and compatibility to building materials in the immediate neighborhood. 
H.  Corrugated metal facades should be complemented with abundant use of masonry, whether brick, stone, stucco, or split-face block, especially along perimeter streets. Architectural metal panels may be an acceptable substitute for masonry. Appropriate landscaping can be used to complement and enhance a building's design, color and material. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 13, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-1308—19-1400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1710 , § 1k, adopted Feb. 20, 2018, repealed Art. XIV in its entirety. Former Art. XIV, §§ 19-1401—19-1405, pertained to board of zoning appeals and derived from Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 14, §§ 1—5), adopted Dec. 3, 2001. 
 
Secs. 19-1401—19-1500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 
 
[Sec. 19-1501. - Violation and penalty.] 
The owner or agent of a structure or premises in or upon which a violation of any provision of this regulation has been committed or shall exist; or the lessee or tenant of an entire structure or entire premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist; or the agent, architect, structure or premises in or upon which violation has been committed or shall exist, shall be a sum of not less than $50.00 nor more than $1,000.00 and shall be subject to a sentence in the Sherman County Bastille of not less than five nor more than 30 days or both fine and jail sentence. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which violation of this article occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
In case any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any structure or land is used in violation of this regulation, the appropriate authorities, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance of use, or to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of said structure or land. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 15, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-1502—19-1600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 19-1601. - Amendments to change zoning regulations or district boundaries. 
The City Commission, from time to time, may supplement, change or generally revise the boundaries or regulations contained in zoning regulations by amendment. A proposal for such amendment may be initiated by the City Commission or the Planning Commission. If such proposed amendment is not a general revision of the existing regulations and affects specific property, the amendment may be initiated by application of the owner of property affected. Applications for conditional use permits shall be considered by the same procedure as zoning district amendments. Any such amendment, if in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan, shall be presumed to be reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1602. - Public hearing. 
All such proposed amendments first shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon at its next regular meeting for which the application may be scheduled, shall cause an accurate written summary to be made of the proceedings, and shall give notice in like manner as that required for recommendations on the original proposed zoning regulations. Such notice shall fix the time and place for such hearing and contain a statement regarding the proposed changes in regulations or restrictions or in the boundary or classification of any zone or district. If such proposed amendment is not a general revision of the existing regulations and affects specific property, the property shall be designated by legal description or a general description sufficient to identify the property under consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1603. - Public notice. 
In addition to such publication notice, written notice of such proposed amendment shall be mailed at least 20 days before the hearing to all owners of record of lands located within at least 300 feet of the area proposed to be altered. All notices shall include a statement that a complete legal description is available for public inspection and shall indicate where such information is available. When the notice has been properly addressed and deposited in the mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken by the Planning Commission or the City Commission. Such notice is sufficient to permit the Planning Commission to recommend amendments to zoning regulations which affect only a portion of the land described in the notice or which give all or any part of the land described a zoning classification of lesser change than that set forth in the notice. At any public hearing held to consider a proposed rezoning, an opportunity shall be granted to interested parties to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1604. - Adoption. 
The procedure for the consideration and adoption of a recommendation to amend zoning district boundaries shall be in the same manner as that required for the consideration and adoption of the original zoning regulations. A majority of a quorum of the Planning Commission at the hearing shall be required to recommend approval or denial of the amendment to the City Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to make a recommendation on a rezoning request, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have made a recommendation of disapproval. When the Planning Commission submits a recommendation of approval or disapproval of such amendment and the reasons therefore, the City Commission may: (1) Adopt such recommendation by ordinance; (2) Override the Planning Commission's recommendation by a 2/3 vote of the membership of the City Commission; or (3) return such recommendation to the Planning Commission with a statement specifying the basis for the City Commission's failure to approve or disapprove. 
If the City Commission returns the Planning Commission's recommendation, the Planning Commission, after considering the same, may resubmit its original recommendation giving the reasons therefore or submit a new and amended recommendation. Upon the receipt of such recommendation, the City Commission, by a simple majority thereof, may adopt or may revise or amend and adopt such recommendation by the respective ordinance or it need take no further action thereon. If the Planning Commission fails to deliver its recommendation to the City Commission following the Planning Commission's next regular meeting after receipt of the City Commission's report, the City Commission shall consider such course of inaction on the part of the Planning Commission as a resubmission of the original recommendation and proceed accordingly. The proposed rezoning shall become effective upon publication of the respective adopting ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 4), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1605. - Applications. 
Any party desiring any change in zoning district boundaries or regulations contained in these Zoning Regulations, as to any lot, tract or area of land, shall file with the Building Official an application, and such application shall be accompanied by such data and information as prescribed in these Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 5), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1606. - Filing deposit and fee. 
An application fee and filing deposit in amounts as established by the City Commission shall accompany each application filed with the City. Promptly upon the filing of any such application, the Building Official shall refer the application to the Planning Commission agenda for study and recommendation and shall submit a report to the City Commission concerning the nature of the application and that said application has been referred to the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 6), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1607. - Comprehensive plan. 
Upon the adoption or amendment of any such plan or part thereof by adoption of the appropriate resolution by the Planning Commission, a certified copy of the plan or part thereof, together with a written summary of the hearing thereon, shall be submitted to the City Commission. No comprehensive plan shall be effective unless approved by the City Commission. 
An attested copy of the comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto shall be sent to all other taxing subdivisions in the planning area which request a copy of such plan. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 7), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1608. - Matters to be considered for zoning district amendments. 
In order to recommend approval or disapproval of a proposed zoning district amendment, the Planning Commission shall consider the following matters: 
A.  Character of the neighborhood. 
B.  Consistency with the comprehensive plan and regulations of the City of Goodland. 
C.  Adequacy of public utilities and other needed public services. 
D.  Suitability of the uses to which the property has been restricted under its existing zoning. 
E.  Compatibility of the proposed district classification with nearby properties. 
F.  The extent to which the zoning amendment may detrimentally affect nearby property. 
G.  Whether the proposed amendment provides a disproportionately great loss to the individual land owners nearby relative to the public gain. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 8), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1609. - Amendments to text. 
When a proposed amendment would result in a change in the text of these regulations, but would not result in a change of zoning classification of any specific property, the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall contain a statement as to the nature and effect of such proposed amendment and determination as to the following items: 
A.  Whether such change is consistent with the intent and purpose of these regulations; 
B.  The areas which are most likely to be directly affected by such change and in what way they will be affected; and 
C.  Whether the proposed amendment is made necessary because of changed or changing conditions in the areas and zoning districts affected, or in the area of jurisdiction of such changed or changing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 9), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1610. - Protest. 
Regardless of whether or not the Planning Commission approves or disapproves a zoning amendment, if a protest against such amendment is filed in the office of the City Clerk within 14 days after the date of the conclusion of the public hearing pursuant to said publication notice, signed by the owners of 30 percent or more, either of the areas of the land (exclusive of streets and alleys) included in such proposed change, or within an area determined by lines drawn parallel to and 300 feet distant from the boundaries of the district proposed to be changed, such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 16, § 10), 12-3-01)  
Secs. 19-1611—19-1700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 19-1701. - Legislative and quasi-judicial regulation of land use. 
The City shall regulate land use as provided by statute and appoint a Planning Commission by City ordinance; which Planning Commission shall prepare and adopt bylaws for the conduct of their business, including adoption of a comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 17, § 1), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1702. - Office of the Building Official. 
A.  Authorization: A Building Official shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be responsible for the enforcement of these regulations. 
B.  Duties of the Building Official: The Building Official shall enforce these regulations and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, he shall: 
(1)  Approve and issue all zoning and occupancy certificates and make and maintain records thereof. 
(2)  Conduct inspections of structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the provisions of the zoning regulations. 
(3)  Receive, file, and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals the records in all appeals and all applications for variances. 
(4)  Maintain permanent and current records of the zoning regulations including, but not limited to, all zoning maps, amendments, variances, appeals and applications therefore and records of hearing thereon. 
(5)  Maintain for distribution to the public a supply of copies of the zoning map or maps, the compiled text of the zoning regulations, and the rules of the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 17, § 2), 12-3-01)  
Sec. 19-1703. - Building permits. 
A.  Building Permits: Unless a building permit shall first have been obtained from the Building Inspector: 
(1)  The construction, moving, remodeling or reconstruction of any structure shall not be commenced; and 
(2)  The improvement of land preliminary to any use of such land shall not be commenced. 
Any building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of these regulations shall be null and void. 
B.  Application for Building Permit: Every application for a building permit shall include at least the following: 
(1)  A plat, in duplicate, of the piece or parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the piece or parcel, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, according to the recorded plat of such land. 
(2)  A plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale and in such form as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Building Official, showing the location, ground area, height, and bulk of all present and proposed structures, drives and parking lots, utility easements, the structure lines in relation to lot lines, waste disposal areas, the use to be made of such present and proposed structures on the land, and such other information as may be required by the Building Official for the proper enforcement of these regulations. 
One copy of both the plat and the plot plan shall be retained by the Building Official as a public record. 
C.  Issuance of Building Permit: A building permit shall be either issued or refused by the Building Official within ten days after the receipt of an application or within such further period as may be agreed to by the applicant. No building permit shall be issued unless all the zoning requirements of these regulations are met. 
D.  Posting of Building Permits: Upon issuance of a building permit by the Building Official, the building permit shall be posted on the job site by the applicant. The building permit shall remain posted on the job site for the entire duration of the project for which the building permit was issued. Said building permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place that is visible from the street. 
E.  Period of Validity: A building permit shall become null and void six (6) months after the date on which it is issued unless within such six-month period construction, moving, remodeling or reconstruction of a structure is commenced or a use is commenced. If the construction, moving, remodeling or reconstruction of any structure is not commenced within said six-month period, issuance of a new building permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1(Art. 17, § 3), 12-3-01)  
Appendix A - CHARTER ORDINANCES 
NOTE: The charter ordinances included herein are for information only. Each of them contains the substance as adopted by the governing body but enacting clauses, publication clauses and signatures have been omitted to conserve space. Complete copies of each charter ordinance as adopted are on file in the office of the city clerk and with the Kansas secretary of state. Date of passage by the governing body of each charter ordinance is shown in parentheses at the end of the text. 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 1 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 79-1952; AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING TAX LEVIES IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH DOLLAR OF ASSESSED TANGIBLE VALUATION; AND PRESCRIBING AN AGGREGATE FOR ALL CITY-WIDE TAX LEVIES. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 5) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 2 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR A TAX LEVY OR THE ISSUANCE OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING FUNDS TO ACQUIRE A CEMETERY OR LANDS THEREFORE AND IMPROVEMENT THEREOF, FOR THE CITY OF GOODLAND, SHERMAN COUNTY, KANSAS, AND EXEMPTING SAID CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 14-1007b, K.S.A. AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECTS. 
Section 1. That pursuant to the provisions of Section 5, Article 12 of the constitution of the State of Kansas the City of Goodland, Sherman County, Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and to make inapplicable to it Section 14-1007b K.S.A. which applies to said city but the provisions of which do not apply uniformly to all cities and does provide by this charter ordinance substitute and additional provisions on the same subject, to-wit: 
That for the purpose of providing a fund to acquire a cemetery or lands therefore and improvements thereof, the Mayor and Council of the City of Goodland, Sherman County, Kansas, may levy a tax not exceeding in any one year one mill on the dollar upon all the taxable property in such City, to be levied and collected as other taxes for such City; or said City may issue its general obligation bonds in an amount not exceeding the amount of the purchase or condemnation price of the cemetery or grounds and land therefore and the improvement thereof, in the manner as provided by the general bond law, without an election being required before the issuance of the said bonds. 
No election is required before putting on said above mentioned tax levy. 
(9-5-67) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 3 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 79-1952; AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING TAX LEVIES IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH DOLLAR OF ASSESSED TANGIBLE VALUATION; AND PRESCRIBING AN AGGREGATE FOR ALL CITY-WIDE TAX LEVIES. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 5) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 4 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 12-825a OF THE KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, RELATING TO PETTY CASH FUNDS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 14) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 70-1952; AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AUTHORIZING AND LIMITING TAX LEVIES IN ANY ONE YEAR ON EACH DOLLAR OF ASSESSED TANGIBLE VALUATION; AND PRESCRIBING AN AGGREGATE FOR ALL CITY-WIDE TAX LEVIES. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 16) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 6 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 1968, Supp. 14-201; PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT, RELATING TO THE ELECTION AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS AND THE TERMS OF OFFICERS. 
Section 1. The City of Goodland, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it, K.S.A. 1968 Supp. 14-201, and provide substitute and additional provisions as hereinafter set forth in this Ordinance. Such statutory section is applicable to this City but is not applicable uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. There shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of each odd-numbered year a Mayor and one-half the number of Councilmen as hereinafter set forth in this Section. There shall be elected on the first Tuesday in April of each even-numbered year one-half the number of Councilmen as hereinafter set forth in this Section. The Mayor shall hold his office for a term of two years or until his successor is qualified. There shall be two Councilmen elected from each ward within the City, and they shall hold their offices for a term of two years or until their successors are qualified. One Councilman from each ward shall be elected in each even-numbered year and the remaining Councilman in each ward will be elected in each odd-numbered year. Councilmen elected in 1968 shall have terms expiring in 1970. Councilmen elected in 1969 shall have terms expiring in 1971. The Mayor elected in 1969 shall have a term expiring in 1971. 
Section 3. The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the Council, a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, a City Chief of Police, City Clerk, City Attorney, City Treasurer and may appoint policemen and such other officers as they may deem necessary. Officers so appointed and confirmed shall hold their offices for a term of one (1) year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The Council shall by Ordinance specify their duties and compensation, and by Ordinance may abolish any office created by them whenever they may deem it expedient. The Council may retain a licensed, professional engineer to act in the capacity of City Engineer for specifically defined duties, and provide for reasonable compensation for the services rendered. 
Section 4. The Mayor and City Councilmen so elected shall be sworn into office on the Friday following the election on the first Tuesday in April. 
(5-16-69) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS FROM SECTIONS 14-201, 14-205, 14-301, 14-302, 14-303, 14-306, and 14-307, KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SUBJECT, RELATING TO THE APPOINTMENT OF A CITY MANAGER, AND TO THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF SAID MANAGER AND OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 10) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING CHARTER ORDINANCE NUMBER SEVEN, AND SUBSTITUTING THE WORDS "CITY ADMINISTRATOR" FOR THE WORDS "CITY MANAGER" CONTAINED IN SAID CHARTER ORDINANCE NUMBER SEVEN. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 10) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE AMENDING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7 OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, WHICH AMENDMENT SETS FORTH THE POWERS OF THE MAYOR OF SAID CITY. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 10) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 7, CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 8, AND CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 9, AND EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM SECTIONS 14-301 and 14-307, KANSAS STATUTES ANNOTATED, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS OF THE SUBJECT, RELATING TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN OFFICE OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR, AND DESCRIBING THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF SAID CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 11) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 11 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 10 OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS. 
Section 1. Charter Ordinance No. 10 of the City of Goodland is hereby repealed. 
(5-6-75) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 12 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE IMPOSITION AND COLLECTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT COSTS AND RELATED FEES. 
Section 1. That the City of Goodland hereby elects to exempt itself from the provisions of K.S.A. 12-4112, pursuant to Article 12, Section 5(c)(1), of the Kansas Constitution. 
Section 2. That in lieu of K.S.A. 12-4112, the City of Goodland is authorized to adopt by regular ordinance, a schedule of court costs and fees to be charged and collected in all actions and cases filed and docketed in the municipal court or traffic bureau. 
Section 3. All court costs and fees provided for by this charter ordinance are to be collected by the municipal court, or clerk, and shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Goodland. 
(5-3-82) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 13 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE AS PROVIDED BY THE KANSAS CONSTITUTION RELATING TO THE EXEMPTION OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM K.S.A. 1981 SUPP. 14-1806 AND K.S.A. 14-1204 ESTABLISHING THE NUMBER OF COMMISSIONERS ON THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND PROVIDING FOR SUBSTITUTION OF A PROVISION INCREASING THE SIZE OF THE BOARD FROM TWO COMMISSIONERS AND A MAYOR TO FIVE COMMISSIONERS. 
Section 1. That the City of Goodland, Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from K.S.A. 1981 Supp. 14-1806 and K.S.A. 14-1204 a portion of which relates to the number of members of the city commission of the city, said exemption as provided by Article 12, Section 5(c)(1), et seq., of the Kansas Constitution. 
Section 2. That in lieu of K.S.A. 1981 Supp. 14-1806 the following is hereby enacted by the city, to wit: 
Before the provisions of this act shall apply to any said city of the second class in this State it shall be submitted in the manner provided in K.S.A. 1981 Supp. 12-184 to a vote of the legally qualified electors of the city for adoption and shall receive a majority of all votes cast at such election. 
Such election shall be held in all respects according to the law for holding city elections on questions submitted. 
At the next city election in an odd numbered year after the 1982 election adopting the manager plan of government, five commissioners shall be elected, and upon their election and qualification, the rights, powers, duties and emoluments of the then governing body of such city shall cease and terminate. 
Section 3. That the city elects to exempt itself from K.S.A. 14-1204 which relates to the election of a mayor and commissioners in cities of the second class. 
(9-13-82) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 14 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 4 OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS. 
Section 1. Charter Ordinance No. 4 of the City of Goodland is hereby repealed. 
(1-6-86) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 15 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 41-2702 AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISION ON THE SAME SUBJECT, RELATING TO THE RETAIL SALE OF CEREAL MALT BEVERAGES AND ESTABLISHING LICENSING FEES AND THE PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING A LICENSE. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. The City of Goodland, by power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 41-2702 and hereby provides substitute provisions as hereinafter set forth. 
Section 2. For the purpose of this ordinance, all words, terms, and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them by K.S.A. 41-2701, where the same are defined in such statute. 
Section 3. No person shall sell any cereal malt beverage at retail in the City of Goodland without first securing a license for each place of business as herein provided. The application for such license shall be made to the Governing Body and filed with the City Clerk of said City. The application shall be verified and upon a form prepared by the Attorney General of the State of Kansas and shall contain: 
a.  The name and residence of the applicant; 
b.  The length of time the applicant has resided within the State of Kansas; 
c.  The particular place of business for which a license is desired; 
d.  The name of the owner of the premises upon which the place of business is located; 
e.  A statement that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and not less than twenty-one (21) years of age and that he has not, within two (2) years immediately preceding the date of making application been convicted of a felony, any crime involving moral turpitude, drunkenness, driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or violation of any other intoxicating liquor law of any state or of the United States; 
f.  Such additional information as may be required by the Governing Body by ordinance; 
Section 4. (Repealed by Section 2 of Ordinance No. 1587). 
Section 5. All licenses issued in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall be for a term of one (1) year and shall not be transferrable to another person or to another location. 
Section 6. This is a charter ordinance and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after final publication unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subdivision (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(2-3-86; 2-17-07) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 79-1952, REGARDING THE MILL LEVY LIMITATIONS FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES AND PROVIDING A SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISION ON THE SAME SUBJECT, AND REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 5 OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND. 
(Repealed by Charter Ordinance No. 19) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16-A 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 79-5001 TO 79-5017, INCLUSIVE, AND ANY AMENDMENTS THERETO. 
Section 1. The City of Goodland, Kansas, by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 79-5001 to 79-5017, inclusive, and any amendments thereto, which is an enactment of the legislature applicable to this city but which is not applicable uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. The provisions of K.S.A. 79-5001 to 79-5017, inclusive, and any amendments thereto, shall not apply to any taxes levied by the city. 
(5-16-88) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 17 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1422 THROUGH 12-1427, AND REPEALING SECTIONS 13-201 AND 13-202 OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT RELATING TO THE OPERATION OF THE MUNICIPAL CEMETERY. 
Section 1. Exemptions from K.S.A. 12-1422 Through 12-1427. In accordance with the authority granted to municipalities by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas the City of Goodland, hereby elects to exempt itself from and to make inapplicable to the City of Goodland, the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1422 through 12-1427, and to provide substitute and additional provisions as are set out in this ordinance. The provisions of the above mentioned statutes apply to the City of Goodland, but do not apply uniformly to all cities in Kansas. 
Section 2. Code Sections 13-201 and 13-202 Repealed. Sections 13-201 and 13-202, of the Code of the City of Goodland, are hereby repealed. 
Section 3. Transfer of Functions of Cemetery Board. All of the functions of the cemetery board the directors thereof, the secretary, treasurer, sexton and assistants, and all other officers and agents of the cemetery board are hereby transferred to the parks department of the city except the oversight and custody of the funds known as the Tree Fund and the Fence Fund. 
Section 4. Transfer of Books, Records, Etc. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the cemetery board and all personnel, provided therefor by ordinance, shall no longer serve in the capacities designated by ordinance and they shall, transfer all books, records, accounts, equipment, material and other tangibles in their possession, to the parks department of the city except funds presently held and known as the Tree Fund and Fence Fund. 
Section 5. Administration. The city cemetery shall be administered by the city manager in accordance with sections 1-308 and 1-311. 
Section 6. Staffing. The city manager is hereby authorized to hire such employees and officer as are necessary for the execution of this article subject to the provisions of section 1-311. 
Section 7. Advisory Board Created. There is hereby created a cemetery advisory board for the city. 
Section 8. Same, Appointment. The cemetery advisory board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the governing body. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by the governing body of the city for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Section 9. Same, Organization. The board shall select its own officers annually during the month of December. Officers of the board shall consist of a chairman and vice chairman and such other officers as may be deemed necessary by the board. 
Section 10. Same, Duties. The board shall make recommendations to the governing body as to all major proposals and propositions for the construction and improvement of the city cemetery including the acquisition of land and the acquisition of major equipment and facilities for cemetery purposes. The board shall make reports and recommendations to the governing body on all matters referred to it and any further recommendations as deemed advisable. The board shall administer the tree and fence fund. 
Section 11. Same, Meetings and Reports. The board shall meet at least once each three months during winter months and shall meet at least once each month during summer months and report its recommendations to the governing body through its chairman, the director of recreation or the city manager. At least once each year the board shall report on the financial condition of the Tree Fund and the Fence Fund. 
Section 12. Special Trust Fund Unaffected. The special trust fund known as the Perpetual Fund, provided for by the provisions of sections 13-301 through 13-303 shall not be affected by the provisions of this article. 
(1-7-90) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 18 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 25-2303, 25-2309 AND 25-2709 AND AMENDMENTS THERETO. 
Section 1. Exemption. The City of Goodland, by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to and does exempt itself and make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 25-2303, 25-2309 and 25-2709 and amendments thereto, which apply to this city but do not apply uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. Publication. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
Section 3. Effective date. This Charter Ordinance shall take effect 61 days after final publication unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed, requiring a referendum to be held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this Charter Ordinance shall become effective upon approval by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(6-17-96) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 19 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE REPEALING CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 16 OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS. 
Section 1. The City of Goodland, Kansas, by the power invested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby repeals Charter Ordinance No. 16 of the City of Goodland, Kansas, passed on the 16th day of February, 1988. 
Section 2. This ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper as provided by law. 
Section 3. This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect sixty-one (61) days after the last publication thereof unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subdivision (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this ordinance shall become effective if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(6-18-01) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 20 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS FROM K.S.A. 14-1403, and providing substitute provisions on the same subject. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
SECTION 1: EXEMPTION. The City of Goodland, Kansas, a City of the second class by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to the City of Goodland, the provisions of K.S.A. 14-1403, and provide substitute provisions as hereinafter provided. 
SECTION 2: K.S.A. 14-1403 states: The mayor and one commissioner shall have power to call special meetings of the board of commissioners, the object of which shall be submitted to the said board in writing, and the call and the object as well as the action of said board thereon shall be entered upon the journal by the clerk, and no other business shall be transacted except that mentioned in the call. A written notice of said special meeting shall be served personally upon each member of said board or left at the member's usual place of residence at least two hours before the time of such meeting. The notice shall state the time, place and object of such special meeting, and shall be issued by the city clerk to the chief of police, his or her deputy or a policeman, or other city employees, who shall be required to make such service at once as above provided, and the person serving such notice shall make a return in writing of the service, showing the manner of such service. 
SECTION 3: The City of Goodland, Kansas, hereby modifies K.S.A. 14-1403 to read as follows: Any commissioner shall have power to call a special meeting of the board of commissioners, the object of which shall be submitted to the said board in writing, and the call and the object as well as the action of said board thereon shall be entered upon the journal by the clerk, and no other business shall be transacted except that mentioned in the call. Notice of said special meeting shall be given in a reasonable manner as soon as practical prior to the meeting. The notice shall state the time, place and object of such special meeting, and shall be issued by the city clerk at a reasonable time and in a manner reasonably calculated to provide notice to the members of the commission and those required to receive notice pursuant to the Kansas Open Meetings Act. 
SECTION 4: This Ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper as provided by law. 
SECTION 5: This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect Sixty-one (61) days after the last publication thereof unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subdivision (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this ordinance shall become effective if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(5-4-09) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 21 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 25-2108a RELATING TO PRIMARY ELECTIONS, AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS ON THE SAME SUBJECT BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND. 
Section 1. The City of Goodland by virtue of the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Kansas hereby elects to and does exempt itself a make inapplicable to it K.S.A. 25-2108a which applies to this city, but is part of an enactment which does not apply uniformly to all cities. 
Section 2. There shall be a primary election of city officers on the Tuesday preceding by five weeks the first Tuesday in April of every year that such city has a city election, except as otherwise provided in Section 3. 
Section 3. No primary election of city officers shall be held unless by holding such primary one or more persons will be eliminated as candidates for office. In the event there are not more than two candidates for any one office, the names of the candidates for such office shall not appear on the primary election ballots, and there shall be no primary election for such office, but the names of such candidates shall be placed on the general city election ballot. Two candidates for each position shall advance to the general election. 
Section 4. This charter ordinance shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper. 
Section 5. This charter ordinance shall take effect 61 days after final publication, unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subsection (c)(3) of the Constitution of Kansas, in which case the ordinance shall become effective if approved by the majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(9-10-09) 
CHARTER ORDINANCE NO. 22 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE EXEMPTING THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS FROM K.S.A. 12-1420, and providing substitute provisions on the same subject. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
SECTION 1: EXEMPTION. The City of Goodland, Kansas, a city of the second class by the power vested in it by Article 12, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to the City of Goodland, the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1420, and provide substitute provisions as hereinafter provided. 
SECTION 2: K.S.A. 12-1420 states: "Any City may, by ordinance, create a cemetery board of seven directors, to manage, operate, maintain and improve cemeteries owned by the City. Such directors shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the governing body, from the residents of the City at large, but no person holding any official position under the City shall be appointed a director while holding such office. The director shall receive no compensation for services, except that the board of directors may pay the secretary such a sum per annum as the governing body of the City shall fix for keeping the records, selling the lots, and other duties devolving upon the secretary in that office." 
SECTION 3: The City of Goodland, Kansas, hereby modifies K.S.A. 12-1420 to read as follows: The cemetery advisory board shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the governing body. All members shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies occurring during any term shall be filled by the governing body of the City for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
SECTION 4: This Ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official city newspaper as provided by law. 
SECTION 5: This is a Charter Ordinance and shall take effect Sixty-one (61) days after the last publication thereof unless a sufficient petition for a referendum is filed and a referendum held on the ordinance as provided in Article 12, Section 5, Subdivision (c)(3) of the Constitution of the State of Kansas, in which case this ordinance shall become effective if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon. 
(4-4-11) 
A CHARTER ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS EXEMPTING THE CITY FROM THE PROVISIONS OF K.S.A. 12-1758, K.S.A. 12-1760 AND K.S.A. 12-1767 RELATING TO PUBLIC BUILDING COMMISSIONS AND THE ISSUANCE OF REVENUE BONDS THEREBY AND PROVIDING SUBSTITUTE AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING THERETO. 
Section 1. Exemption-K.S.A. 12-1758. The City, by the power vested in it by the Act, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it, the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1758 and does hereby provide the following substitute and additional provisions in place thereof: 
The City, by appropriate ordinance, may create a public building commission for the purposes of acquiring a site or sites for and constructing, reconstructing, equipping and furnishing, or purchasing or otherwise acquiring, a building or buildings or other facilities of a revenue producing character. Such building or buildings or facilities shall be maintained and operated for (i) City offices or such other purposes as are commonly carried on in connection with such facilities and general City buildings, (ii) public, municipal, community or recreational purposes of the City, (iii) educational, recreational or administrative purposes for school districts, (iv) county courthouses, the housing and accommodation of county offices or county businesses or such other purposes as are commonly carried on in collection with such facilities and general county buildings and (v) for housing, accommodations and parking facilities for offices of state and federal agencies. 
Section 2. Exemption-K.S.A. 12-1760. The City, by the power vested in it by the Act, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1760 and does hereby provide substitute and additional provisions in place thereof as follows: 
A public building commission authorized under this Charter Ordinance and K.S.A. 12-1757 et seq. shall have the power to do all things necessary or incidental to the purpose of constructing or acquiring or enlarging, furnishing and operating and maintaining buildings or facilities to be made available for use by governmental agencies and non-profit corporations organized under the laws of this state. 
Section 3. Exemption-K.S.A. 12-1767. The City, by the power vested in it by the Act, hereby elects to exempt itself from and make inapplicable to it the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1767 and does hereby provide substitute and additional provisions in place thereof as follows: 
(a) Any revenue bonds proposed to be issued by a public building commission created by the City shall be issued as provided in K.S.A. 10-1201 et seq. and amendments thereto, except to the extent that such statutes are in conflict with this Charter Ordinance or K.S.A. 12-1757 et seq. Before any revenue bonds are authorized or issued under the provisions of this Charter Ordinance and K.S.A. 12-1757 et seq., the public building commission shall adopt a resolution specifying the amount of such bonds and the purpose of the issuance thereof. 
(b) Such resolution shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper, or in a newspaper having general circulation in the county if the public building commission lease is with a county or school district. The resolution may provide, and shall provide, if the lease is with a county or school district, that if within 30 days after the last date of publication of the resolution a petition in opposition to the resolution, signed by not less than 5% of the electors of the City, if the public building commission lease is with the City, or by not less than 5% of the electors of the county or school district, if the public building commission lease is with the county or school district, as applicable, is filed with the county election officer, the board of county commissioners shall submit the question to the voters at an election called for that purpose or at the next general election. 
(c) No construction contract shall be let or approved by a public building commission until after publication of the resolution as provided in subsection (b) hereof. 
Section 4. Severability. Any provision or section of this Charter Ordinance is deemed or ruled unconstitutional or otherwise illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such illegality or invalidity shall not affect any other provision of this Charter Ordinance. In such instance, this Charter Ordinance shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal or invalid provision had not been contained herein. 
Section 5. Effective Date. This Charter Ordinance shall be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official City newspaper, and shall take effect sixty (60) days after final publication, unless a petition signed by a number of electors of the City equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the number of electors who voted at the last preceding regular City election shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk, demanding that this Charter Ordinance be submitted to a vote of the electors, in which event this Charter Ordinance shall take effect when approved by a majority of the electors voting at an election held for such a purpose. 
(5-4-15)  
Appendix B - FRANCHISES 
AN ORDINANCE DEFINING THE MANNER AND PLACE OF CONSTRUCTION OF THE LINES OF THE SOUTHWESTERN TELEPHONE COMPANY AND PROVIDING FOR AN ANNUAL PAYMENT TO BE MADE TO THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 599. 
Section 1. The Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns (herein referred to as "telephone company") shall continue to operate its telephone system and all business incidental to or connected with the conducting of a telephone business and system in the City of Goodland, State of Kansas, (herein referred to as "city"). The plant construction and appurtenances used in or incident to the giving of telephone service and to the maintenance of a telephone business and system by the telephone company in the conduct of its business, and said telephone company shall continue to exercise its right to place, remove, construct and reconstruct, extend and maintain its said plant and appurtenances as the business and purposes for which it is or may be incorporated may from time to time require, along, across, on, over, through, above and under all the public streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, and under all the public streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, and the public grounds and places within the limits of said city as the same from time to time may be established. 
Section 2. The telephone company shall pay the city on the 15th day of March for the period January 1, 1979, to January 1, 1980, a sum computed at the rate of .25 per month per main telephone station located within said city. The telephone company shall pay a similarly computed sum annually thereafter on the 1st day of March unless either party chooses to renegotiate the amount by the 15th day of December of the previous year. This agreement may be terminated forthwith by the telephone company if authority to collect the amounts of such payments from its customers within the city shall be removed, cancelled or withheld by legislative or regulatory act. 
The number of main telephone stations upon which such payment shall be determined shall be the number of main telephone stations in service determined by a count made in the six months preceding such payment. The payments herein provided shall be in lieu of all other licenses, charges, fees or impositions (other than the usual general or special ad valorem taxes) which might be imposed by the city under authority conferred by law. The telephone company shall have the privilege of crediting such sums payable hereunder with any unpaid balance due said company for telephone service rendered or facilities furnished to said city. 
Section 3. The telephone company on the request of any applicant shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the party or parties requesting the same, and the telephone company may require such payment in advance. The telephone company shall be given not less than 15 days written notice from the applicant detailing the time and location of the moving operations, and not less than 24 hours advance notice from the applicant advising of the actual operation. 
Section 4. Permission is hereby granted to the telephone company to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of said city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the telephone company, all the said trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of any city official to whom said duties have been or may be delegated. 
Section 5. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any telephone, electric light, or power wire attachments by either the city or the telephone company on the poles of the other. If such attachments are desired the city or the telephone company, then a separate non-contingent agreement shall be a prerequisite to such attachments. 
Section 6. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to the telephone company any exclusive privileges, nor shall it affect any prior or existing rights of the telephone company to maintain a telephone system within the city. 
(2-6-79) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1235 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO KAYS, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES AND ASSIGNS, FOR A TERM OF 20 YEARS, THE RIGHT, AUTHORITY, POWER AND FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH, CONSTRUCT, ACQUIRE, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND ENVIRONS THEREOF, AND TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR SUCH COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM, AND REPEALING PAST ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT. 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number; provided further that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include them appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporate form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(c)  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a community antennae television system within said city subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above-captioned ordinance. 
(d)  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, leasee, or assignee of the person, firm, or corporation. 
(e)  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley or other public right-of-way now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the city as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
(f)  Community Antennae Television System hereinafter referred to as "CATV System" shall mean an electronic system with properties and facilities so constructed as to be used for the interception and receipt of electro-magnetic radiation, and the transmission and distribution of same to subscribers by means of a cable and other related facilities. 
(g)  Subscriber shall mean any person which receives from the franchisee herein named, the services of the franchisee's community antennae system. 
(h)  Person shall mean any individual or association of individuals, or any firm, corporation or other business organization. 
(i)  Gross Receipts as applied to sales of all levels of community antennae and closed circuit electronic service as now exist, or may expand to, and shall include all service sold for domestic, residential, or commercial consumption, but excluding maintenance, installation and service, and repair charges. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After public hearings affording an opportunity to be heard to all interested parties, and after a review of the qualification of Kays, Inc., and after determining that to the best of their knowledge Kays, Inc., is legally qualified, of good reputation, adequately financed, and technically competent to provide community antennae television service to the city, and after determining that the construction arrangements of Kays, Inc., are adequate and feasible, there is hereby granted unto Kays, Inc., a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a community antennae television system within said city, and in so doing to use the streets of said city by erection, installing, construction, repairing, replacing, reconstructing, maintaining and retaining in, on, upon, or across any such streets, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to a CATV system, and in addition, so to use, operate and provide for all or part of such facilities by service offerings obtained from any franchisees or operating utility company providing service within the city. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise herein granted shall commence on the first day of the first month next following the date upon which the franchisee herein named accepts and agrees in writing to the terms and conditions set forth in this franchise ordinance and shall continue for a term of 20 years from said date. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the city clerk within 30 days of passing of this ordinance. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The construction of the properties and facilities of said franchisee's CATV system shall conform, at least, to the standards of the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters or the edition thereof which has been adopted by the city, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that said construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State of Kansas and the City of Goodland, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of said CATV system. 
(b)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
(c)  In case of disturbance caused by the franchisee of any street or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
(d)  The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees which are located upon and overhang the public streets and other public ways of said city, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the franchisee's properties, and the trimming shall be done at all times in a workmanlike manner. 
(e)  The franchisee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall normally be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways. 
Prior to any underground construction occurring on any street a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such service. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of other utilities in the area proposed for construction, and the location of telephone, gas, water, sewer, and electric lines, and the location of the proposed cable and appurtenances. Upon approval of the permit by the city, the franchisee may commence construction. 
Underground construction which occurs on private property shall not be required to have a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operating Standards. The franchisee's CATV system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the Community Antennae Television industry and applicable city codes and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the subscriber receives the highest quality of service and shall at all times be in conformance with the FCC rules, regulations and proof of performance test provisions. The franchisee shall maintain an office within the city, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a listed telephone, and shall be operated so that complaints and request for repair or adjustments may be received at all reasonable times. 
Section 6. Additional Standards of Operations. The franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets of the city. A copy of such records shall be kept within the city and available for inspection by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas, or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval, if federal or state funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds may be made available to the franchisee at the option of the city if the federal or state regulations permit. 
(c)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower or remove its wires to permit the moving of building. The expense of such temporary removal, and of raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority at its option to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given no less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  The franchisee will limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours after notice has been given, except said time shall be extended when the performance of this obligation is prevented by an act of God or the same is otherwise made impossible because of circumstances over which the franchisee has no control; and that the franchisee shall provide its subscribers with facilities for receiving request and complaints for service. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding cable television operation, the subscriber shall be entitled to file his written complaint with the city manager, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with the representative of the franchisee within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each subscriber who shall have filed a written complaint of his rights to such a procedure if the complaint is not resolved to satisfaction of subscriber/company within 15 days. 
(e)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, above, under, and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the franchisee that the franchisee shall protect and hold the city harmless for all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, court costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any persons arising out of the negligence of the franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the CATV system, provided the city gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations, in writing. The franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability insurance in an insurance company with a national rating acceptable to the city. The insurances shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for personal injury to any one accident and $500,000.00 for property damage in any one accident. All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $1,000.00 for any type of coverage, and the city shall be named as an additional insured. The city may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuses of privileges granted to the franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the franchisee or its insurer. The franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance required hereby within the coverage of any so-called blanket policy or policies of insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise, provided, however, the interest of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the city a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be approved by the city attorney, and filed in the office of the city clerk; the city will receive prior notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. The franchisee is hereby authorized to extend the existing system within the franchise area to the extent that such is or may become economically feasible. The franchisee acknowledges the city from time to time may add or delete land to the city limits by annexation or deannexation to which franchisee is obligated to serve under this franchise, but said obligation to extend service shall only be in the city limits. The obligation shall occur whenever the franchisee shall receive written requests for service from at least 13 subscribers within 1,320 cable feet of its aerial trunk cable and the connection shall be solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible. The 1,320 feet shall be measured in extension length of franchisee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. No person in the franchisee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual circumstances, including, without limitations, when the distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than 150 feet or when a subscriber density exists less than the density specified hereinabove, service shall be made available on the basis of costs of materials, labor, and easements, plus ten percent, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on potential cable subscribers in more densely populated areas. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not, however, the franchisee may not sell or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of its streets and places by the franchisee and in lieu of all occupation and license taxes, the franchise shall, on or before the 31st day of January and the 31st day of July of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to three percent of the gross receipts, for the first ten years of this franchise, and thereafter four percent for the remainder of the franchise, accompanied by a certified notarized statement, from the sale of community antennae and closed-circuit electronic service within the then existing corporate limits of the city for the preceding six month period ending on the 31st day of December and the 30th day of June, respectively. 
Copyright tax, local and state sales tax and franchise tax may be an add-on to rates and may be automatically passed through to subscriber. If passed on these costs shall be shown separately on billing to subscribers. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The governing body of the city may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds: 
(a)  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
(b)  Misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
(c)  Insolvency of the franchisee, or inability of the franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The city shall file with the franchise a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the governing body. The franchisee shall have at least 60 days prior to the hearing and after receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other grounds asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the city determines that the franchisee has taken action during or making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the city shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the city, the franchisee, subscribers or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the governing body if it tends to substantiate or disprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The governing body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the governing body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial review sought by the franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the franchisee. 
Section 13. Procedure Upon Termination. Upon termination of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension or renewal thereof and accepted the same, or if it shall not have sold its property in place, it shall promptly remove all its property within 360 days after termination at its sole expense. In so removing the property, the franchisee shall refill, at its sole expense, any excavation that it shall make and shall leave the streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Section 14. Use of Facilities. It shall be the duty of the franchisee to negotiate and make any and all contracts and agreements with the owners of poles, towers, conduits, or other facilities for use by the franchisee in the provision of cable television service under this ordinance. 
Section 15. Rights of the Franchisee. The franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms, and conditions, of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The franchisee shall, upon request of the city, provide to the city a copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and a copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of business shall include rates charged for various levels of service and the number of channels carried for viewing along with various levels of service to subscribers and changes made for installation. 
Section 16. Rights Reserved to the City. Without the limitations upon the rights the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, power, and authorities: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
(b)  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
(c)  The right to grant additional CATV franchises with the city. 
Section 17. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The city's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights hereunder, and the franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 18. Amendments to Franchise. The city may amend this franchise, from time to time to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which will afford an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its customers, and to enable the franchisee to conform to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as they may be amended from time to time. 
Section 19. Emergency Use of Franchisee's System. Franchisee agrees to include within their system the capability for a remotely activated emergency system whereby a designee of the city in time of emergency, may introduce an audio message on all systems channels simultaneously. 
Section 20. Franchisee is Without Remedy Against the City. The franchisee shall have no remedy or recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all, or any part, of the franchise herein granted; provided that the franchisee expressly acknowledges that it accepted the franchise herein granted in reliance upon its independent and personal investigation and understanding of the power of authority of the city to grant the franchise herein conferred upon the franchisee; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by its acceptance of the franchise that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise upon any understanding of promise, whether given verbally or in writing by or on behalf of the city, or by any other person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed herein; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that it has carefully read the provisions, terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 21. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(a)  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the city, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to the office of the city clerk of the city or by personal delivery of the same to the person, of his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if the notice be addressed to the franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States mail addressed to any officer of the franchisee or its resident agent, or by personally delivering the same to such person as hereinabove provided, or such other person as the franchisee shall from time to time direct. 
(b)  The franchisee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise when such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the franchisee by the city clerk. 
Section 22. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the franchisee. 
(1-6-86) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1250 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO PEOPLES NATURAL GAS COMPANY, A DIVISION OF UTILICORP UNITED INCORPORATED, ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES, AND ASSIGNS, A NONEXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY FOR A PERIOD OF 20 YEARS TO ERECT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE, A GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND ANY AND ALL NECESSARY MAINS, PIPES, SERVICES, AND OTHER APPURTENANCES THEREUNTO, APPERTAINING IN, UPON, OVER, ACROSS, AND ALONG THE STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR THE TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF NATURAL AND/OR MIXED GAS FOR LIGHTING, HEATING, INDUSTRIAL, AND ALL OTHER USES IN SAID CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRANSMITTING, TRANSPORTING AND CONVERTING SUCH GAS INTO, THROUGH, OR BEYOND THE IMMEDIATE LIMITS OF CITIES TO OTHER CITIES, CITIES AND CUSTOMERS, AND PRESCRIBING SUCH BASIC TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE SAID COMPANY IS TO OPERATE. 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number; provided further that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include them appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporate form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(c)  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, leasee, or assignee of the person, firm, or corporation, and hereafter referred to as Peoples and/or the franchisee. 
(d)  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a natural gas system within the city subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above-captioned ordinance. 
(e)  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley or other public right-of-way now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the city as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
(f)  Natural Gas System shall mean a gas distribution system and any and all necessary mains, pipes, services, and other appurtenances thereunto, appertaining, upon, over, across, and along the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, for the non-exclusive transmission, distribution, and sale of natural and/or mixed gas for lighting, heating, industrial, and all other uses and purposes in the city, and for the non-exclusive purpose of transmitting, transporting, and conveying such gas into, through, or beyond the immediate limits of cities to other cities, cities and customers, and prescribing the basic terms and conditions under which the franchise is to operate. 
(g)  Gross Receipts as applied to sales of all sales of all commodities through and with the natural gas system as now exist, or may expand to, and shall include all natural gas and/or artificial gas for domestic, residential, industrial, or commercial consumption. 
(h)  Shall means when used the action is mandatory and obligatory. 
(i)  Residential Natural Gas Service shall mean that category of natural gas system consumer and natural gas system service which resides in single and multi-family dwellings. All other gas service would include nonresidential service, such as commercial and industrial natural gas service. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After public hearings affording an opportunity to be heard to all interested parties, and after a review of the qualification of Peoples, and after determining that to the best of their knowledge Peoples is legally qualified, of good reputation, adequately financed, and technically competent to provide for the operation of a natural gas system in the city, there is hereby granted unto Peoples, a non-exclusive franchise to operate a natural gas system within the city, and in doing so to use the streets of the city for operation of the natural gas system as may be necessary. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise herein granted shall commence on the 15th day of April 1987, and shall continue for a term of 20 years from said date. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the city clerk within 30 days of passing of this ordinance. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The construction of the properties and facilities of the franchisee's natural gas system shall conform, at least, to the standards of the plumbing and other mechanical codes of the city which have been so adopted, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that the construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulations of the United States of America and the State of Kansas and of the city, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of the natural gas system. 
(b)  All equipment necessary for the operation of the natural gas system which is located within the corporate limits of the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
(c)  In case of disturbance caused by the franchisee of any street or other public area, the franchisee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or other public area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
(d)  The franchisee, in above ground level fashion shall not place fixtures or devices necessary for the operation of the natural gas system where the same will interfere with any existing, cable television appurtenances or devices, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such fixtures placed in any street and shall normally be placed toward the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curbline, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on the alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on the streets, alleys, and publicways. 
Prior to any underground construction occurring on any street a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such service. After receipt of such permit request, the city shall have two working days to approve or reject the application. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of other utilities in the area proposed for construction, and the location of telephone, cable television, water, sewer, and electric lines, and the location of the proposed natural gas system work to be accomplished. Upon approval of the permit by the city, the franchisee may commence construction. 
Underground construction which occurs on private property shall not be required to have a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operating Standards. The franchisee's natural gas system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the natural gas industry wide practices, and applicable city codes and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the various natural gas system customers receive adequate, modern, and efficient service. 
The franchisee shall maintain an office within the city, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a listed telephone, and shall be operated so that complaints and request for repair or adjustments may be received at all reasonable times. 
Section 6. Additional Standards of Operations. The franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets and other public ways of the city. A copy of such records shall be kept within the city and available for inspection by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public way, or remove from the street or other public way, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city, but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval. 
(c)  The franchisee will limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours after notice has been given, except the time shall be extended when the performance of this obligation is prevented by an act of God or the same is otherwise made impossible because of circumstances over which the franchisee has no control; and that the franchisee shall provide its customers with facilities for receiving requests and complaints for service. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding the terms of this franchise agreement posed on the franchisee, the customer shall be entitled to file his/her written complaint with the city manager of such city, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with the representative of the franchisee within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each customer who shall have filed a written complaint of his rights to such a procedure if the complaint is not resolved to satisfaction of the customer/franchisee within 15 days. 
(d)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. All structures and lines, equipment and connections in, under, and through streets and other public ways in the city shall be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the franchisee that the franchisee shall protect and hold the city harmless for all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, court costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any persons arising out of the negligence of the franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the gas system provided the city gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations, in writing. The franchisee shall self-insure liabilities up to $1,000,000.00. Public liability insurance in an insurance company with a national rating acceptable to the city shall be available for claims exceeding $1,000,000.00. The city shall be named as an additional insured on the excess covered policy. The city may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuses of privileges granted to the franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the franchisee or its insurer. The franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance required hereby within the coverage of any so-called blanket policy or policies of insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise, provided, however, the interest of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the city a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be approved by the city attorney, and filed in the office of the city clerk; the city will receive prior notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. Franchisee will from time to time during the term of this franchise make such enlargements and extensions of its natural gas system as the business of the natural gas system, and the growth of the city require, in accordance with its rules and regulations relating to customer connections and main and service line extensions currently in effect and on file from time to time with the Kansas Corporation Commission, or other competent authority having jurisdiction on the premises; provided, however, that no obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon the franchisee, to construct or extend its mains or furnish natural gas or natural gas service within the city if franchisee is, for any reason, unable to obtain delivery of natural gas of an adequate supply thereof to warrant the construction or extension of its mains, for the furnishing of such natural gas or gas service. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not, however, the franchisee may not sell or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Such city shall strive to review such transfer within 60 days of formal written notification. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of its streets and publicways by the franchisee, the franchisee shall, on or before the end of each month of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to five percent of the gross receipts on residential natural gas service and two percent of gross receipts for all other natural gas service as called for herein for the first ten years this franchise is in force. For the second ten years this franchise is effective, the city and franchisee will negotiate an amount of gross receipts for the franchisee, however, in no event shall the amount be less than the first ten years. In the event the franchise fee is not renegotiated, the fee will remain the same for years 11 through 20, as the fee as it was established for the first ten years. 
Such payments shall be accompanied by a certified notarized statement on such gross receipts on each date such payments are submitted to the city. 
Any tax which is considered as sales tax, state tax, franchise tax, or otherwise, may at the election of the franchisee, be an add-on to rates, and may be passed onto the customers of the natural gas system. If passed, these costs shall be shown separately on billings to customers, and shall be carefully and accurately delineated thereon. Such city shall be exempt from payment of any itemized or delineated franchise tax which may be shown on the natural gas service utilized by the city in performance of its official and legally bound duties and obligations. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The governing body of the city may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds: 
(a)  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
(b)  Willful and/or misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
(c)  Insolvency of the franchisee, or inability of the franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The city shall file with the franchisee a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the governing body. The franchisee shall have at least 60 days prior to the hearing and after receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other grounds asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the city determines that the franchisee has taken action during or making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the city shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the city, the franchisee, subscribers or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the governing body if it tends to substantiate or disprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The governing body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the governing body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial review sought by the franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the franchisee. 
Section 13. Procedure Upon Termination. Upon termination of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension or renewal thereof and accepted the same, or if it shall not have sold its property in place, it shall promptly remove all its property within 360 days after termination at its sole expense. In so removing the property, the franchisee shall refill, at its sole expense, any excavation that it shall make and shall leave the streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Section 14. Rights of the Franchisee. The franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms, and conditions, of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The franchisee shall, upon request of the city, provide to the city a copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and a copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of business shall include rates charged for various levels of service. 
Section 15. Rights Reserved to the City. Without the limitations upon the rights the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, power, and authorities: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
(b)  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
(c)  The right to grant additional natural gas franchise's shall be retained by the city. 
Section 16. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The city's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights hereunder, and the franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 17. Amendments to Franchise. The city may amend this franchise, subject to acceptance by the franchisee, from time to time to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the technology of natural gas systems, thus enabling the franchisee to operate more effectively, efficiently, or economically. 
Section 18. Franchisee is Without Remedy Against the City. The franchisee shall have no remedy or recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all, or any part, of the franchise herein granted; provided that the franchisee expressly acknowledges that it accepted the franchise herein granted in reliance upon its independent and personal investigation and understanding of the power of authority of the city to grant the franchise herein conferred upon the franchisee; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by its acceptance of the franchise that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise upon any understanding of promise, whether given verbally or in writing by or on behalf of the city, or by any other person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed herein; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that it has carefully read the provisions, terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 19. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(a)  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the city, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to the office of the city clerk of the city or by personal delivery of the same to the person, or his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if the notice be addressed to the franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States mail addressed to any officer of the franchisee or its resident agent, or by personally delivering the same to such person as hereinabove provided, or such other person as the franchisee shall from time to time direct. 
(b)  The franchisee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise when such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the franchisee by the city clerk. 
Section 22. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the franchisee. 
(1-19-87) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1409 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, MAINTAIN AND EXTEND A TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS OF SAID GRANT AND RELATING THERETO; AND REPEALING ORDINANCE 1042 AND ALL OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AND PARTS THEREOF INCONSISTENT OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE TERMS HEREOF. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
(a)  Access Lines shall mean the following billed main lines and trunks, whether provided on a retail or wholesale basis: residential lines; business lines; ISDN lines (channels); PBX trunks; Centrex or Centrex-like stations; simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement where all stations served by such simulated exchange access lines are used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement; where stations are served by simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement and the stations served are not used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement, each station shall constitute an access line; and pay phone lines. "Access Line" shall include wireless telecommunication services subject to 47 C.F.R. Part 24. "Access Line" shall not include the following: wireless telecommunication services subject to 47 C.F.R. Part 22; unbundled loop facilities; and special access services. 
(b)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(c)  Cable Service means the one way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for selection and use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable Service does not include point to point, point to multipoint, and switched video services that Telephone Company has historically offered or other similar services that Telephone Company may in the future offer. 
(d)  Facilities shall mean telephone and telecommunication lines, conduits, fiber optic cables, wires, cables, pipes, poles, towers, vaults, and appliances, either under or above ground. 
(e)  Public Improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building, or capital improvement project, including without limitation streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, rights-of-way improvement, and public projects. 
(f)  Public Project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public facilities or improvements or any other purpose of a public nature. 
(g)  Rights-of-Way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and public easements, including easements dedicated in plats of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(h)  Street Rights-of-Way shall mean the entire width between property lines of land, property of an interest therein of every way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including street, avenue, boulevard, highway, expressway, alley or any other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name. 
(i)  Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
(j)  Telecommunication; Service. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
(k)  Telephone Company shall mean Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns. 
Section 2. Grant. 
(a)  There is hereby granted to Telephone Company the right, privilege and franchise to construct, maintain, extend and operate its facilities, in, through and along the rights-of-way for the purpose of supplying Telecommunications Services to the City and the inhabitants thereof for the full term of this franchise; subject, however, to the terms and conditions herein set forth. 
(b)  This franchise does not provide the Telephone Company the right to provide "Cable Service" to City and inhabitants thereof. Nothing in this franchise is intended to preclude the City from seeking, or authorize the City to seek, a franchise from any subsidiary, affiliate, or third party providing "Cable Service", Telephone Company and City agree that nothing in this franchise is intended to authorize the City to seek from Telephone Company nor to require Telephone Company to obtain a franchise to offer "Open Video Systems" as that term is used in section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. 573). Telephone Company and City further agree, however, that this ordinance does not authorize Telephone Company to offer "Open Video Systems" without paying the fee on the gross revenues of the system operator for the provision of cable service in lieu of a franchise fee, pursuant to and in the manner described in 47 U.S.C. 573(c)(2)(b) and without complying with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 573. 
(c)  Upon written request from Telephone Company, the City agrees to begin negotiations in good faith with Telephone Company within 30 days to provide Telephone Company a franchise to provide "Cable Service" to the City and inhabitants thereof on terms no more burdensome than the franchise(s) granted to other providers of "Cable Service" within the City. 
Section 3. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of rights-of-way under this franchise, the Telephone Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its policy power. In addition, the Telephone Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, and other requirements on the use of rights-of-way and shall comply with the following: 
(a)  The Telephone Company's use of rights-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's use of rights-of-way for any public purpose. The Telephone Company shall coordinate placement of its facilities in a manner that minimizes adverse impact on public improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not otherwise regulated, facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement. 
(b)  All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements, or improvements of any kind, injured or removed by the Telephone Company in its activities under this franchise, shall be fully repaired or restored promptly by the Telephone Company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City or owner thereof. 
(c)  All facilities constructed, replaced, or relocated in the rights-of-way after the date hereof shall be placed underground unless otherwise agreed to by the City. Where there are obstructions in the rights-of-way such as trees, shrubs, other utilities, commercial signs, man-made structures, or other like obstructions which make the cost of such underground burial unreasonable, the Telephone Company may request waiver of this requirement, in which event the City will not unreasonably withhold consent. Any vaults, boxes, pedestals, and similar facilities placed above ground in street rights-of-way shall be located behind the sidewalk where feasible. 
(d)  The Telephone Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting accurate horizontal and vertical location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or relocated in the street rights-of-way after the date hereof and provide location information regarding specific future project locations to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon request from the City, Telephone Company agrees to provide such information in an electronic format. (City agrees to use information only to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as required by law. Telephone Company and City agree that such information is confidential and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of the Telephone Company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221(12), (18), as amended, such information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as amended. In the event that City is required by law to disclose such information. The Telephone Company agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the Telephone Company, or of the City at the written request of the Telephone Company, in seeking to safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by Telephone Company to City under this section. In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the Telephone Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with such information). Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least every 100 feet and at any other alignment change. All points of facilities shall be horizontally located from street centerline, or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum. 
(e)  All work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected. Such signing shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Federal Highway Administration's Standards and Guideline from Work Zone Traffic Control, unless otherwise agreed to by the City. 
(f)  The Telephone Company shall notify the City not less than three working days in advance (such notice to be adequate for timely notice on the governing body agenda under City procedures) of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or relocation of facilities which would require any street closure which reduces traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic. Except in the event of an Emergency, as reasonably determined by the Telephone Company, no such closure shall take place without prior authorization from the City. 
(g)  The Telephone Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the nature and horizontal and vertical location of its facilities located within right-of-way when requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the Telephone Company without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The Telephone Company shall designate and maintain a local agent, familiar with the facilities, who is responsible for satisfying information needs of the City and other users of the rights-of-way. 
(h)  The Telephone Company shall promptly remove, relocate, or adjust any facilities located in rights-of-way if reasonably necessary and directed by the City for a publicly-funded improvement or project. Such removal, relocation, or adjustment for a particular public project shall be performed by the Telephone Company once at its sole expense without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors and shall be specifically subject to rules and regulations of the City pertaining to such. If additional removal, relocation, or adjustment is the result of the inaccurate or mistaken information of the Telephone Company, the Telephone Company shall be responsible for such at its sole expense. 
(i)  It shall be the responsibility of the Telephone Company to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities in the rights-of-way from harm or damage. If the Telephone Company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, it has no claim for cost or damages against the City and its authorized contractors unless such party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentional conduct. Telephone Company shall be responsible to the City and its agents, representatives, and authorized contractors for all damages including, but not limited to, delay damages, repair costs, down time, construction delays, penalties or other expenses of any kind arising out of the failure of the Telephone Company to perform any of its obligations under this agreement unless the damaged party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentionally caused harm. However, the City and its authorized contractors shall be responsible to take reasonable precautionary measures including calling for utility locations and observing marker posts when working near Telephone Company facilities. 
(j)  The Telephone Company, on the request of any applicant, shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the party or parties requesting the same, and the Telephone Company may require such payment in advance. The Telephone Company shall be given not less than 15 days' written notice from the applicant detailing the time and location of the moving operations, and not less than 24 hours' advance notice from the applicant advising of the actual operation. The City shall not be liable for any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures by the City or its contractors. 
(k)  Permission is hereby granted to the Telephone Company to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of said City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with wires and cables of the Telephone Company, all of said trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of any City Officials to whom said duties have been or may be designated in accordance with Goodland City Code. 
(l)  All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the rights-of-way shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state, and City laws and regulations, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, and the Fiber Optic Cable Installation Standard of the Telecommunications Industry Committee, or such substantive equivalents as may hereafter be adopted or promulgated. It is understood that the standards established in this paragraph are minimum standards and the requirements established or referenced in this ordinance may be additional to or stricter than such minimum standards. 
(m)  The City encourages the conservation of rights-of-way by the sharing of space by all utilities. To the extent required by Federal or State law, the Telephone Company shall permit any other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and all facilities constructed or erected by the Telephone Company. All said agreements and installations shall be subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. Telephone Company agrees that it will not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the City. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring Telephone Company to provide City notice when it provides Telecommunications Services to any entity. 
Section 4. Indemnity and Hold Harmless. The Telephone Company shall hold and save the City, its officers, employees, agents, and authorized contractors, harmless from and against all claims, damages, expense, liability and cost including attorney fees, to the extent occasioned in any manner by the Telephone Company's occupancy of rights-of-way, except to the extent otherwise specified in section 3(i). In the event a claim shall be made or an action shall be instituted against the City growing out of such occupancy of the rights-of-way by facilities of the Telephone Company, then upon notice by the City to the Telephone Company, the Telephone Company will assume liability for the defense of such actions at the cost of the Telephone Company, subject to the option of the City to appear and defend, at its own cost, any such case. 
Section 5. Payments and Charges. The payments herein provided shall be in lieu of all other licenses, taxes, charges, fees or impositions, except that the usual general property taxes and special ad valorem property taxes, and any charges for pavement cuts or other charges based on restoring premises to their same condition, or charges made for privileges which are not in any way connected with telephone business, as such, will be imposed on the Telephone Company, and are not covered by the payments herein. The Telephone Company shall have the privilege of crediting such sums payable hereunder with any unpaid balance due said Telephone Company for telephone service rendered or facilities furnished to said City; provided, that said balance due is liquidated and uncontested. 
Section 6. Compensation to City. 
(a)  In consideration of the franchise granted to Telephone Company by City, Telephone Company agrees to pay to City during the term of this franchise, a sum of $0.75 per month for each access line served by Telephone Company for local service within the city limits of City. Compensation required by this franchise shall be paid on a quarterly basis and shall become due and payable 60 days after the end of said quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31, making said payments due May 31, August 30, November 30 and March 1 respectively. The number of access lines as of the end of the last month of the quarter shall be used to calculate payment to City for the following quarter. 
(b)  If during the term of this ordinance any entity provides Local Service in City and provides compensation to City at an amount less than the Telephone Company is required to pay under section 6(a) per month for each access line within the City or provides no compensation to City for each such access line, this ordinance shall require compensation no greater than such amounts, if any, during such time remaining of the term of this ordinance that the lesser compensation, if any, is paid by such other entity. 
(c)  The parties agree that if federal law or state law is enacted setting forth a maximum allowable level of compensation for franchise rights and if such maximum allowable level is less than the level of compensation required by this ordinance, this ordinance shall require Telephone Company to pay the reduced level required by law the remainder of the term of this ordinance. 
(d)  If during the term of this ordinance, Telephone Company believes that it is entitled to reduction in compensation pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above, Telephone Company agrees to notify City in writing and agrees that it will continue to pay City at the monthly rate set forth in section 6(a) for each access line served by Telephone Company for Local Service within the City of Goodland until final agreement is reached with the City 60 days following such notice to City. 
(e)  The Telephone Company shall correctly code all customers that are located within the corporate limits of the City, provided that the City shall give Telephone Company notice of boundary changes as provided below. Coding shall be updated to reflect annexation and other changes in City boundaries, and the associated changes in customers and access lines, within 30 days of the date City provides Telephone Company written notice of the annexation or other changes in boundaries and a listing of addresses affected by such changes. Such notice shall be sent to Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, 823 Quincy, Room 801, Topeka, Kansas 66612. In the event of annexations, Telephone Company may request additional time in writing to recode customers, which request will not be unreasonably denied. 
Section 7. Collection of Compensation. This franchise may be terminated by the Telephone Company if authority to collect the amounts of such payments, or part of such payments, from its customers within the City shall be removed, canceled or withdrawn by legislative, judicial or regulatory act. City and Telephone Company acknowledge and agree that Telephone Company has collected and paid City all amounts due and owing for Telephone Company's use and occupancy of City right-of-way at all times prior to January 1, 2000. 
Section 8. Attachment to Poles. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require or permit any telephone, electric light or power wire attachments by either the City or the Telephone Company on the poles of the other. If such attachments are desired by the City or the Telephone Company, then a separate non-contingent agreement shall be prerequisite to such attachments. 
Section 9. Termination of Franchise. In case of failure on the part of Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or if Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance, Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until the City of Goodland shall carry out the following proceedings. Before the City of Goodland proceeds to forfeit said franchise, as in this section prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice upon the manager of Southwestern Bell Telephone at its principal office in the City of Goodland and Southwestern Bell Telephone shall have 90 days thereafter in which to comply with the conditions of this franchise. If at the end of such 90-day period the City of Goodland deems that the conditions of such franchise have not been complied with by Southwestern Bell Telephone and that such franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City of Goodland, in order to terminate such franchise, shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which said franchise or agreement is to be canceled or terminated. If within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance Southwestern Bell Telephone shall not have instituted an action, either in the District Court of Sherman County, Kansas, or some other court of competent jurisdiction to determine whether or not Southwestern Bell Telephone has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and terminated at the end of such 30-day period. If within such 30-day period Southwestern Bell Telephone does institute an action, as provided, to determine whether or not Southwestern Bell Telephone has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event, in case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate 30 days after such final judgment is rendered. Provided, however, that the failure of Southwestern Bell Telephone to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance or the doing or accusing to be done by Southwestern Bell Telephone of anything prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall not be grounds for the forfeiture thereof when such act or omission on the part of Southwestern Bell Telephone is due to any cause or delay beyond the control of Southwestern Bell Telephone, its successors and assigns, or to bona fide legal proceedings. 
Section 10. Rights and Duties of Grantee Upon Expiration of Franchise. Upon expiration of this franchise, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between the Telephone Company and the City of Goodland, or by forfeiture thereof, the Telephone Company shall have the right to remove from public property and all of its lines, poles, towers and other appurtenances and equipment used in its said business within a reasonable time after such expiration, but in such event, it shall be the duty of the Telephone Company, immediately upon such removal, to restore the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public ways and grounds from which said lines, poles, towers, other appurtenances and other equipment are removed to as good condition as the same were before said removal was effected. 
Section 11. Term and Termination Date. The term of this franchise shall be three years commencing January 1, 2000. The Telephone Company at its option shall have the right to extend this franchise upon the same terms and conditions for a subsequent term of three years, by providing written notice to City of its desire to extend the franchise not later than 180 days prior to the expiration of the initial term; provided, however, that if by operation of subsection (b) of section 6, Telephone Company is required to pay a lesser amount or no compensation to City at the time that Telephone Company provides such written notice, City may reject the additional term by providing written notice to Telephone Company within 90 days of receipt of Telephone Company's written notice to City of its desire to extend the franchise. The additional term shall be deemed a continuation of this franchise and not as a new franchise or amendment. 
Section 12. Acceptance of Terms by the Telephone Company. The Telephone Company shall have 60 days after final passage and approval of this ordinance to file with the City Clerk of the City of Goodland its acceptance in writing of the provision, terms and conditions of this ordinance, which acceptance shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and when so accepted the ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the City of Goodland and the Telephone Company subject to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas. 
Section 13. Right to Assign. This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same may exist at the time when any assignment is made. 
Section 14. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, grant and privilege is granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction, and each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the Telephone Company's control. This franchise shall not be exclusive. 
Section 15. Invalidity of Ordinance. If any clause, sentence, or section of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provision of this ordinance. 
Section 16. Venue. This agreement shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, and all obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Sherman County, Kansas. In the event that any legal proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this agreement, the same shall be brought in Sherman County, Kansas limited to state court action. Nothing in Section 17 shall be construed to limit or restrict Telephone Company right to initiate action in federal court (Kansas District) or to remove a state court action to federal court (Kansas District). 
Section 17. Notice. For the purpose of this agreement, notice to the City will be to: 
City Manager 
City of Goodland 
204 W. 11th Street 
Goodland, Kansas 67735 
Notice to the Telephone Company will be to: 
Area Manager—Municipal Affairs 
Southwestern Bell Telephone 
220 E. Sixth, Room 505 
Topeka, Kansas 66603 
Notice will be effective upon delivery by hand delivery or by first class mail to the above address until the City or the Telephone Company notifies the other, in writing, of a change in the address. 
Section 18. Repeal of Ordinance 1042. Ordinance 1042 shall be canceled, annulled, repealed and set aside. 
Section 19. Public Purpose. All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. Any member of the governing body or City official or employee charged with enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. Neither the City nor the Telephone Company by accepting this ordinance waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this ordinance, including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(4-5-99) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1452 
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO S&T COMMUNICATIONS, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, MAINTAIN AND EXTEND A TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS OF THE SAID GRANT AND RELATING THERETO. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein: 
(a)  Access Lines shall mean all working communication facilities extending from an end user terminating in an end office that is or may be used for local exchange service. Equaling the number of lines(loops) terminating on the main frame of the central office. 
(b)  Reported Access Lines shall mean access lines including semi-public pay-station lines, access lines used for Customer Owned Coin Operated Telephone Sets (COCOTS) and employee concession lines. Excluded are the company official lines, public pay-station lines operated by S&T Communications Inc., and special access lines, i.e., FX service at either the closed or open end, WATS/800 service lines at closed end. 
(c)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(d)  Cable Service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for selection and use of such video programming service. Cable service does not include point to point, point to multipoint, and switched video services that Telephone Company has historically offered or other similar services that Telephone Company may in the future offer. 
(e)  Public Improvement shall mean any existing or contemplated public facility, building, or capital improvement project, including without limitation streets, alleys, sidewalks, sewer, water, drainage, rights-of-way improvement, and public projects. 
(f)  Public Project shall mean any project planned or undertaken by the City or any governmental entity for construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of public facilities or improvements or any other purpose of a public nature. 
(g)  Rights-of-way shall mean present and future streets, alleys, rights-of-way, and public easements, including easements dedicated in plats of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
(h)  Street Rights-of-way shall mean the entire width between property lines of land, property of an interest therein of every way publicly maintained where any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including street, avenue, boulevard, highway, expressway, alley or any other public way for vehicular travel by whatever name. 
(i)  Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
(j)  Telecommunication; Service. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. 
(k)  Telephone Company shall mean S&T Communications Inc., its successors and assigns. 
Section 2. Grant. 
(a)  There is hereby granted to Telephone Company the right, privilege and Franchise to construct, maintain, extend and operate its facilities, in, through and along the rights-of-way for the purpose of supplying Telecommunications Services to the City and the inhabitants thereof for the full term of the franchise; subject, however, to the terms and conditions herein set forth. 
(b)  This franchise does not provide the Telephone Company the right to provide "Cable Service" to City and inhabitants thereof. Nothing in this franchise is intended to preclude the City from seeking, or authorizing the City to seek, a franchise from any subsidiary, affiliate, or third party providing "Cable Service". The Telephone Company and City agree that nothing in this franchise is intended to authorize the City to seek from Telephone Company nor to require Telephone Company to obtain a franchise to offer "Open Video Systems" as that term is used in section 653 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (codified at 47 U.S.C. 573). Telephone Company and City further agree, however, that this ordinance does not authorize Telephone Company to offer "Open Video Systems" without paying the fee on the number of subscribers in the system operator for the provision of cable service in lieu of a franchise fee, pursuant to and in the manner described in 47 U.S.C. 573 (c)(2)(b) and without complying with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 573. 
(c)  Upon written request from Telephone Company, the City agrees to begin negotiations in good faith with Telephone Company within 30 days to provide Telephone Company a franchise to provide "Cable Service" to the City and inhabitants thereof on terms no more burdensome that the franchise(s) granted to other providers of "Cable Service" within the City. 
Section 3. Use of Right-of-Way. In the use of rights-of-way under this franchise, the Telephone Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City in the reasonable exercise of its police power. In addition, the Telephone Company shall be subject to all rules, regulations, policies, resolutions, and ordinances now or hereafter adopted or promulgated by the City relating to permits and fees, sidewalk and pavement cuts, utility location, construction coordination, beautification, and other requirements on the use of rights-of-way and shall comply with the following: 
(a)  The Telephone Company's use of rights-of-way shall in all matters be subordinate to the City's use of rights-of-way for any public purpose. The Telephone Company shall coordinate placement of its facilities in a manner that minimizes adverse impact on public improvements, as reasonably determined by the City. Where placement is not otherwise regulated, facilities shall be placed with adequate clearance from such public improvements so as not to impact or be impacted by such public improvement. 
(b)  All earth, materials, sidewalks, paving, crossings, utilities, public improvements, or improvements of any kind, injured or removed by the Telephone Company in its activities under this franchise, shall be fully repaired or restored promptly by the Telephone company at its sole expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City or owner thereof. 
(c)  All facilities constructed, replaced, or relocated in the rights-of-way after the date hereof shall be placed underground. Any vaults, boxes, pedestals, and similar facilities placed above ground in street rights-of-way shall be located behind the sidewalk where feasible. 
(d)  The Telephone Company shall keep and maintain accurate records and as-built drawings depicting accurate horizontal and vertical location of all facilities constructed, reconstructed, or relocated in the street rights-of-way after the date hereof and provide location information regarding specific future project locations to the City upon request. Where such information is available electronically, upon request from the City, Telephone Company agrees to provide such information in an electronic format. (City agrees to use information only to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects and further agrees not to disclose such information to anyone other than City employees requiring such information to locate utility facilities in connection with municipal projects, except as required by law. Telephone Company and City agree that such information is confidential and proprietary and agree that such information shall remain the sole property of Telephone Company and agree that pursuant to K.S.A. 45-221(12), (18), as amended, such information does not constitute public records subject to K.S.A. 45-218, as amended. In the event that City is required by law to disclose such information, the Telephone Company agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all penalties or costs, including attorney's fees, arising from the actions of the Telephone Company, or of the City at the written request of the Telephone Company, in seeking to safeguard the confidentiality of information provided by Telephone Company to City under this section. In the event such information is required by force of law to be publicly disclosed, the Telephone Company shall have no further obligation under this section to provide the City with such information). Such facilities shall be horizontally and vertically located at least every 100 feet and at any other alignment change. All points of facilities shall be horizontally located from street centerline, or section or quarter section lines or corners. Vertical locations or all points of facilities shall consist of elevations in either City datum or United States Geological Survey datum. 
(e)  All work performed in the traveled way or which in any way impacts vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be properly signed, barricaded, and otherwise protected. Such signing shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Federal Highway Administration's Guideline for Work Zone Traffic Control, unless otherwise agreed to by the City. 
(f)  The Telephone Company shall notify the City not less than three working days in advance (such notice to be adequate for timely notice on the governing body agenda under City procedures) of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or relocation of facilities, which would require any street closure, which reduces traffic flow to less than two lanes of moving traffic. Except in the event of an Emergency, as reasonably determined by the Telephone Company, so such closure shall take place without prior authorization from the City. 
(g)  The Telephone Company shall cooperate promptly and fully with the City and take all reasonable measures necessary to provide accurate and complete information regarding the nature and horizontal and vertical location of its facilities located within right-of-way when requested by the City or its authorized agents for a public project. Such location and identification shall be at the sole expense of the Telephone Company without expense to the City, its employees, agents, or authorized contractors. The Telephone Company shall designate and maintain a local agent, familiar with the facilities, who is responsible for satisfying information needs of the City and other users of the rights-of-way. 
(h)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas, or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval. If federal or state funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds may be made available to the franchisee at the option of the city if the federal or state regulations permit. 
(i)  It shall be the responsibility of the Telephone Company to take adequate measures to protect and defend its facilities in the rights-of-way from harm or damage. If the Telephone Company fails to accurately or timely locate facilities when requested, it has no claim for cost or damages against the City and its authorized contractors unless such party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentional conduct. Telephone Company shall be responsible to the City and its agents, representatives, and authorized contractors for all damages including, but not limited to, delay damages, repair costs, down time, construction delays, penalties or other expenses of any kind arising out of the failure of the Telephone Company to perform any of its obligations under this agreement unless the damaged party is solely responsible for the harm or damage by its negligence or intentionally caused harm. However, the City and its authorized contractors shall be responsible to take reasonable precautionary measures including calling for utility locations and observing marker posts when working near Telephone Company facilities. 
(j)  The Telephone Company, on the request of any applicant, shall remove or raise or lower its wires temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the party or parties requesting the same, and the Telephone Company may require such payment in advance. The Telephone Company shall be given not less that 15 days' written notice from the applicant detailing the time and location of the moving operations, and not less than 24 hours advance notice from the applicant advising of the actual operation. The City shall not be liable for any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures by the City or its contractors. 
(k)  All technical standards governing construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, use, maintenance, and dismantling of the facilities in the rights-of-way shall be in accordance with applicable present and future federal, state, and City laws and regulations, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety Code, and the Fiber Optic Cable Installation Standard, of the Telecommunications Industry Committee, or such substantive equivalents as may hereafter be adopted or promulgated. It is understood that the standards established in this paragraph are minimum standards and the requirements established or referenced in this ordinance may be additional to or stricter than such minimum standards. 
(l)  The City encourages the conservation of rights-of-way by the sharing of space by all utilities. To the extent required by Federal or State law, the Telephone Company shall permit any other franchised entity by appropriate contract or agreement negotiated by the parties to use any and all facilities constructed or erected by the Telephone Company. All said agreements and installations shall be subject to all existing and future ordinances and regulations of the City. Telephone Company agrees that it will not grant any entity rights to occupy the rights-of-way without providing notice to the City. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring Telephone Company to provide City notice when it provides Telecommunications services to any entity. 
Section 4. Indemnity and Hold Harmless. The Telephone Company shall hold and save the City, its officers, employees, agents, and authorized contractors, harmless from and against all claims, damages, expense, liability and cost including attorney fees, to the extent occasioned in any manner by the Telephone Company's occupancy of rights-of-way, except to the extent otherwise specified in Section 3(i). In the event a claim shall be made or an action shall be instituted against the City growing out of such occupancy of the rights-of-way by facilities of the Telephone Company, then upon notice by the City to the Telephone company, the Telephone Company will assume liability for the defense of such actions at the cost of the Telephone Company, subject to the option of the City to appear and defend, at its own cost, any such case. 
Section 5. Payments and Charges. The payments herein provided shall be in lieu of all other licenses, taxes, charges, fees or impositions, except that the usual general property taxes and special ad valorem property taxes, and any charges for pavement cuts or other charges based on restoring premises to their same condition, or charges made for privileges which are not in any way connected with telephone business, as such, will be imposed on the Telephone Company, and are not covered by the payments herein. The Telephone Company shall have the privilege of crediting such sums payable hereunder with any unpaid balance due said Telephone company for telephone service rendered or facilities furnished to said City; provided, that said balance due is liquidated and uncontested. 
Section 6. Compensation to City. 
(a)  In consideration of the franchise granted to Telephone Company by City, Telephone Company agrees to pay to City during the term of this franchise, a sum of $0.75 per month for each reported access line served by Telephone Company for local service within the city limits of City. Compensation required by this franchise shall be paid on or before the 31st day of January and the 31st day of July of each year in which this franchise is effective, and pay the aforementioned sums for the preceding six month period ending on the 31st day of December and the 30th day of June, respectively, for a period of five years, or any extension thereof. 
(b)  If during the term of this ordinance any entity provides Local Service in city and provides compensation to City at an amount less than the Telephone Company is required to pay under Section 6(a) per month for each reported access line within the City or provides no compensation to City for each such reported access line, this ordinance shall require compensation no greater than such amounts, if any, during such time remaining of the term of this ordinance that the lesser compensation, if any, is paid by such other entity. 
(c)  The parties agree that if federal law or state law is enacted setting forth a maximum allowable level of compensation for franchise rights and if such maximum allowable level is less that the level of compensation required by this ordinance, this ordinance shall require Telephone Company to pay the reduced level required by law the remainder of the term of this ordinance. 
(d)  If during the term of this ordinance, Telephone Company believes that it is entitled to reduction in compensation pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) above, Telephone Company agrees to notify City in writing and agrees that it will continue to pay City at the monthly rate set forth in Section 6(a) for each reported access line served by Telephone Company for Local Service within the City of Goodland until final agreement is reached with the City sixty (60) days following such notice to City. 
(e)  The Telephone Company shall correctly code all customers that are located within the corporate limits of the City, provided that the City shall give Telephone Company notice of boundary changes as provided below. Coding shall be updated to reflect annexation and other changes in City boundaries, and the associated changes in customers and access lines, within 30 days of the date City provides Telephone Company written notice of the annexation or other changes in boundaries and a listing of addresses affected by such changes. Such notice shall be sent to S&T Communications Inc., 320 Kansas Ave., Brewster, Kansas 67732. In the event of annexations, Telephone Company may request additional time in writing to recode customers, which request will not be unreasonably denied. 
Section 7. Collection of Compensation. This franchise may be terminated by the Telephone Company if authority to collect the amounts of such payments, or part of such payments, from its customers within the City shall be removed, canceled or withdrawn by legislative, judicial or regulatory act. 
Section 8. Termination of Franchise. In case of failure on the part of S&T Communications Inc., its successors and assigns, to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or S&T Communications Inc., its successors and assigns, should do or cause to be done any act or thing prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance, S&T Communications Inc., its successors and assigns, shall forfeit all rights and privileges granted by this ordinance and all rights hereunder shall cease, terminate and become null and void, provided that said forfeiture shall not take effect until the City of Goodland shall carry out the following proceedings. Before the City of Goodland proceeds to forfeit said franchise, as in this section prescribed, it shall first serve a written notice upon the manager of S&T Communications Inc. at its principal office in the City of Brewster, Kansas, and S&T Communications Inc. shall have 90 days thereafter in which to comply with conditions of this franchise. If at the end of such 90-day period the City of Goodland deems that the conditions of such franchise have not been complied with by S&T Communications and that such franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, the City of Goodland, in order to terminate such franchise, shall enact an ordinance setting out the grounds upon which said franchise or agreement is to be canceled or terminated. If within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance S&T Communications Inc. shall not have instituted an action, either in the District Court of Sherman County, Kansas or some other court of competent jurisdiction to determine whether or not S&T Communications Inc. has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof, such franchise shall be canceled and terminated at the end of such 30-day period. If within such 30-day period S&T Communication Inc. does institute an action, as provided, to determine whether or not S&T Communications Inc. has violated the terms of this franchise and that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason thereof and prosecutes such action to final judgment with due diligence, then, in that event, in case the court finds that the franchise is subject to cancellation by reason of the violation of its terms, this franchise shall terminate 30 days after such final judgment is rendered. Provided, however, that the failure of S&T Communications Inc. to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance or the doing or accusing to be done by S & T Communications, Inc. of anything prohibited by or in violation of the terms of this ordinance shall not be grounds for the forfeiture thereof when such act or omission on the part of S&T Communications Inc. is due to any cause or delay beyond the control of S&T Communications Inc., its successors and assigns, or to bona fide legal proceedings. 
Section 9. Rights and Duties of Grantee Upon Expiration of Franchise. Upon expiration of this franchise, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between the Telephone Company and the City of Goodland, or by forfeiture thereof, the Telephone Company shall have the right to remove from public property all of its lines, poles, towers and other appurtenances and equipment used in its said business within a reasonable time after such expiration, but in such event, it shall be the duty of the Telephone Company, immediately upon such removal, to restore the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public ways and grounds from which said lines, poles, towers, other appurtenances and other equipment are removed to as good condition as the same were before said removal was effected. 
Section 10. Term and Termination Date. The term of this franchise shall be five years commencing upon date of final approval and adoption by the City. The Telephone Company at its option shall have the right to renegotiate this franchise for five subsequent terms three years each, by providing written notice to City of its desire to extend the franchise not later than 180 days prior to the expiration of the initial term; provided, however, that if by operation of subsection (b) of Section 6, Telephone Company is required to pay a lesser amount or no compensation to City at the time that Telephone Company provides such written notice, City may reject the additional term by providing written notice to Telephone Company within 90 days of receipt of Telephone Company's written notice to City of its desire to extend the franchise. The additional term shall be deemed a continuation of this franchise and not as a new franchise or amendment. 
Section 11. Acceptance of Terms by the Telephone Company. The Telephone Company shall have 60 days after final passage and approval of this ordinance to file with the City Clerk of the City of Goodland its acceptance in writing of the provision, terms and conditions of this ordinance, which acceptance shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths; and so accepted the ordinance and acceptance shall constitute a contract between the City of Goodland and the Telephone Company subject to the provisions of the laws of the State of Kansas. 
Section 12. Right to Assign. This franchise shall be assignable only in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, as the same may exist at the time when any assignment is made. 
Section 13. Conditions of Franchise. This contract, franchise, grant and privilege is granted and accepted under and subject to all applicable laws and under and subject to all of the orders, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted by governmental bodies now or hereafter having jurisdiction, and each and every provision hereof shall be subject to Acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other causes beyond the Telephone Company's control. This franchise shall not be exclusive. 
Section 14. Invalidity of Ordinance. If any clause, sentence, or section of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provision of this ordinance. 
Section 15. Venue. This agreement shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Kansas, and all obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Sherman County, Kansas. In the event that any legal proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this agreement, the same shall be brought in Sherman County, Kansas limited to state court action. Nothing in Section 15 shall be construed to limit or restrict Telephone Company right to initiate action in federal court (Kansas District) or to remove a state court action to federal court (Kansas District). 
Section 16. Notice. For the purpose of this agreement, notice to the City will be to: 
City Manager 
City of Goodland 
204 W. 11th Street 
Goodland, Kansas 67735 
Notice to the Telephone Company will be to: 
General Manager 
S&T Communications Inc. 
320 Kansas Ave. 
Brewster, Kansas 67732 
Notice will be effective upon delivery by hand delivery or by first class mail to the above address until the City or the Telephone Company notifies the other, in writing, of a change in the address. 
Section 17. Public Purpose. All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. Any member of the governing body or City official or employee charged with enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. Neither the City nor the Telephone Company by accepting this ordinance waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this ordinance, including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 18. Effective Date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the Goodland Daily News, but not before sixty (60) days after its final passage all pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001(b)(6). 
(6-18-01) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1453 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO S&T COMMUNICATIONS INC., ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES AND ASSIGNS, FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS, THE RIGHT, AUTHORITY, POWER AND FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH, CONSTRUCT, ACQUIRE, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND ENVIRONS THEREOF, AND TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR SUCH COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM, AND REPEALING PAST ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT. BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviation, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense, words in the plural number include the singular number; provided that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include that which is appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(c)  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a community antennae television system within said city subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above-captioned ordinance. 
(d)  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, lessee, or assignee of the person, firm or corporation. 
(e)  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley, or other public right-of-way now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the city as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
(f)  Community Antennae Television System hereinafter referred to as "CATV System" shall mean an electronic system with properties and facilities so constructed or presently existing as to be used for the interception and receipt of electro-magnetic radiation, and transmission and distribution of same to subscribers by means of a cable and other related facilities. 
(g)  Subscriber shall mean any person which receives from the franchisee herein named, the services of the franchisee's CATV System. 
(h)  Person shall mean any individual or association of individuals, or any firm, corporation or other business organization. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After a public hearing affording an opportunity to be heard to all interested parties, and after a review of the qualifications of S&T Communications Inc., and its reputation, whether or not it is adequately financed, and technically competent to provide CATV System service to the city, and after determining that the construction arrangements of S&T Communications Inc., are adequate and feasible, there is hereby granted unto S&T Communications Inc., a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a CATV System within said city, and in so doing to use the streets of said city by erection, installing, placing, burying, construction, repairing, replacing, reconstructing, maintaining and retaining in, on, upon, or across any such streets, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to a CATV System, and in addition, so to use, operate and provide for all or part of such facilities by a service offerings obtained from any franchisee or operating utility company providing service within the city. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise herein granted shall commence on the first day of the first month next following the date upon which the franchisee herein named accepts and agrees in writing to the terms and conditions set forth in this franchise ordinance and shall continue for a term of five years from said date. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the city clerk within 30 days of passing this ordinance. This franchise may be extended upon good faith negotiations for five subsequent terms of three years each by providing written notice to the city of its desire to extend the franchise no later than 180 days prior to the expiration of the initial term for any of the extensions thereof. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The construction of the properties and facilities of said franchisee's CATV System shall conform, at least, to the standard of the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters or the edition thereof which has been adopted by the city, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that said construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulation of the United States of America and the State of Kansas and the City of Goodland, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of said CATV System. 
(b)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected, or buried by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
(c)  In case of disturbance caused by the franchisee of any street or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
(d)  The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees which are located upon and overhang the public streets and other public ways of said city, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the franchisee's properties, and the trimming shall be done at all times in a workmanlike manner. 
(e)  The franchisee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall normally be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways. 
Prior to any underground construction occurring on any street a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such services. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of the proposed cable and appurtenances. Upon approval of the permit by the city, the franchisee may commence construction. 
Underground construction on private property shall not require a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operating Standards. The franchisee's CATV system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the Community Antennae Television industry and applicable city codes and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the subscriber receives the highest quality of service and shall at all times be in conformance with the FCC rules, regulations and proof of performance test provisions. The franchisee shall maintain an office within the city, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a listed telephone, and shall be operated so that complaints and request for repair or adjustments may be received al all reasonable times. 
Section 6. Additional Standards of Operations. The franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets of the city. A copy of such records shall be kept within the city and available for inspection by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas, or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval, if federal or state funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds may be made available to the franchisee at the option of the city if the federal or state regulations permit. 
(c)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower or remove its wires to permit the moving of building. The expense of such temporary removal, and of raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority at its option to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given no less that 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  The franchisee will limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer that 24 hours after notice has been given, except said time shall be extended when the performance of this obligation is prevented by an act of God or the same is otherwise made impossible because of circumstances over which the franchisee has no control; and that the franchisee shall provide its subscribers with facilities for receiving request and complaints for service. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding cable television operation, the subscriber shall be entitled to file his written complaint with the city manager, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with representative of the franchisee within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each subscriber who shall have filed a written complaint of his rights to such a procedure if the complaint is not resolved to satisfaction of subscriber/company within 15 days. 
(e)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, above, under, and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the franchisee that the franchisee shall protect and hold the city harmless for all claims, action, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, courts costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any persons arising out of the negligence of the franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the CATV system, provided the city gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations, in writing. The franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability insurance in an insurance company with a national rating acceptable to the city. The insurances shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for personal injury to any one accident and $500.000.00 for property damage in any one accident. All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $1,000.00 for any type of coverage and the city shall be named as an additional insured. The city may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuses of privileges granted to the franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the franchisee or its insurer. The franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise, provided, however, the interest of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the city a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be approved by the city attorney, and filed in the office of the city clerk; the city will receive prior written notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. The franchisee is hereby authorized to extend the existing system within the franchise area to the extent such is or may become economically feasible. The franchisee acknowledges the city from time to time may add or delete land to the city limits by annexation or deannexation to which franchisee is obligated to serve under this franchise, but said obligation to extend service shall only be in the city limits. The obligation shall occur whenever the franchisee shall receive written requests for service from at least 13 subscribers within 1,000 feet of its cable plant and the connection shall be solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible. The 1,000 feet shall be measured in extension length of franchisee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premise. No person in the franchisee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual circumstances, including, without limitations, when the distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than 150 feet or when a subscriber density exists less than the density specified hereinabove, service shall be made available on the basis of costs of materials, labor, and easements, plus ten percent, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on potential cable subscribers in more densely populated areas. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not, however, the franchisee may not sell or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of streets and places by the franchisee and in lieu of all occupation and license taxes, the franchise shall, on or before the 31st day of January and the 31st day of July of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to $0.75 per subscriber per month for the preceding six month period ending on the 31st day of December and 30th day of June, respectively, for a period of five years. Copyright tax, local and state sales tax and franchise tax may be an add-on to rates and may be automatically passed through to the subscriber. If passed on these costs shall be shown separately on billing to subscribers. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The governing body of the city may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds: 
(a)  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
(b)  Misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
(c)  Insolvency of the franchisee, or inability of the franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The city shall file with the franchisee a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the governing body. The franchisee shall have at least 60 days prior to the hearing and after the receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other grounds asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the city determines that the franchisee has taken action during or making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the city shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the city, the franchisee, subscribers or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the governing body if it tends to substantiate or disprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The governing body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the governing body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial reviews sought by the franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the franchisee. 
Section 13. Procedure Upon Termination. Upon termination of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension of renewal thereof and accepted the same, or if it shall not have sold its property in place, it shall promptly remove all its property within 360 days after termination at its sole expense. In so removing the property, the franchisee shall refill, at its sole expense, any excavation so that it shall leave the streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Section 14. Use of Facilities. It shall be the duty of the franchisee to negotiate and make any and all contracts and agreements with the owners of poles, towers, conduits, or other facilities for use by the franchisee in the provision of cable television service under this ordinance. 
Section 15. Rights of the Franchisee. The Franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The Franchisee shall, upon request of the City, provide to the City a copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and a copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of Business shall include rates charged for various levels of service and the number of channels carried for viewing along with various levels of service to subscribers and changes made for installation. 
Section 16. Rights Reserved to the City. Without limitations upon the rights the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserves the following rights, power, and authorities: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
(b)  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
(c)  The right to grant other CATV franchises in the city. 
Section 17. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The city's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights hereunder, and the franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 18. Amendments to Franchise. The city may amend this franchise, from time to time to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which will afford an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its customers, and to enable the franchisee to conform to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as they may be amended from time to time. 
Section 19. Emergency Use of Franchisee's System. Franchisee agrees to include within their system the capability for a remotely activated emergency system whereby a designee of the city in time of emergency, may introduce a scrolling or audio message on all system channels simultaneously. 
Section 20. Franchisee is without Remedy Against the City. The franchisee shall have no remedy or recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from and of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, because of the enforcement thereof by the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all, or part, of the franchise herein granted; provided that the franchisee expressly acknowledges that it accepted the franchise that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise upon any understanding of promise, whether given verbally or in writing by or on behalf of the city, or by any other person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed herein; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that it has carefully read the provisions, terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 21. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(a)  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the city, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to office of the city clerk of the city or by personal delivery of the same to the person, of his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if the notice be addressed to the franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States mail addressed to the General Manager of the franchisee, or by personally delivering the same to such person as hereinabove provided. 
Section 22. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration of other obligation required of the franchisee. 
Section 23. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the Goodland Daily News, but not before sixty (60) days after its final passage all pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001(b)(6). 
(6-18-01) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1497 
A CONTRACT FRANCHISE ORDINANCE GRANTING TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE AND THE RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE, MAINTAIN AND EXTEND A TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, PRESCRIBING THE TERMS OF SAID GRANT AND RELATING THERETO; AND REPEALING ORDINANCE 1409 AND ALL OTHER ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AND PARTS THEREOF INCONSISTENT OR IN CONFLICT WITH THE TERMS HEREOF. 
Section 1. Pursuant to K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001, a contract franchise ordinance is hereby granted to Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (SWBT), a telecommunications local exchange provider providing local exchange service within the City of Goodland, Kansas ("City"), subject to the provisions contained hereafter. The term of this ordinance shall be for a period beginning April 1, 2003 and ending March 31, 2006. Compensation for said contract franchise ordinance shall be established pursuant to Section 3 of this ordinance. 
Section 2. For the purposes of this contract franchise ordinance, the following words and phrases and their derivations shall have the following meaning: 
Access Line shall mean and be limited to retail billed and collected residential lines; business lines; ISDN lines; PBX trunks and simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement where all stations served by such simulated access lines are used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement. Access line may not be construed to include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not terminate at an end user customer's premises, or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access line rates on the provision of a single service or on the multiple communications paths derived from a billed and collected access line. Access line shall not include the following: Wireless telecommunication services, the sale or lease of unbundled loop facilities, special access services, lines providing only data services without voice services processed by a telecommunications local exchange service provider or private line service arrangements. 
Access line count means the number of access lines serving consumers within the corporate boundaries of the city on the last day of each month. 
Access line fee means a fee determined by a city, up to a maximum as set out in K.S.A 2002 Supp. 12-2001 and amendments thereto, to be used by a telecommunications local exchange service provider in calculating the amount of access line remittance. 
Access line remittance means the amount to be paid by a telecommunications local exchange service provider to a city, the total of which is calculated by multiplying the access line fee, as determined in the city, by the number of access lines served by that telecommunications local exchange service provider within that city for each month in that calendar year. 
Gross receipts means only those receipts collected from within the corporate boundaries of the city enacting the franchise and which are derived from the following: 
(A)  recurring local exchange service for business and residence which includes basic exchange service, touch tone, optional calling features and measured local calls; 
(B)  recurring local exchange access line services for pay phone lines provided by a telecommunications local exchange service provider to all pay phone service providers; 
(C)  local directory assistance revenue; 
(D)  line status verification/busy interrupt revenue; 
(E)  local operator assistance revenue; 
(F)  nonrecurring local exchange service revenue which shall include customer service for installation of lines, reconnection of service and charge for duplicate bills. 
All other revenue, including, but not limited to, revenues from extended area service, the sale or lease of unbundled network elements, nonregulated services, carrier and end user access, long distance, wireless telecommunications services, lines providing only data service without voice services processed by a telecommunications local exchange service provider, private line service arrangements, internet, broadband and all other services not wholly local in nature are excluded from gross receipts. Gross receipts shall be reduced by bad debt expenses. Uncollectible and late charges shall not be included within gross receipts. If a telecommunications local exchange service provider offers additional services of a wholly local nature which if in existence on or before July 1, 2002, would have been included with the definition of gross receipts, such services shall be included from the date of the offering of such services in the city. 
Local exchange service means local switched telecommunications service within any local exchange service area approved by the state corporation commission, regardless of the medium by which the local telecommunications service is provided. The term local exchange service shall not include wireless communication services. 
Provider shall mean a local exchange carrier as defined in subsection (h) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, or a telecommunications carrier as defined in subsection (m) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto. 
Public right-of-way means only the area of real property in which the city has a dedicated or acquired right-of-way interest in the real property. It shall include the area on, below or above the present and future streets, alleys, avenues, roads, highways, parkways or boulevards dedicated or acquired as right-of-way. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications or other nonwire telecommunication or broadcast service, easements obtained by utilities, or private easements in platted subdivisions or tracts. 
Telecommunications local exchange service provider means a local exchange carrier as defined in subsection (h) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, and a telecommunications carrier as defined in subsection (m) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, which does, or in good faith intends to, provide local exchange service. The term telecommunications local exchange service provider does not include an interexchange carrier that does not provide local exchange service, competitive access provider that does not provide local exchange service or any wireless telecommunications local exchange service provider. 
Telecommunications services means providing the means of transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Section 3. Compensation made pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance shall be paid on a quarterly basis without invoice or reminder from the City and paid within forty-five (45) days after the last day of the remittal period. For the term of this contract franchise ordinance, said compensation shall be a sum equal to seventy-five cents ($.75) per month per access line. Thereafter, compensation for the term of this contract franchise ordinance shall continue to be based on a sum equal to ($.75) per access line; unless the City notifies SBC prior to ninety days (90) before the end of the calendar year that it intends to increase or decrease the percentage of gross receipts for the following calendar year or that it intends to switch to an access line fee for the following calendar year. In the event city elects compensation based on an access line fee, nothing herein precludes the City from switching back to a gross receipts fee provided city notifies SBC prior to ninety days (90) before the end of the calendar year that it intends to elect a gross receipts fee for the following calendar year. Beginning January 1, 2004, any increased access line fee or gross receipt fee shall be in compliance with the public notification procedures set forth in subsections (l) and (m) K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001. 
Section 4. The City shall have the right to examine, upon written notice to the telecommunications local exchange service provider, no more than once per calendar year, those records necessary to verify the correctness of the compensation paid pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance. 
Section 5. The Telephone Company shall correctly code all customers that are located within the corporate limits of the City, provided that the City shall give Telephone Company notice of boundary changes as provided below. Coding shall be updated to reflect annexation and other changes in City boundaries, and the associated changes in customers and access lines, within thirty (30) days of the date City provides Telephone Company written notice of the annexation or other changes in boundaries and a listing of addresses affected by such changes. Such notice shall be sent to: 
Southwestern Bell Telephone Company 
823 Quincy, Room 801 
Topeka, Kansas 66612 
In the event of annexations, Telephone Company may request additional time in writing to recode customers, which request will not be unreasonably denied. 
Section 6. The authority of SWBT to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall always be subject and subordinate to the reasonable public health, safety and welfare requirements and regulations of the City. The City may exercise its home rule powers in its administration and regulation related to the management of the public right-of-way provided that any such exercise must be competitively neutral and may not be unreasonable or discriminatory. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to require a competitive infrastructure provider to enter into a contract franchise ordinance. 
Section 7. As a condition of this contract franchise ordinance, SWBT is required to obtain and is responsible for any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Kansas Corporation Commission (KCC), subject to SWBT's right to challenge in good faith such requirements as established by the FCC, KCC, or other City Ordinance. SWBT shall also comply with all applicable laws, statutes and/or ordinances, subject to SWBT's right to challenge in good faith such laws, statutes and/or ordinances. 
Section 8. This contract franchise ordinance does not provide SWBT the right to provide cable service as a cable operator (as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522 (5)) within the City. Upon SWBT's request for a franchise to provide cable service as a cable operator (as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 522 (5)) within the City, the City agrees to timely negotiate such franchise in good faith with SWBT. SWBT agrees that this franchise does not permit it to operate an open video system without payment of fees permitted by 47 U.S.C. § 573(c)(2)(B) and without complying with FCC regulations promulgated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 573. 
Section 9. If requested by City, in order to accomplish construction and maintenance activities directly related to improvements for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, SWBT shall remove its facilities from the public right of way or shall relocate or adjust its facilities within the public right of way at no cost to the City. Such relocation or adjustment shall be completed as soon as reasonably possible within the time set forth in any request by the City for such relocation or adjustment. Any damages suffered by the City or its contractors as a result of SWBT's failure to timely relocate or adjust its facilities shall be borne by SWBT. 
Section 10. The City may require SWBT to repair all damage to a public right-of-way caused by the activities of SWBT, or of any agent, affiliate, employee, or subcontractor of SWBT, while occupying, installing, repairing or maintaining facilities in a public right-of-way and to return the right-of-way, to its functional equivalence before the damage pursuant to the reasonable requirements and specifications of the City. If SWBT fails to make the repairs required by the City, the City may effect those repairs and charge SWBT the cost of those repairs. If the City incurs damages as a result of a violation of this section, then the City shall have a cause of action against SWBT for violation of this section, and may recover its damages, including reasonable attorney fees, if SWBT is found liable by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 11. Permission is hereby granted to SWBT to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of said city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with SWBT's facilities, all the said trimming shall comply with all applicable laws, statutes and/or ordinances. 
Section 12. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving SWBT any exclusive privileges, nor shall it affect any prior or existing rights of SWBT to maintain a telecommunications system within the City. 
Section 13. SWBT shall collect and remit compensation as described in Section 3 on those access lines that have been resold or leased to another telecommunications local exchange service provider. 
Section 14. Any required or permitted notice under this contract franchise ordinance shall be in writing. Notice upon the City shall be delivered to the city clerk by first class United States mail or by personal delivery. Notice upon SWBT shall be delivered by first class mail or by personal delivery to: 
Southwestern Bell Telephone Company 
Area Manager - Municipal Affairs 
220 E 6th Street, Room 505 
Topeka, Kansas 66603 
Section 15. Failure to Enforce. The failure of either party to enforce and remedy any noncompliance of the terms and conditions of this contract franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of rights nor a waiver of the other party's obligations as provided herein. 
Section 16. SWBT shall hold and save the City, its officers, employees, agents, and authorized contractors, harmless from and against all claims, damages, expense, liability and cost including attorney fees, to the extent occasioned in any manner by SWBT's occupancy of rights-of-way. In the event a claim shall be made or an action instituted against the City growing out of such occupancy of the rights-of-way by facilities of SWBT, then upon notice by the City to SWBT, SWBT will assume liability for the defense of such actions at the cost of the SWBT, subject to the option of the City to appear and defend, at its own cost, any such case. 
Section 17. Upon expiration of this franchise, whether by lapse of time, by agreement between SWBT and the City, or by forfeiture thereof, SWBT shall have the right to remove from public property any all of its lines, pole, towers and other appurtenances and equipment used in its said business within a reasonable time after such expiration, but in such event, it shall be the duty of SWBT, immediately upon such removal, to restore the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public ways and grounds from which said lines, poles, towers, other appurtenances and other equipment are removed to as good condition as the same were before said removal was effected. 
Section 18. If any clause, sentence, or section of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid, it shall not affect the remaining provision of this ordinance. 
Section 19. Force Majure. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to the acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other disasters beyond SWBT's or the City's control. 
Section 20. Ordinance No. 1409 shall be canceled, annulled, repealed and set aside. 
Section 21. This contract franchise ordinance is made under and in conformity with the laws of the State of Kansas. No such contract franchise shall be effective until the ordinance granting the same has been adopted as provided by law. 
Section 22. All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. Any member of the governing body or City official or employee charged with enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties. Neither the City nor the Telephone Company by accepting this ordinance waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this ordinance, including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2-18-03) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1536 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO EAGLE COMMUNICATIONS INC., ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES AND ASSIGNS, FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS, THE RIGHT, AUTHORITY, POWER AND FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH, CONSTRUCT, ACQUIRE, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND ENVIRONS THEREOF, AND TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR SUCH COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM, AND REPEALING PAST ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviation, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense, words in the plural number include the singular number; provided that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include that which is appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(c)  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a community antennae television system within said city subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above-captioned ordinance. 
(d)  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, lessee, or assignee of the person, firm or corporation. 
(e)  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley, or other public right-of-way now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the city as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
(f)  Community Antennae Television System hereinafter referred to, as "CATV System" shall mean an electronic system with properties and facilities so constructed or presently existing as to be used for the interception and receipt of electro-magnetic radiation, and transmission and distribution of the same to subscribers by means of a cable and other related facilities. 
(g)  Subscriber shall mean any person, which receives from the franchisee herein named, the services of the franchisee's CATV System. 
(h)  Person shall mean any individual or association of individuals, or any firm, corporation or other business organization. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After a public hearing affording an opportunity to be heard to all interested parties, and after a review of the qualifications of EAGLE COMMUNICATIONS INC., and its reputation, whether or not it is adequately financed, and technically competent to provide CATV System service to the city, and after determining that the construction arrangements of EAGLE COMMUNICATIONS INC., are adequate and feasible, there is hereby granted unto EAGLE COMMUNICATIONS INC., a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a CATV System within said city, and in so doing to use the streets of said city by erection, installing, placing, burying, construction, repairing, replacing, reconstructing, maintaining and retaining in, on, upon, or across any such streets, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to a CATV System, and in addition, so to use, operate and provide for all or part of such facilities by a service offering obtained from any franchisee or operating utility company providing service within the city. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise herein granted shall commence on the first day of the first month next following the date upon which the franchisee herein named accepts and agrees in writing to the terms and conditions set forth in this franchise ordinance and shall continue for a term of five years from said date. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the city clerk within 30 days of passing this ordinance. This franchise may be extended upon good faith negotiations for five subsequent terms of three years each by providing written notice to the city of its desire to extend the franchise no later than 180 days prior to the expiration of the initial term for any of the extensions thereof. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The construction of the properties and facilities of said franchisee's CATV System shall conform, at least, to the standard of the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters or the edition thereof which has been adopted by the city, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that said construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulation of the United States of America and the State of Kansas and the City of Goodland, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of said CATV System. 
(b)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected, or buried by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, easements, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
(c)  In case of disturbance caused by the franchisee of any street or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
(d)  The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees which are located upon and overhang the public streets and other public ways of said city, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the franchisee's properties, and the trimming shall be done at all times in a workmanlike manner. 
(e)  The franchisee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall normally be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways. 
Prior to any underground construction occurring on any street a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such services. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of the proposed cable and appurtenances. Upon approval of the permit by the city, the franchisee may commence construction. 
Underground construction on private property shall not require a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operating Standards. The franchisee's CATV system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the Community Antennae Television industry and applicable city codes and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the subscriber receives the highest quality of service and shall at all times be in conformance with the FCC rules, regulations and proof of performance test provisions. The franchisee shall maintain an office within the city, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a listed telephone, and shall be operated so that complaints and requests for repair or adjustments may be received at all reasonable times. 
Section 6. Additional Standards of Operations. The franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations. 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets of the city. A copy of such records shall be kept within the city and available for inspection by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval, if federal or state funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds may be made available to the franchisee at the option of the city if the federal or state regulations permit. 
(c)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building-moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower or remove its wires to permit the moving of building. The expense of such temporary removal, and of raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority at its option to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given no less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  The franchisee will limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours after notice has been given, except said time shall be extended when the performance of this obligation is prevented by an act of God or the same is otherwise made impossible because of circumstances over which the franchisee has no control; and that the franchisee shall provide its subscribers with facilities for receiving request and complaints for service. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding cable television operation, the subscriber shall be entitled to file his written complaint with the city manager, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with representative of the franchisee within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each subscriber who shall have filed a written complaint of his rights to such a procedure if the complaint is not resolved to satisfaction of subscriber/company within 15 days. 
(e)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, above, under and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the franchisee that the franchisee shall protect and hold the city harmless for all claims, action, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, courts costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person arising out of the negligence of the franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the CATV system, provided the city gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations in writing. The franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability insurance in an insurance company with a national rating acceptable to the city. The insurances shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for personal injury to any one accident and $500,000.00 for property damage in any one accident. All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $1,000.00 for any type of coverage and the city shall be named as an additional insured. The city may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuse of privileges granted to the franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the franchisee or its insurer. The franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise, provided, however, the interest of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the city a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be approved by the city attorney, and filed in the office of the city clerk; the city will receive prior written notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. The franchisee is hereby authorized to extend the existing system within the franchise area to the extent such is or may become economically feasible. The franchisee acknowledges the city from time to time may add or delete land to the city limits by annexation or deannexation to which franchisee is obligated to serve under this franchise, but said obligation to extend service shall only be in the city limits. The obligation shall occur whenever the franchisee shall receive written requests for services from at least 13 subscribers within 1,000 feet of its cable plant and the connections shall be solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible. The 1,000 feet shall be measured in extension length of franchisee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premise. No person in the franchisee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual circumstances, including, without limitations. When the distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than 150 feet or when a subscriber density exists less than the density specified hereinabove, service shall be made available on the basis of costs of materials, labor, and easements, plus ten percent, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on potential cable subscribers in more densely populated areas. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not, however, the franchisee may not sell or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of streets and places by the franchisee and in lieu of all occupation and license taxes, the franchise shall, on or before the 31st day of January and the 31st day of July of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to $0.75 per subscriber per month for the preceding six month period ending on the 31st day of December and the 30th day of June, respectively, for a period of five years. 
Copyright tax, local and state sales tax and franchise tax may be an add-on to rates and may be automatically passed through to the subscriber. If passed on these costs shall be shown separately on billing to subscribers. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The governing body of the city may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds: 
(a)  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
(b)  Misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
(c)  Insolvency of the franchisee, or inability of the franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The city shall file with the franchisee a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the governing body. The franchisee shall have at least 60 days prior to the hearing and after the receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other grounds asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the city determines that the franchisee has taken action during or making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the city shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the city, the franchisee, subscribers or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the governing body if it tends to substantiate or disprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The governing body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the governing body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial reviews sought by the franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the franchisee. 
Section 13. Procedure Upon Termination. Upon termination of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension of renewal thereof and accepted the same, or if it shall not have sold its property in place, it shall promptly remove all its property within 360 days after termination at its sole expense. In so removing the property, the franchisee shall refill, at its sole expense, any excavation so that it shall leave the streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Section 14. Use of Facilities. It shall be the duty of the franchisee to negotiate and make any and all contracts and agreements with the owners of poles, towers, conduits or other facilities for use by the franchisee in the provision of cable television service under this ordinance. 
Section 15. Rights of the Franchisee. The Franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The Franchisee shall, upon request of the City, provide to the City a copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and a copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of Business shall include rates charged for various levels of service and the number of channels carried for viewing along with various levels of service to subscribers and changes made for installation. 
Section 16. Rights Reserved to the City. Without limitation upon the rights the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, power, and authorities: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
(b)  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
(c)  The right to grant other CATV franchises in the city. 
Section 17. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The city's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights hereunder, and the franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 18. Amendments to Franchise. The city may amend this franchise, from time to time to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which will afford an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its customers and to enable the franchisee to conform to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as they may be amended from time to time. 
Section 19. Emergency Use of Franchisee's System. Franchisee agrees to include within their system the capability for a remotely activated emergency system whereby a designee of the city in time of emergency, may introduce a scrolling or audio message on all system channels simultaneously. 
Section 20. Franchisee is without Remedy Against the City. The franchisee shall have no remedy or recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from and of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, because of the enforcement thereof by the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all, or part, of the franchise herein granted; provided that the franchisee expressly acknowledges that it accepted the franchise that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise upon any understanding of promise, whether given verbally or in writing by or on behalf of the city, or by any other person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed herein; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that it has carefully read the provisions, terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 21. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(a)  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the city, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to office of the city clerk of the city or by personal delivery of the same to the person, of his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if the notice be addressed to the franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States mail addressed to the General Manager of the franchisee, or by personally delivering the same to such person as hereinabove provided. 
Section 22. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration of other obligation required of the franchisee. 
Section 23. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the Goodland Star News, but not before sixty (60) days after its final passage all pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001(b)(6). 
(9-19-05) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1543 
A CONTRACT FRANCHISE ORDINANCE GRANTED TO SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE, L.P., A TELECOMMUNICATIONS LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE PROVIDER PROVIDING LOCAL EXCHANGE SERVICE WITHIN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Pursuant to K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001, a contract franchise ordinance is hereby granted to Southwestern Bell Telephone L.P. d/b/a AT&T Kansas ("AT&T Kansas), a telecommunications local exchange service provider providing local exchange service within the City of Goodland, Kansas ("City"), subject to the provisions contained hereafter. The initial term of this contract franchise ordinance shall be for a period of two years beginning September 1, 2006, and ending August 31, 2008. Thereafter, this contract franchise ordinance will automatically renew for additional one-year terms, unless either party notifies the other party of its intent to terminate the contract franchise ordinance at least 90 days before the termination of the then current term. The additional term shall be deemed a continuation of this contract franchise ordinance and not as a new contract franchise ordinance or amendment. Pursuant to K.S.A. 2005 Supp. 12-2001(b)(2) under no circumstances shall this contract franchise ordinance exceed 20 years from the effective date of the contract franchise ordinance. Compensation for said contract franchise ordinance shall be established pursuant to Section 3 of this ordinance. 
Section 2. For the purpose of this contract franchise ordinance, the following words and phrases and their derivations shall have the following meaning: 
Access line shall mean and be limited to retail billed and collected residential lines; business lines; ISDN lines; PBX trunks and simulated exchange access lines provided by a central office based switching arrangement where all stations serviced by such simulated exchange access lines are used by a single customer of the provider of such arrangement. Access line may not be construed to include interoffice transport or other transmission media that do not terminate at an end user customer's premises, or to permit duplicate or multiple assessment of access line rates on the provision of a single service or on the multiple communications paths derived from a billed and collected access line. Access line shall not include the following: Wireless telecommunications services, the sale or lease of unbundled loop facilities, special access services, lines providing only data services without voice services process by a telecommunications local exchange service provider or private line service arrangements. 
Access line count means the number of access lines serving consumers within the corporate boundaries of the city on the last day of each month. 
Access line fee means a fee determined by a city, up to a maximum as set out in K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001 and amendments thereto, to be used by a telecommunications local exchange service provider in calculating the amount of access line remittance. 
Access line remittance means the amount to be paid by a telecommunications local exchange service provider to a city, the total of which is calculated by multiplying the access line fee, as determined in the City, by the number of access lines served by that telecommunications local exchange service provider within that city for each month in that calendar quarter. 
Gross receipts means only those receipts collected from within the corporate boundaries of the City enacting the franchise and which are derived from the following: (A) Recurring local exchange service for business and residence which includes basic exchange service, touch tone, optional calling features and measured local calls; (B) recurring local exchange access line services for pay phone lines provided by a telecommunications local exchange service provider to all pay phone service providers; (C) local directory assistance revenue; (D) line status verification/busy interrupt revenue; (E) local operator assistance revenue; and (F) nonrecurring local exchange service revenue which shall include customer service for installation of lines, reconnection of service and charge for duplicate bills. All other revenues, including, but not limited to, revenues from extended area service, the sale of lease of unbundled network elements, nonregulated services, carrier and end user access, long distance, wireless telecommunications services, lines providing only data service without voice services processed by a telecommunications local exchange service provider, private line service arrangements, internet, broadband and all other services not wholly local in nature are excluded from gross receipts. Gross receipts shall be reduced by bad debt expenses. Uncollectible and late charges shall not be included within gross receipts. If a telecommunications local exchange service provider offers additional services of a wholly local nature which if in existence on or before July 1, 2002, would have been included with the definition of gross receipts, such services shall be included from the date of the offering of such services in the City. 
Local exchange service means local switched telecommunications service within any local exchange service area approved by the state corporation commission, regardless of the medium by which the local telecommunications service is provided. The term local exchange service shall not include wireless communication services. 
Telecommunications local exchange service provider means a local exchange carrier as defined in subsection (h) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, and a telecommunications carrier as defined in subsection (m) of K.S.A. 66-1,187, and amendments thereto, which does, or in good faith intends to, provide local exchange service. The term telecommunications local exchange service provider does not include an interexchange carrier that does not provide local exchange service, competitive access provider that does not provide local exchange service or any wireless telecommunications local exchange service provider. 
Telecommunications services means providing the means of transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Section 3. Compensation made pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance shall be paid on a quarterly basis without invoice or reminder from the City and paid not later than 45 days after the end of the remittal period. For the first year of this contract franchise ordinance, said compensation shall be a sum equal to five percent of gross receipts. Thereafter, compensation for each calendar year of the remaining term of the contract franchise ordinance shall continue to be based on a sum equal to five percent of gross receipts; unless the City notifies AT&T Kansas prior to 90 days before the end of the calendar year that it intends to increase or decrease the percentage of gross receipts for the following calendar year or that it intends to switch to an access line fee for the following calendar year. In the event City elects compensation based on an access line fee, nothing herein precludes City from switching back to a gross receipts fee provided City notifies AT&T Kansas prior to 90 days before the end of the calendar year that it intends to elect a gross receipts fee for the following calendar year. Any increased access line fee or gross receipt fee shall be in compliance with the public notification procedures set forth in subsections (l) and (m) K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001. 
Section 4. The City shall have the right to examine, upon written notice to the telecommunications local exchange service provider, no more than once per calendar year, those records necessary to verify the correctness of the compensation paid pursuant to this contract franchise ordinance. 
Section 5. As a condition of this contract franchise ordinance, AT&T Kansas is required to obtain and is responsible for any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration or any other authorization required by any appropriate governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the City, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Kansas Corporation Commission (KCC), subject to AT&T Kansas' right to challenge in good faith such requirements as established by the FCC, KCC or other City Ordinance. AT&T Kansas shall also comply with all applicable laws, statutes and/or ordinances, subject to AT&T Kansas' right to challenge in good faith such laws, statutes and/or ordinances. 
Section 6. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving AT&T Kansas any exclusive privileges, nor shall it affect any prior or existing rights of AT&T Kansas to maintain a telecommunications system within the City. 
Section 7. AT&T Kansas shall collect and remit compensation as described in Section 3 on those access lines that have been resold to another telecommunications local exchange service provider. 
Section 8. The City agrees to provide AT&T Kansas with notification in the event that it annexes property into the corporate boundaries of the City that would require AT&T Kansas to collect and pay a franchise fee on which prior to the annexation of the property AT&T Kansas was not required to pay a franchise fee. The City agrees to provide AT&T Kansas with notification in the event the City renumbers or renames any streets that would require AT&T Kansas to collect and pay a franchise fee for on which prior to the renumbering or renaming of the streets AT&T Kansas would not have been required to pay a franchise fee. The City agrees that in the event the City does not provide AT&T Kansas with notice of an annexation or renumbering and/or renaming of the streets, AT&T Kansas is not liable to the City for payment of franchise fees on the annexation or renumbered and/or renamed streets prior to the City providing notice to AT&T Kansas of such. 
Section 9. Any required or permitted notice under this contract franchise ordinance shall be in writing. Notice upon the City shall be delivered to the city clerk by first class United States mail or by personal delivery. Notice upon AT&T Kansas shall be delivered by first class United States mail or by personal delivery to: 
Southwestern Bell Telephone L.P. 
Cindy Zapletal 
Director-External Affairs 
1640 Fairchild Avenue, First Floor 
Manhattan, Kansas 66502 
Section 10. Failure to Enforce. The failure of either party to enforce and remedy any noncompliance of the terms and conditions of this contract franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of rights nor a waiver of the other party's obligations as provided herein. 
Section 11. Force Majeure. Each and every provision hereof shall be subject to acts of God, fires, strikes, riots, floods, war and other disasters beyond AT&T Kansas' or the City's control. 
Section 12. AT&T Kansas has entered into this contract franchise ordinance as required by the City and K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001. If any clause, sentence, section, or provision of K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001, and amendments thereto, shall be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, either the City or AT&T Kansas may elect to terminate the entire contract franchise ordinance. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates K.S.A. 2002 Supp. 12-2001, and amendments thereto, if AT&T Kansas is required by law to enter into a contract franchise ordinance with the City, the parties agree to act in good faith in promptly negotiating a new contract franchise ordinance. 
Section 13. In entering into this contract franchise ordinance, neither the City's nor AT&T Kansas' present or future legal rights, positions, claims, assertions or arguments before any administrative agency or court of law are in any way prejudiced or waived. By entering into the contract franchise ordinance, neither the City nor AT&T Kansas waive any rights, but instead expressly reserve any and all rights, remedies, and arguments the City or AT&T Kansas may have at law or equity, without limitation, to argue, assert, and/or take any position as to the legality or appropriateness of this contract franchise ordinance or any present or future laws, ordinances, and/or rulings which may be the basis for the City and AT&T Kansas entering into this contract franchise ordinance. 
Section 14. This contract franchise ordinance is made under and in conformity with the laws of the State of Kansas. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the Goodland Star News, but not before 60 days after its final passage all pursuant to K.S.A. 12-2001(b)(6). 
(6-5-06) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1576 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO AQUILA INC., ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES, AND ASSIGNS, A NON EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO 20 YEARS TO ERECT, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE, A GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND ANY AND ALL NECESSARY MAINS, PIPES, SERVICES, AND OTHER APPURTANCES THEREUNTO, APPERTAINING IN, UPON, OVER, ACROSS, AND ALONG THE STREETS, ALLEYS, BRIDGES, AND PUBLIC WAYS OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR THE TRANSMISSION, DISTRIBUTION, AND SALE OF NATURAL AND/OR MIXED GAS FOR LIGHTING, HEATING, INDUSTRIAL, AND ALL OTHER USES IN SAID CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND FOR THE PURPOSE OF TRANSMITTING, TRANSPORTING AND CONVERTING SUCH GAS INTO, THROUGH, OR BEYOND THE IMMEDIATE LIMITS OF CITIES TO OTHER CITIES, CITIES AND CUSTOMERS, AND PRESCRIBING SUCH BASIC TERMS AND CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH THE SAID COMPANY IS TO OPERATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS AS FOLLOWS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; provided that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
a.  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include them appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporate form, or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form. 
b.  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the City or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City. 
c.  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the Commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, leasee, or assignee of said person, firm, or corporation, and hereafter referred to as Aquila Inc. and/or the Franchisee. 
d.  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a natural gas system within said City subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above captioned ordinance. 
e.  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley, or other public right of way, now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the City of Goodland, Kansas, as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
f.  Natural Gas System shall mean a gas distribution system and any and all necessary mains, pipes, services, and other appurtances thereunto, appertaining, upon, over, across and along the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the City, for the non-exclusive transmission, distribution, and sale of natural and/or mixed gas for lighting, heating, industrial, and all other uses and purposes in said City, and for the-non exclusive purpose of transmitting, transporting, and conveying such gas into, through, or beyond the immediate limits of cities to other cities, cities and customers, and prescribing the basic terms and conditions under which the said franchise is to operate. 
g.  Gross Receipts the term "gross receipts" as applied to sales of all commodities through and with the natural gas system as now exist, or may expand to, and shall include all natural gas and or artificial gas for domestic, residential, industrial, or commercial consumption. 
h.  Shall means when used the action is mandatory and obligatory. 
i.  Residential Natural Gas Service shall mean that category of natural gas system consumer and natural gas system service, which resides in single- and multifamily dwellings. All other gas service would include non-residential service, such as commercial and industrial natural gas service. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After a review of the qualification of Aquila Inc., and after determining that to the best of its knowledge Aquila is legally qualified, of good reputation, adequately financed, and technically competent to provide for the operation of a natural gas system in the city, there is hereby granted unto Aquila Inc., a non-exclusive franchise to operate a natural gas system within said City, and in doing so to use the Streets of said City for operation of said natural gas system. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The franchise granted hereunder shall remain in effect for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance (the "Initial Term"), and for three additional five (5) year terms after the expiration of the Initial Term, unless City, through its Clerk, notifies Franchisee in writing at least 90 days before the expiration of the Initial Term, or succeeding term, that City desires not to renew the franchise and specifies the reasons for non-renewal. The effective date of this Ordinance shall be determined pursuant to state law. This Ordinance shall continue as written, unless terminated as provided in this section. The effective date of this Ordinance and any extensions thereof shall be determined pursuant to state law. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the City Clerk within sixty (60) days of passing of this ordinance. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The construction of the properties and facilities of said Franchisee's natural gas system shall conform, at least, to the plumbing and other mechanical codes of the City which have been so adopted, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that said construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulations of the United State of America, and the State of Kansas, and of the City, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of said natural gas system. 
b.  All equipment necessary for the operation of the natural gas system which is located within the corporate limits of said city shall be so located and constructed as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements, and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
c.  In case of disturbance caused by the Franchisee of any street or other public area, the Franchisee shall, at its reasonable expense, and in a manner reasonably approved by the City, replace and restore such street or other public area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
d.  The Franchisee, in above ground level fashion shall not place fixtures or devices necessary for the operation of the natural gas system where the same will interfere with any existing cable television appurtances or devices, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such fixtures placed in any street and shall normally be placed toward the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys, and public ways. 
Except in an emergency, prior to any underground construction occurring on any City right-of-way a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such service. After receipt of such permit request, the City shall have two working days to approve or reject the application. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of other utilities in the area proposed for construction, and the location of telephone, cable television, water, sewer, and electric lines and the location of the proposed natural gas system work to be accomplished. Upon approval of the permit by the City, the Franchisee may commence construction. 
Any pavements, sidewalks or curbing taken up and any and all excavations made shall be done in such a manner as to cause only such inconvenience to the inhabitants of City and the general public as is reasonably necessary, and repairs and replacements shall be made promptly by Franchisee, all in accordance with City Code [section] 15-701 of the City of Goodland, Kansas. 
Underground construction, which occurs on private property, shall not be required to have a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operation Standards. The Franchisee's natural gas system shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in accordance with the accepted standards of the governmental authorities having jurisdiction over such system and generally within the standards established by natural gas industry wide practices, lawful applicable city codes, and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the various natural gas system customers receive safe and reliable service in accordance with applicable law. 
Section 6. Additional Operating Standards. The Franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations: 
a.  The Franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps, or other records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets and other public ways of the City. Subject to confidentiality, and upon reasonable prior written notice, a copy of such records shall be available to the City Manager or its designated agent for the purpose of inspecting, regulating, administrating, or enforcing the provisions of this franchise 
b.  The Franchisee shall at its expense protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public way, or remove from the street or other public way any property of the Franchisee when lawfully required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the City, but, the Franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval. 
c.  If City orders or requests Franchisee to relocate its facilities or equipment for the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, or as a result of the initial request of a commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, and such removal is necessary to prevent interference and is not merely for the convenience of the City or other right-of-way user, Franchisee shall receive payment for the cost of such relocation from the commercial or private project developer as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment. City shall consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects and exercising its authority under this section so as not to arbitrarily cause Franchisee unreasonable additional expense. City shall also provide a reasonable alternative location for Franchisee's facilities. City shall give Franchisee written notice of an order or request to vacate a public right-of-way; provided, however, that its receipt of such notice shall not deprive Franchisee of its right to operate and maintain its existing facilities in such public right-of way until it receives the reasonable cost of relocating the same and City provides a reasonable alternative location for such facilities 
d.  If a subscriber has an unresolved complaint regarding the terms of this franchise agreement, then the customer shall be entitled to file his/her written complaint with the City Manager of such city, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with the representative of the Franchisee within thirty (30) days to fully discuss and resolve such franchise matters within the City's jurisdiction. 
The Franchisee at all times shall employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the public. All structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, under, and through streets and other public ways in the City shall be kept and maintained in accordance with the federal and state safety statutes and regulations. 
City will give Franchisee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements where paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved that affects Franchisee's facilities. The notice shall contain the nature and character of the improvements, the rights-of-way upon which the improvements are to be made, the extent of the improvements, and the time when the City will start the work, and, if more than one right-of-way is involved, the order in which the work is to proceed. The notice shall be given to the Franchisee a sufficient length of time in advance of the actual commencement of the work, considering seasonable working conditions, to permit the Franchisee to make any additions, alterations, or repairs to its facilities. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the City and the Franchisee that the Franchisee shall protect and hold the City harmless from all claims, actions, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, court costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any persons arising out of the negligence of the Franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the gas system provided the City gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations, in writing. The Franchisee shall maintain adequate insurance for such claims. The City may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the City arising out of any use or misuses of privileges granted to the Franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the Franchisee or its insurer. The Franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance required hereby within the coverage of any so-called blanket policy or policies of insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise; provided, however, the interests of the City shall be as fully protected thereby as if the Franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the City a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be available to the City; the City will receive prior notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. Franchisee will from time to time during the term of this franchise make such enlargements and extensions of its natural gas system as the business of the natural gas system, and the growth of said City require, in accordance with its Rules and Regulations relating to customer connections and main and service line extensions currently in effect and on file from time to time with the Kansas Corporation Commission, or other competent authority having jurisdiction on the premises; provided, however, that no obligation shall extend to, or be binding upon the Franchisee, to construct or extend its mains or furnish natural gas or natural gas service within the City if Franchisee is, for any reason, unable to obtain delivery of natural gas of an adequate supply thereof to warrant the construction or extension of its mains, for the furnishing of such natural gas or gas service. 
Upon receipt and acceptance of a valid application for service, Franchisee shall, subject to its own economic feasibility criteria, make reasonable extensions of its distribution facilities to serve customers located within the current or future corporate limits of City. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the Franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the Franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges, and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the City for use of its streets and public ways by the Franchisee, the Franchisee shall, on or before the end of each month of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the City in prior monthly amounts a sum equal to 5% of gross receipts on residential natural gas service and 3% of gross receipts for all other natural gas service as called for herein. 
Such payments shall be accompanied by the certified notarized statement on such gross receipts on each date such payments are submitted to the City. 
Any tax which is considered as sales tax, state tax, franchise tax, or otherwise, may at the election of the Franchisee, be an add on to rates, and may be passed onto the customers of the natural gas system. If passed on, these costs shall be shown separately on billings to customers, and shall be carefully and accurately delineated thereon. Such City shall be exempt from payment of any itemized or delineated franchise tax which may be shown on the natural gas service utilized by the City in performance of its official and legally bound duties and obligations. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The Governing Body of the City may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds; 
a.  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
b.  Willful and/or misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
c.  Insolvency of the Franchisee, or continued inability of the Franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the Franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The City shall file with the Franchisee a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the Governing Body. The Franchisee shall have at least sixty (60) days prior to the hearing and after receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the City determines that the Franchisee has taken action during or is making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the City shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the City, the Franchisee, Subscriber or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the Governing Body if it tends to substantiate or disapprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The Governing Body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the Governing Body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial review sought by the Franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the Franchisee. The franchise shall main in full force and effect pending the judicial review and a court or courts of competent jurisdiction issue a final order affirming the City decision to revoke the franchise. 
Section 13. Rights of the Franchisee. The Franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms, and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The Franchisee shall, upon request of the City, provide to the City a copy of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of business shall include rates charged for various levels of service. 
Section 14. Rights Reserved to the City. Without the limitations upon the rights the City might otherwise have, said City does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, power, and authorities: 
a.  The Franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the City, and to such reasonable regulations as the City shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
b.  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, constructions or installation of any facilities by the Franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
c.  The right to grant additional natural gas franchises shall be retained by the City. 
Section 15. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The City's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the Franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of said City's rights hereunder, and said Franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 16. Amendments to Franchise. The City may amend this franchise, subject to mutual agreement and acceptance by the Franchisee, from time to time to enable the Franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the technology of natural gas systems, thus enabling the Franchisee to operate more effectively, efficiently, or economically. 
Section 17. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
a.  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the City, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to the office of the City Clerk of said City or by personal delivery of the same to said person, of his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if said notice be addressed to said Franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States Mail addressed to any officer of said Franchisee or its resident agent, or by personally delivering the same to such person as herein above provided, or such other person as said Franchisee shall from time to time direct. 
b.  The Franchisee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise when such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the Franchisee by the City Clerk. 
Section 18. Force Majeure. It shall not be a breach or default under this Ordinance if either party fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to force majeure. Force majeure shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to machinery, equipment or distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by a governmental authority having jurisdiction; and (4) any other causes, whether of the kind herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid force majeure and to resolve such event as promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance of its obligations hereunder; provided, however, that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle any labor strike. 
Section 19. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the Franchisee. 
Section 20. Confidential Information. City acknowledges that certain information it might request from Franchisee pursuant to this Ordinance may be of a proprietary and confidential nature, and that such requests may be subject to the Homeland Security Act or other confidentiality protections under state or federal law. If Franchisee requests that any information provided by Franchisee to City be kept confidential due to its proprietary or commercial value, City and its employees, agents and representatives shall maintain the confidentiality of such information, to the extent allowed by law. If City is requested or required by legal or administrative process to disclose any such proprietary or confidential information, City shall promptly notify Franchisee of such request or requirement so that Franchisee may seek an appropriate protective order or other relief. 
Section 21. Repeal. Prior Franchise Ordinance No. 1250 is hereby repealed. 
Section 22. Adoption. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage and publication in the official city newspaper. 
(7-2-07) 
ORDINANCE NO. 1627 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, GRANTING TO S & T COMMUNICATIONS INC., ITS SUCCESSORS, LESSEES AND ASSIGNS, FOR A TERM OF FIVE YEARS, THE RIGHT, AUTHORITY, POWER AND FRANCHISE TO ESTABLISH, CONSTRUCT, ACQUIRE, MAINTAIN, AND OPERATE A COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM WITHIN THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, AND ENVIRONS THEREOF, AND TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS, FOR SUCH COMMUNITY ANTENNAE AND CLOSED CIRCUIT ELECTRONIC SYSTEM, AND REPEALING PAST ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF GOODLAND, KANSAS: 
Section 1. Definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviation, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense, words in the plural number include the singular number; provided that the word "shall" is to be construed as mandatory. 
(a)  City shall mean the City of Goodland, Kansas a municipal corporation, or its successors, and shall include that which is appropriate to the use of the term in context, the city in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
(b)  Commission shall mean the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city. 
(c)  Franchise shall mean and include the right to conduct and operate a community antennae television system within said city subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter stated in the above-captioned ordinance. 
(d)  Franchisee shall mean the person, firm, or corporation to whom or which a franchise, as hereinabove defined, is granted by the commission under this ordinance, and the lawful successor, transferee, lessee, or assignee of the person, firm or corporation. 
(e)  Street shall mean any public street, roadway, highway, alley, or other public right-of-way now or hereafter subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the city as provided by the laws of the State of Kansas, and any subsequent amendments thereof. 
(f)  Community Antennae Television System hereinafter referred to, as "CATV System" shall mean an electronic system with properties and facilities so constructed or presently existing as to be used for the interception and receipt of electro-magnetic radiation, and transmission and distribution of the same to subscribers by means of a cable and other related facilities. 
(g)  Subscriber shall mean any person, which receives from the franchisee herein named, the services of the franchisee's CATV System. 
(h)  Person shall mean any individual or association of individuals, or any firm, corporation or other business organization. 
Section 2. Grant of Non-Exclusive Franchise. After a public hearing affording an opportunity to be heard to all interested parties, and after a review of the qualifications of S & T Communications Inc., and its reputation, whether or not it is adequately financed, and technically competent to provide CATV System service to the city, and after determining that the construction arrangements of S & T Communications Inc., are adequate and feasible, there is hereby granted unto S & T Communications Inc., a non-exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain a CATV System within said city, and in so doing to use the streets of said city by erection, installing, placing, burying, construction, repairing, replacing, reconstructing, maintaining and retaining in, on, upon, or across any such streets, such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to a CATV System, and in addition, so to use, operate and provide for all or part of such facilities by a service offerings obtained from any franchisee or operating utility company providing service within the city. 
Section 3. Term of Franchise. The term of the franchise herein granted shall commence on the first day of the first month next following the date upon which the franchisee herein named accepts and agrees in writing to the terms and conditions set forth in this franchise ordinance and shall continue for a term of five years from said date. Franchisee shall indicate acceptance of this agreement, or lack thereof, by filing accordingly such written indication with the city clerk within 30 days of passing this ordinance. This franchise may be extended and automatically renewed for additional one (1) year terms, unless either party notifies the other party of its intent to terminate the franchise ordinance at least 90 days before the termination of the then current term. The additional term shall be deemed a continuation of this contract franchise ordinance and not as a new contract franchise ordinance or amendment. Pursuant to KSA 12-2001(b)(2) under no circumstances shall this contract franchise ordinance exceed twenty (20) years from the effective date of this contract franchise ordinance. Compensation for said contract franchise ordinance shall be established pursuant to Section 11 of this ordinance. 
Section 4. Standards for Construction of Franchisee's Facilities. Any construction of facilities after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The construction of the properties and facilities of said franchisee's CATV System shall conform, at least, to the standard of the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters or the edition thereof which has been adopted by the city, at the time any such properties and facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed, provided further that said construction shall be in conformance with all laws and regulation of the United States of America and the State of Kansas and the City of Goodland, and any administrative agency thereof, having jurisdiction to regulate the construction of said CATV System. 
(b)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected, or buried by the franchisee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the said streets, easements and swales, sidewalks, alleys or other ways and places. 
(c)  In case of disturbance caused by the franchisee of any street or paved area, the franchisee shall, at its expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore such street or paved area in as good condition as theretofore existed. 
(d)  The franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees which are located upon and overhang the public streets and other public ways of said city, so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the franchisee's properties, and the trimming shall be done at all times in a workmanlike manner. 
(e)  The franchisee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any existing gas, electric or telephone fixtures, water hydrants or mains, or sewer mains, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall normally be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public ways. 
Prior to any underground construction occurring on any street a permit shall be applied for requesting permission to install such services. Such application shall set forth the route, depth, location of the proposed cable and appurtenances. Upon approval of the permit by the city, the franchisee may commence construction. 
Underground construction on private property shall not require a permit under the terms and conditions described above. 
Section 5. Operating Standards. The franchisee's CATV system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the Community Antennae Television industry and applicable city codes and ordinances as now exist, or may hereafter be adopted to insure that the subscriber receives the highest quality of service and shall at all times be in conformance with the FCC rules, regulations and proof of performance test provisions. The franchisee shall maintain an office within the city, which office shall be open during all usual business hours, shall have a listed telephone, and shall be operated so that complaints and requests for repair or adjustments may be received at all reasonable times. 
Section 6. Additional Standards of Operations. The franchisee shall comply with the following additional standards of operations. 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing exact location of its facilities located within the streets of the city. A copy of such records shall be kept within the city and available for inspection by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(b)  The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the franchisee when lawfully required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of structures or improvements by the city; but, the franchisee may in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property, subject to city ordinances and approval, if federal or state funds are available to any utility company for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, such funds may be made available to the franchisee at the option of the city if the federal or state regulations permit. 
(c)  The franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building-moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower or remove its wires to permit the moving of building. The expense of such temporary removal, and of raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the franchisee shall have the authority at its option to require such payment in advance. The franchisee shall be given no less than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(d)  The franchisee will limit failures to a minimum by locating and correcting malfunctions promptly, but in no event longer than 24 hours after notice has been given, except said time shall be extended when the performance of this obligation is prevented by an act of God or the same is otherwise made impossible because of circumstances over which the franchisee has no control; and that the franchisee shall provide its subscribers with facilities for receiving request and complaints for service. Should a subscriber have an unresolved complaint regarding cable television operation, the subscriber shall be entitled to file his written complaint with the city manager, who has primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and procedures for resolving complaints, and thereafter to meet jointly with representative of the franchisee within 30 days to fully discuss and resolve such matters. The franchisee shall notify each subscriber who shall have filed a written complaint of his rights to such a procedure if the complaint is not resolved to satisfaction of subscriber/company within 15 days. 
(e)  The franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, above, under and upon all streets of the franchise area shall be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
Section 7. Indemnification of City. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the franchisee that the franchisee shall protect and hold the city harmless for all claims, action, suits, liability, loss, expense or damage of every kind and description, including investigation costs, courts costs, and reasonable attorney's fees, which may accrue to or be suffered or claimed by any person arising out of the negligence of the franchisee in the ownership, construction, repair, replacement, maintenance and operation of the CATV system, provided the city gives prompt notice of any such claims, actions, and suits, without limitations in writing. The franchisee shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise, public liability insurance in an insurance company with a national rating acceptable to the city. The insurances shall be in the sum of not less than $500,000.00 for personal injury to any one accident and $500,000.00 for property damage in any one accident. All such insurance may contain reasonable deductible provisions not to exceed $1,000.00 for any type of coverage and the city shall be named as an additional insured. The city may require that any and all investigation of claims by any person against the city arising out of any use or misuse of privileges granted to the franchisee hereunder shall be made by, or at the expense of the franchisee or its insurer. The franchisee may bring its obligations to carry any insurance now or hereafter carried, by appropriate amendment, endorsement, or otherwise, provided, however, the interest of the city shall be as fully protected thereby as if the franchisee has obtained individual policies of insurance, and the city a named insured in any policy. The policy, or certificate of insurance, will be approved by the city attorney, and filed in the office of the city clerk; the city will receive prior written notice of any intent to cancel insurance by the issuing company. 
Section 8. Extensions. The franchisee is hereby authorized to extend the existing system within the franchise area to the extent such is or may become economically feasible. The franchisee acknowledges the city from time to time may add or delete land to the city limits by annexation or deannexation to which franchisee is obligated to serve under this franchise, but said obligation to extend service shall only be in the city limits. The obligation shall occur whenever the franchisee shall receive written requests for services from at least 13 subscribers within 1,000 feet of its cable plant and the connections shall be solely for the usual connection and service fees for all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible. The 1,000 feet shall be measured in extension length of franchisee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premise. No person in the franchisee's service area shall be arbitrarily refused service; but in recognition of the capital costs involved in unusual circumstances, including, without limitations. When the distance from distribution cable to connection of service to subscribers is more than 150 feet or when a subscriber density exists less than the density specified hereinabove, service shall be made available on the basis of costs of materials, labor, and easements, plus ten percent, in order to prevent inequitable burdens on potential cable subscribers in more densely populated areas. 
Section 9. Assignments. All provisions of this ordinance shall be binding upon the franchisee and all successors, lessees and assigns of the franchisee whether expressly stated herein or not, however, the franchisee may not sell or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Section 10. Statutory Regulations. The franchise herein granted shall be subject to all of the provisions of Article 20 of Chapter 12, K.S.A. and amendments thereof, as may be applicable to this franchise. 
Section 11. Franchise Payments. In consideration for the rights, privileges and franchise hereby granted, and as compensation to the city for the use of streets and places by the franchisee and in lieu of all occupation and license taxes, the franchise shall, on or before the 31st day of January and the 31st day of July of each year in which this franchise is effective, pay to the city a sum equal to $1.00 per subscriber per month for the preceding six month period ending on the 31st day of December and the 30th day of June, respectively, for a period of five years. 
Copyright tax, local and state sales tax and franchise tax may be an add-on to rates and may be automatically passed through to the subscriber. If passed on these costs shall be shown separately on billing to subscribers. 
Section 12. Revocation of Franchise. The governing body of the city may revoke the franchise including, but not limited to the following grounds: 
(a)  Willful and material breach of any terms or conditions of this franchise; 
(b)  Misrepresentation of fact in the application for, or negotiation of this franchise; 
(c)  Insolvency of the franchisee, or inability of the franchisee to pay its just debts, or application of the franchisee for adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The city shall file with the franchisee a detailed list of the grounds alleged for revocation of the franchise. This notice shall include specific details of the acts, omissions, breaches, or other grounds asserted as warranting revocation. The notice shall also include the time and date established for a public hearing to be held on the matter before the governing body. The franchisee shall have at least 60 days prior to the hearing and after the receipt of the notice during which it may remedy the acts, omission, breaches, or other grounds asserted as giving cause for revocation and which are stated in the notice. If prior to the time of the public hearing, the city determines that the franchisee has taken action during or making significant progress toward eliminating the causes and grounds asserted as giving cause to revoke, the city shall either cancel the hearing or postpone the hearing for a reasonable time to a certain date, whichever is appropriate. Any evidence offered by the city, the franchisee, subscribers or any other interested person or entity, whether oral or written, shall be received by the governing body if it tends to substantiate or disprove the causes or grounds for revocation stated in the notice. The governing body shall determine based on all admissible evidence submitted to it at the hearing, whether or not to revoke the franchise. Upon a finding that the grounds for revocation as stated in the notice have been substantiated by a preponderance of the evidence, the governing body shall revoke the franchise, subject to judicial reviews sought by the franchisee. Revocation shall be accomplished by the passage of an ordinance and delivery of a certified copy of it to the franchisee. 
Section 13. Procedure Upon Termination. Upon termination of the franchise, if the franchisee shall not have acquired an extension of renewal thereof and accepted the same, or if it shall not have sold its property in place, it shall promptly remove all its property within 360 days after termination at its sole expense. In so removing the property, the franchisee shall refill, at its sole expense, any excavation so that it shall leave the streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the franchisee's removal of its property. 
Section 14. Use of Facilities. It shall be the duty of the franchisee to negotiate and make any and all contracts and agreements with the owners of poles, towers, conduits or other facilities for use by the franchisee in the provision of cable television service under this ordinance. 
Section 15. Rights of the Franchisee. The Franchisee shall have the authority to promulgate such reasonable rules, regulations, terms and conditions of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its services under this franchise and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. The Franchisee shall, upon request of the City, provide to the City a copy of such rules. regulations, terms and conditions and a copy of any changes as may be made during the term of the franchise. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions of Business shall include rates charged for various levels of service and the number of channels carried for viewing along with various levels of service to subscribers and changes made for installation. 
Section 16. Rights Reserved to the City. Without limitation upon the rights the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserves the following rights, power, and authorities: 
(a)  The franchisee shall at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide; 
(b)  The right of reasonable regulation of the erection, construction or installation of any facilities by the franchisee and to reasonably designate where such facilities are to be placed within the public ways and places; 
(c)  The right to grant other CATV franchises in the city. 
Section 17. City's Failure to Enforce the Terms and Conditions of this Franchise. The city's failure to notify, enforce, or remedy any noncompliance by the franchisee of any of the terms and conditions of this franchise ordinance shall not constitute a waiver of the city's rights hereunder, and the franchisee shall continue to perform its obligation as herein provided. 
Section 18. Amendments to Franchise. The city may amend this franchise, from time to time to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television and radio signals which will afford an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its customers and to enable the franchisee to conform to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as they may be amended from time to time. 
Section 19. Emergency Use of Franchisee's System. Franchisee agrees to include within their system the capability for a remotely activated emergency system whereby a designee of the city in time of emergency, may introduce a scrolling or audio message on all system channels simultaneously. 
Section 20. Franchisee is without Remedy Against the City. The franchisee shall have no remedy or recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from and of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, because of the enforcement thereof by the city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage arising from any of the provisions or requirements of the franchise ordinance, or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, or for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all, or part, of the franchise herein granted; provided that the franchisee expressly acknowledges that it accepted the franchise that it has not been induced to enter into this franchise upon any understanding of promise, whether given verbally or in writing by or on behalf of the city, or by any other person concerning any term or condition of this franchise not expressed herein; provided further that the franchisee acknowledges by the acceptance of this franchise that it has carefully read the provisions, terms and conditions hereof. 
Section 21. Miscellaneous Provisions. 
(a)  Whenever, under the terms of this franchise ordinance, either party hereto shall be required or permitted to give notice to the other, such notice shall be in writing, and if to be served upon the city, it shall be delivered either by first class United States mail addressed to office of the city clerk of the city or by personal delivery of the same to the person, of his duly authorized agent for receiving the same, and if the notice be addressed to the franchisee, the same shall be delivered by either first class United States mail addressed to the General Manager of the franchisee, or by personally delivering the same to such person as hereinabove provided. 
Section 22. Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the decision of any court or regulatory body of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. The validity of any portion of this ordinance shall not abate, reduce, or otherwise affect any consideration of other obligation required of the franchisee. 
Section 23. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its publication in the Goodland Star News. 
(11-21-11)  
Appendix C - PROCEDURES MANUAL 
